| AUM ॥ 


RIGVEDA 


ऋग्वेदः 


(With Original Sanskrit Text, Transliteration & 
Lucid English Translation in the Aarsh Tradition 
of Maharshi Yaska and Swami Dayananda) 


English translation by 
Dr. Tulsi Ram M.A., Ph.D. (London, U.K.) 


(Professor, Administrator, Researcher and Writer) 


Sanskrit Text as per publication of 


Paropakarini Sabha, Ajmer 


© Dr. Tulsi Ram 


ISBN : 978-81-7077-158-6 


Publisher : 
Vijaykumar Govindram Hasanand 
Delhi. 


Edition : First, 2013 


Price : Rs. 700.00 


RIGVEDA Vol. IV by Dr. Tulsi Ram M.A., Ph.D. 


Cv) 


CONTENTS 


S.No. Particulars 

1. RIGVEDA: 
MANDAL -9 
MANDAL -10 


Page 


1-424 
425-1193 


(vi) 
DIACRITICAL MARKS OF TRANSLITERATION 


Vowels 
अ आ 8 ड्‌ 1 ई 7 
= w ऊ प्र ऋ r ऋ 7 
ad oidr aq 1 
ए € ae) ai aT 0 ओ au 
अनुस्वार (` ) 1 विसर्ग (:) h 
(- 27 
Consonants 


Guttural 


क्‌ ६ ख्‌ kh ग्‌ £ HA gh ङ्‌ A 
Palatal 

च ¢ दू cho Wj ABA jh BA A 
Lingual 

द्‌ { व्‌ th ङ ५ द्‌ dh ण्‌ 


Dental 

त्‌ { थ्‌ th द्‌ ५ धू dh 2 1 
Labial 

Tp र्‌ ph न्‌ 90 न्‌ bh म्‌ ग 


others 


Hy tor 1 च्‌ ४ 
श्‌ § ष्‌ $ Hs दह्‌ ॥1 
(5). 24 in 


MANDALA-9 


Mandala 9/Sukta 1 


Pavamana Soma Devata, Madhucchanda 
Vaishvamitra Rshi 


स्वादिंछया मदिंछया पव॑स्व सोम्‌ धार॑या । 
इन्द्राय पात॑वे सुतः ॥ ९॥ 


0 Svadisthaya madisthaya pavasva soma dharaya. 
Indraya patave sutah. 


O Soma, Spirit of Divinity, peace and glory of 
existence distilled in the essence for the soul’s being, 
flow in the sweetest and most exhilarating streams of 
ecstasy, cleanse and sanctify us unto purity and 
constancy, and initiate us into the state of ananda, divine 
glory. 

(Soma in the physical sense is an exhilarating 
drink, in the aesthetic sense it is ecstasy, in the psychic 
sense it is ananda, and in the spiritual sense it is elevation 
of the soul to the experience of divinity. It is the peace, 
purity and glory of life, any power physical, social or 
divine that leads to satyam (truth), shivam (goodness), 
and sundaram (beauty) of life, anything, power and 
person that gives us an experience of sacchidananda, 
the real, the intelligent and the blissful state of the life 
divine. In short, Soma is satyam, shivam and sundaram, 
the sat, the chit and the ananda of life. It is not restricted 
to a particular herb and a particular drink. The meaning 
of soma is open-ended on the positive side of life and 


2 RGVEDA 
living joy.) 
रक्षोहा विश्वचर्षणिरभि योनिमयोहतम्‌ | 
द्रुणा सधस्थमासंदत्‌॥ २॥ 


2 Raksoha visvacarsanirabhi yonimayohatam. 
Drunda sadhasthamasadat. 


You are the destroyer of negativity, destructivity 
and evil and darkness, you are universal watcher and 
guardian of all that is, you are centre of the origin and 
end of existence, veiled in impenetrable womb of gold, 
you are ever on the move yet settled and constant in the 
house of life. (Soma is Divinity Itself.) 


akaterdat wa fest वृत्रहन्त॑मः। 
पर्षि राधो Farah 3 
a Varivodhatamo bhava mamhistho vrtrahanta- 


mah. Parsi radho maghonam. 


Be the highest giver of the cherished wealth of 
life, mightiest munificent, and the destroyer of want, 
suffering and darkness. Sanctify the wealth of the 
prosperous and powerful with showers of peace, purity 
and generosity. 


sad महानां देवानां वीतिमन्ध॑सा। 
अभि वाज॑मुत sta: si 


4. Abhyarsa mahanam devanam vitimandhasa. 
Abhi vajamuta sravah. 


Let your bounty flow free to the yajnic hall of 
the great and generous divine yajnic givers with gifts 
of holy food and prosperity, and bring us honour, 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 1 3 
progress and fame. 


त्वामच्छा चरामसि तदिदर्थः दिवेदिवे। 
इन्दो त्वे नं आशसः HK 


sf Tvamaccha caramasi tadidartham divedive. 
Indo tve na asasah. 


Lord giver of showers of joy, we serve you with 
all our will and dedication, that alone is our end and 
aim of life day in and day out. All our hopes and 
aspirations centre in you. 

uate ते परिस्रुतं सोमं सूर्यस्य दुहिता । 
वारेण शश्व॑ता तना ।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Punati te parisrutam somam suryasya duhita. 
Varena Sasvata tana. 


The soma of your eternal peace and joy flowing 
universally, the dawn, daughter of the sun, glorifies with 
the sanctity of her exquisite cover of beauty. 
तमीमण्वीः समर्यं आ गृभ्णन्ति योष॑णो at | 
स्वसारः पार्ये' दिवि ॥ ७॥ 

Te Tamimanvih samarya a grbhnanti yosano dasa. 
Svasarah parye divi. 


That soma, sanctified by the dawn in the holy 
congregation of peaceful life yajna, ten fine and youthful 
sisterly senses and pranic energies receive and absorb 
for the achievement of the light of salvation. 


तमीं हिन्वन्त्यग्रुवो धम॑न्ति बाकुरं दूतिम्‌। 
त्रिधातुं वारणं मधुं ८ ॥ 


4 RGVEDA 


8. Tamim hinvantyagruvo dhamanti bakuram drtim. 
Tridhatu varanam madhu. 


That thrice energised honey sweet and sanctified 
soma for the good of body, mind and soul, the ten prime 
senses and pranas receive and then stimulate the light 
of the soul within, which dispels the darkness of 
ignorance and eliminates the junk of negative 
fluctuations. 


अभीममघ्न्या उत श्रीणन्ति धेनवः शिशुम्‌। 
सोममिन्द्राय पात॑वे॥ ९॥ 


9. Abhimamaghnya uta Srinanti dhenavah Ssisum. 
Somamindraya pdatave. 


And this soma, further, the ten senses and pranas 
season and inflame with positive powers of the soul as 
the milk of inviolable cows seasons and inflames the 
power of soma juice, and then the enflamed joy of the 
soul nourishes and inspires the dedicated man like a 
divine baby for the achievement of spiritual glory. 


अस्येदिन्द्रो मदेष्वा विश्वां garter free 
शुरो मघा च॑ मंहते ॥ ९०॥ 

10. Asyedindro madesva visva vrtrani jighnate. 
Suro magha ca mamhate. 


And in the joy of this soma of peace and spiritual 
power, Indra, the human soul, blest with strength of 
body, power of mind and courage of the soul destroys 
all the evils and shades of darkness and rises in glory. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 2 5 


Mandala 9/Sukta 2 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Medhatithi Kanva Rshi 


पव॑स्व देववीरति पवित्रं सोम tart 
इन्द्रमिन्दो वृषा fast ९॥ 


I. Pavasva devavirati pavitram soma ramhya. 
Indramindo vrsa 175८. 


O Soma, spirit of divinity, flow quick, purify 
our mind and senses, and fulfil our prayers for piety. 
Spirit of peace and spiritual joy in exuberance, bring us 
the glory of life and let it sanctify our heart and soul. 


आ dura महि प्सरो वृषेन्दो द्युम्नव॑त्तमः। 
आ योनिं' धर्णासिः संदः॥ २॥ 


2. A vacyasva mahi psaro vrsendo dyumnavatta- 
mah. A yonim dharnasih sadah. 


Blissful Spirit of divinity, give us food for the 
mind and soul, great you are, delightful, generous, most 
sublime, the origin, wielder and sustainer of the universe 
and the truth of universal knowledge. 


अधुक्षत प्रियं मधु धारा सुतस्य Gere: | 
अपो व॑सिष्ट सुक्रतुं; ॥ ३॥ 


2. Adhuksata priyam madhu dharda sutasya 
vedhasah. Apo vasista sukratuh. 


The stream of soma purity, bliss and knowledge, 
distilled and flowing from the omniscient, showers 
honey sweets of life on us, and the holiness of the noble 
soma internalised inspires our actions. 


6 RGVEDA 


महान्तं त्वा महीरन्वापो अर्षन्ति सिन्ध॑वः। 
यद्रोभि॑ंवसियिष्यसें ux i 


4. Mahantam tva mahiranvapo arsanti sindhavah. 
Yadgobhirvasayisyase. 


Just as great floods of water, rivers and seas join 
the great ocean, and the great ocean abides by you, O 
lord omnipotent, similarly all our will and actions abide 
in you, lord supreme, since by your word and powers 
you inspire them. 


समुद्रो अप्सु मामृजे विष्टम्भो ereuil faa: | 
सोम॑ः पवित्र अस्पयुः ॥ ५ ॥ 


Samudro apsu mamrje vistambho dharuno divah. 
Somah pavitre asmayuh. 


The lord is Samudra, universal space, from 
which everything follows. He is integrated with our 
streams of earthly waters, self-sustained and all 
sustaining, holder and sustainer of the regions of 
heavenly light. The lord giver of peace and bliss is ours, 
with us, in the holy business of our life and karma. 


अचिक्रदद्‌ वृषा हरिं्महान्पित्रो न gta: | 
सं सूर्येण रोचते ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Acikradadvrsa harirmahan mitro na darsatah. 
Sam suryena rocate. 


Soma, Spirit of universal peace and bliss, is 
generous and virile, destroyer of suffering, great, noble 
guide as a friend, and proclaims his presence everywhere 
as he shines glorious with the sun. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 2 7 


गिर॑स्त इन्द्‌ ओज॑सा मर्मृज्यन्ते अपस्युवः | 
याधिर्मदाय शुम्भ॑से॥ ७॥ 


ie Girasta inda ojasa marmrjyante apasyuvah. 
Yabhirmadaya sumbhase. 


Lord giver of peace and grandeur, your voices 
of the Veda, exponent of karma, by virtue of your divine 
lustre purify and sanctify the people. By the same voices 
you shine in divine glory for the joy of humanity. 


तंत्वा मर्दय घुष्व॑य उ लोककृलनुमीं | 
तव प्रशस्तयो महीः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Tam tva madaya ghrsvaya u lokakrtnumimahe. 
Tava prasastayo mahih. 


For the sake of joy and elimination of the 
suffering of life, we adore you, creator of the worlds of 
nature and humanity. O lord, great are your glories sung 
all round. 


अस्मभ्यमिन्दविन्द्रयुर्मध्व॑ः पवस्व धार॑या । 

पर्जन्यो afeurga ॥ ९ ॥ 
Asmabhyamindavindrayurmadhvah pavasva 

dharaya. Parjanyo vrstiman iva. 


For us, O lord of peace and bliss, munificent 
giver of lustre and grandeur, bring showers of purity 
and the honey sweets of life as a cloud laden with 
showers of rain. 


गोषा इन्दो नृषा SAAT वाजसा उत। 
आत्मा यज्ञस्यं Yet: ॥ ९०॥ 


8 RGVEDA 


10. Gosa indo nrsa asyasvasa vajasa uta. 
Atma yajnasya purvyah. 


O lord of peace and glory, you are the very soul 
of yajna, original and eternal since you are the foremost 
fount of all giving. You are the giver of cows, lands and 
the voices of wisdom and culture. You are the giver of 
children and grand children over ages of humanity. You 
are the giver of horses and all advancement and progress 
in achievements. You are the giver of food, sustenance 
and all powers and victories of success. Pray be that for 
us all time. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 3 


Pavamana Soma Devata, Ajigarti Shunah Shepa, 
Krtrma Vaishvamitra Devarata Rshi 


एष देवो अमर्त्यः पर्णवीरिव दीयति। 
अभि द्रोणान्यासद॑म्‌।॥ ९॥ 


ie Esa devo amartyah parnaviriva वा) वा. 
Abhi dronanyasadam. 


This Soma, spirit of divinity, eternal and 
immortal, expands to regions of the universe like soaring 
energy and pervades there as an immanent presence. 


एष देवो विपा कृतोऽ ति हरासि धावति । 
पव॑मानो अर्दाभ्यः॥ २॥ 

2: Esa devo vipa krto’ti hvaramsi dhavati. 
Pavamano adabhyah. 


This refulgent spirit is celebrated by sages and, 
being undaunted, overtakes all crookedness, purifying 
and sanctifying everything and every mind. 


MANDAL - 9/ SUKTA - 3 9 


एष देवो विपन्युभिः पव॑मान searapay: 1 
हरिर्वाजाय मृज्यते ॥ २॥ 

Di Esa devo vipanyubhih pavamana rtayubhih. 
Harirvajaya mrjyate. 


This refulgent spirit, light of life, saviour and 
harbinger of joy, glorified by celebrants and poets of 
rectitude is praised and adored for the achievement of 
victory and advancement. 


एष विश्वानि वार्या शूरो यन्निव सत्व॑भिः। 
पव॑मानः सिषासति ॥ ४॥ 

4. Esa visvani varya Suro yanniva satvabhih. 
Pavamanah sisasati. 
This divine spirit, pure, purifying and powerful, 
advancing by its own essential power as a hero, brings 
and distributes cherished gifts of life among the 
celebrants. 
एष देवो teretfa पव॑मानो दशस्यति | 
आविष्कुणोति वग्वनुम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 

9 Esa devo ratharyati pavamano daSasyati. 
Aviskrnoti vagvanum. 

This spirit of divinity going forward like a 
chariot, pure, purifying, gives the gifts of life and reveals 


new and latest words of advance knowledge as it moves 
on. 


एष विप्रैर भिष्ुतोऽ पो देवो fa ated 
दधद्रलानि दाशुषे ।॥। ६ ॥ 


10 RGVEDA 


6. Esa viprair-abhistuto’po devo vi gahate. 
Dadhadratnani dasuse. 

This spirit, divine, generous and refulgent, 
adored and exalted by sages and scholars, and holding 
jewel gifts of life for people of generous charity, watches 
and controls the actions of humanity and the laws of 
nature in operation. 


एष दिवं वि धावति तिरो रजांसि धार॑या । 
पव॑मानः कनिक्रदत्‌ ॥ ७॥ 

7. Esa divam vi dhavati tiro rajamsi dharaya. 
Pavamanah kanikradat. 
This spirit with the waves of its power rushes 
and radiates unto the heavens across the skies and atomic 
oceans of space, pure, purifying and roaring like thunder. 
एष दिवं व्यास॑रत्तिरो रजांस्यस्पुंतः। 
पव॑मानः स्वध्वरः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Esa divam vyasarat tiro rajamsyasprtah. 
Pavamanah svadhvarah. 

This spirit radiates to the heavens across the 
atomic oceans of skies and spaces, unhurt and 
unopposed, pure, purifying, performing the cosmic 
yajna of love, non-violence and creation of new life in 
evolution. 

एष Wat जन्म॑ना देवो देवेभ्यं: Ta: | 
हरिः पवित्र अर्षति ।॥ ९॥ 


9. Esa pratnena janmana devo devebhyah sutah. 
Harih pavitre arsati. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 4 11 


This divine spirit since its timeless 
manifestation, revealed and manifested for the divines, 
arises in the pure hearts of humanity, eliminating pain 
and suffering. 
एष उ स्य पुंरुत्रतो Sart जनयन्निष॑ः। 
धार॑या पवते सुतः ko ul 

10. Esau sya puruvrato jajnano janayannisah. 
Dharaya pavate sutah. 

This spirit of divinity, power of infinite law and 
action, creating and providing food, energy and 


sustenance for life, flows on in continuum, self- 
sustained, self-revealed, discovered, self-realised. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 4 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Hiranyastupa Angirasa Rshi 


सनां च सोप जेषि च पव॑मान महि sta: | 
अथा नो वस्य॑सस्कृधि ॥ ९॥ 


i? Sanda ca soma jesi ca pavamana mahi sravah. 
Atha no vasyasaskrdhi. 


O Soma, divine spirit of peace and joy, eternal 
power of love and friendship, most renowned giver of 
food and sustenance, win over the opponents and make 
us happy and prosperous, more and ever more. 


सना ज्योतिः सना ca favat च सोम सौभ॑गा । 
अथा नो वस्य॑सस्कृधि ॥ २॥ 


2. Sana jyotih sana svarvisva ca soma saubhaga. 
Atha no vasyasaskrdhi. 


Soma, spirit of divine love and joy, give us 


12 RGVEDA 


eternal light, give us heavenly joy, and give us all good 
fortunes of the world and make us happy and prosperous 
more and ever more. 


सना दक्च॑मुत क्रतुमप॑ं सोम मृधो! जहि। 
अथा नो वस्य॑सस्कृधि ॥ ३॥ 


Sana daksamuta kratumapa soma mrdho jahi. 
Atha no vasyasaskrdhi. 


Soma, spirit of peace and excellence, give us 
strength and efficiency, protect and promote our noble 
actions, and ward off all sin, violence and evil forces, 
and thus make us happy and successful, more and ever 
more. 


पवीतारः पुनीतन सोममिन्द्राय पात॑वे। 
अथां नो वस्य॑सस्कृधि ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Pavitarah punitana somamindraya patave. 
Atha no vasyasaskrdhi. 


O sages, harbingers of purity, purify and enhance 
the soma spirit of peace and joy for Indra, the growth of 
power, protection and excellence of the world and thus 
make us happy and prosperous more and ever more. 


त्वं सूर्ये न आ भ॑ज तव क्रत्वा तवोतिभिः 1 
अथा नो वस्य॑सस्कृधि ॥ ५॥ 


= Tvam surye na a bhaja tava kratva tavotibhih. 
Atha no vasyasaskrdhi. 


O Soma take us high to the light of the sun in 
knowledge and purity by your noble speech and action 
and by your paths of protection and progress, and thus 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 4 13 


make us happy and prosperous more and ever more. 


तव cheat तवोतिभिर्ज्योक्प॑श्येम gay 
अथा नो वस्य॑सस्कृधि ॥ & ॥ 


6. Tava kratva tavotibhirjyok pasyema suryam. 
Atha no vasyasaskrdhi. 


By your noble actions, O spirit of peace and 
piety, and by your protections and promotions, bless us 
that we may ever see and internalise the eternal light of 
the sun, and thus make us happy and prosperous more 
and ever more. 


अभ्यर्ष स्वायुध सोमं द्विबर्हसं रयिम्‌। 
अथां नो वस्य॑सस्कृधि ॥ ७॥ 


a, Abhyarsa svayudha soma dvibarhasam rayim. 
Atha no vasyasaskrdhi. 


Soma, creative and inspiring spirit of the world, 
noble wielder and controller of the dynamics of life, 
bless us with wealth and vision good enough for both 
this life and the life beyond, and thus make us happy 
and prosperous for the life divine for ever. 


say षनिंपच्युतो रयिं समत्सु सासहिः | 
अथा नो वस्य॑सस्कृधि ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Abhyarsanapacyuto rayim samatsu sasahih. 
Atha no vasyasaskrdhi. 


Soma, spirit of divinity, infallible and victorious 
in the conflicts of nature and humanity, bring us wealth 
of imperishable and unconquerable character and make 
us happy and prosperous for ever. 


14 RGVEDA 


त्वां यज्ञैर॑वीवृधन्पव॑मान विधर्मणि । 
अथा नो वस्य॑सस्कृधि ॥ ९ ॥ 
9. Tvam yajnairavivrdhan pavamana vidharmani. 
Atha no vasyasaskrdhi. 
Soma, spirit of purity and purifying power for 
all, celebrants exalt you by yajnic performance in order 
that you protect them to abide within their bounds of 


Dharma. Pray protect us in our Dharma and make us 
happy and prosperous more and ever more. 


रयिं न॑श्चित्रमज्विनमिन्दों विश्वायुमा at | 
अर्था नो वस्य॑सस्कृधि ॥ ९०॥ 
10. Rayim naSscitram-asvinam-indo visvayuma bhara. 
Atha no vasyasaskrdhi. 
Soma, spirit of divine peace and bliss, bring us 
wealth, honour and excellence of wonderful, progressive 


and universal character and thus make us eternally happy 
and prosperous more and ever more. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 5 


Apriya Sukta, Mantrawise Devata, Asita or Devala 
Kashyapa Rshi 


afi विश्वतस्पतिः पव॑मानो fa रांजति। 
प्रीणन्वृषा कनिक्रदत्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


1. Samiddho visvataspatih pavamano vi rajati. 
Prinan vrsa kanikradat. 


Refulgent sovereign ruler and sustainer of the 
world, Pavamana, pure and purifying, shines in glory, 
giving fulfilment to all, generous and virile, roaring as 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 5 15 
thunder all round. 


तनूनपात्पव॑मानः ae शिशानो अर्षति। 
अन्तरिक्षेण रार॑जत्‌ ॥ २॥ 

2. Tanunapat pavamanah srnge sisano arsati. 
Antariksena rarajat. 
Pavamana, lord pure and purifying, self- 
manifested, unfallen, infallible and imperishable, 
blazing on top of all, exists and operates, illuminating 
and glorifying the heaven and beautifying the earth. 
ईन्टेन्यः पव॑मानो र यिर्विं tsa gar 
मधोर्धाराभिरोजसा ॥ ३॥ 

3 Tlenyah pavamano rayirvi rajati dyuman. 
Madhor-dharabhir-ojasa. 

Adorable, immaculate and beatifying lord of 
light shines by his own lustre with honey sweet showers 
of beauty and joy on earth. 

बर्हिः प्राचीनमोज॑सा पव॑मानः स्तृणन्हरिः | 
देवेषुं देव Fag ४॥ 


4. Barhih pracinam-ojasa pavamanah strnan harih. 
Devesu deva tyate. 

Self-refulgent lord infinite, pure and purifying, 
pervading the timeless world of existence by his lustre 
and majesty and withdrawing it unto himself is 
manifested and operative in all divine things of the 
universe and is, as such, realised through them. 


उदातैर्जिहते बृहद्‌ ant देवीर्हिरण्ययीः | 
पव॑मानेन सुष्टुताः ॥ ५॥ 


16 RGVEDA 


on Udatair-jihate brhad dvaro devir-hiranyayth. 
Pavamanena sustutah. 


The golden doors of divinity vast as space 
celebrated along with the divine spirit of universal 
purity, open to the seekers in response to their effort in 
meditation and research. 


सुशिल्पे बं हती मही पव॑मानो वृषण्यति । 
नक्तोषासा न द॑श्ति।॥ ६॥ 


6. SuSilpe brhati mahi pavamano vrsanyati. 
Naktosasa na darsate. 


Beautiful and beatific, vast and grand heaven 
and earth, the lord of piety and purity loves to shower 
with grace and abundance as he does the night and day, 
the glorious dawn and dusk. 


उभा देवा नृचक्षसा होतारा seat हुवे। 
पव॑मान इन्द्रो वृषा ।॥ ७॥ 


वर Ubha deva nrcaksasa hotara daivya huve. 
Pavamana indro vrsa. 


Indra, generous lord and giver of glory and 
excellence, and Pavamana, lord giver of peace, piety 
and purity, both refulgent manifestations of supreme 
divinity, relentless guardians of humanity, divine high 
priests of the yajna of creation and showers of grace, I 
invoke and pray and worship. 


भार'ती पव॑मानस्य सरस्वतीव्छा wet 
इमं नो यज्ञमा ग॑मन्तिस््रो देवीः सुपेशसः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Bharati pavamanasya sarasvatila mahi. 
Imam no yajnama gaman tisro devith supesasah. 


MANDAL - 9/ SUKTA - 5 17 


May Bharati, divine mother bearer of earthly 
life, Sarasvati, dynamic spirit of all-knowledge in flow, 
Mahi, divine spirit of existential sustenance, and Ia, 
infinite reservoir of knowledge, will and passion of 
divinity for being, may this threefold divinity of the 
supreme lord of existence, immanent and transcendent, 
gracious and beatifying, pure and purifying, move and 
bless this yajna of our pious living. 


त्वष्टारमग्रजां गोपां पुरोयावानमा हवे । 
इन्दुरिन्द्रो वृषा हरिः पव॑मानः प्रजाप॑तिः ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Tvastaramagrajam gopam puroyavanama huve. 
Indurindro vrsa harih pavamanah praja-patih. 


I invoke and worship Tvashta, the creative 
maker, first manifested, protector and sustainer of the 
world, and first pioneer and guide. I invoke and worship 
Indra, the same lord of power, excellence and glory, 
Indu, lord of peace and beatitude, Vrsha, generous giver 
of showers of wealth and beauty, Hari, creator and 
sustainer, Pavamana, lord of purity and graciousness, 
and Prajapati, supreme father of his children in 
existence. 


areata carat मध्वा सम॑ङ्ग्धि धार॑या । 
सहस्रवल्शं हरितं भ्राज॑मानं हिरण्ययम्‌ ॥ 2011 
10. Vanaspatim pavamana madhva samangdhi 
dharaya. Sahasravalsam haritam bhrajamanam 
hiranyayam. 
O Pavamana, lord of piety and purity in divine 


flow, with honeyed showers of health and excellence 
bless and beautify this world of nature and humanity of 


18 RGVEDA 


a thousandfold variety clothed in dear green gold of 
blazing beauty and divine grandeur. 


विश्वे देवाः स्वार्हाकृतिं पव॑मानस्या ग॑त। 
वायुर्बहस्पतिः सूर्योऽयिरिन्द्रः स॒जोष॑सः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Visve devah svahakrtim pavamanasya gata. 
Vayur-brhaspatih suryo’gnir-indrah sajosasah. 


May all divinities of the world come and join 
this holy song of homage in honour of the lord of piety, 
purity and beatitude. Let the vibrant pioneer, eminent 
scholar, brilliant giver of enlightenment, enlightened 
leader, mighty ruler, all dear and united in love and faith, 
come and join and celebrate in peace and joy. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 6 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Asita or Devala Kashyapa Rshi 


मन्द्रया सोप धार॑या वृषा पवस्व देवयुः | 
अव्यो वारेष्वस्मयुः ॥ ९॥ 

॥ Mandraya soma dharaya vrsa pavasva devayuh. 
Avyo varesvasmayuh. 

O Soma, divine spirit of peace and beatitude, 
you are the generous power divine, lover of divinities, 
pervasive in stars and planets in space. You are for us 
too, pray flow in exciting streams of joy and bless us 
with peace and purity. 

अभि त्यं मद्यं मदमिन्दविन्द्र इतिं श्चर। 
अभि वाजिनो अर्वतः ॥ २॥ 


2. Abhi tyam madyam madamindavindra iti ksara. 
Abhi vajino arvatah. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 6 19 


O lord of power and peace, love and chivalry, 
release that exciting and beatifying flow of divine spirit 
of ecstasy and enthusiasm which blesses us with strength 
and speed worthy of warriors pressing on way to victory. 


अभि त्यं पूर्व्य मदं सुवानो अर्ष पवित्र आ। 
अभि वाजमुत श्रव॑ः ॥ ३॥ 

Abhi tyam purvyam madam suvano arsa pavitra व. 
Abhi vajamuta sravah. 
O spirit of power and purity, you are the creator 
and giver of eternal passion for life, its honour and 
excellence. Pray inspire us with passion which leads us 
to victory, honour and fame. 
अनु द्रप्सास इन्द॑व आपो न प्रवतांसरन्‌। 
पुनाना इन्द्र॑माशत ॥ ४॥ 

4. Anu drapsasa indava apo na pravatasaran. 
Punana indramasata. 


The streams of that inspiring power and passion 
flow on without interruption like showers of rain and, 
inspiring, sanctifying and beatifying, bring us honour, 
excellence and fame for the soul. 


यमत्य॑मिव वाजिनं मृजन्ति योष॑णो दशं | 
वने क्रीठन्तमत्य॑विम्‌॥ ५ ॥ 


2. Yamatyamiva vajinam mrjanti yosano dasa. 
Vane krilantam-atyavim. 
The soul, now that it is past the process of 


purification, like soma after filteration, and sports in 
the world of beauty, ten youthful senses and pranas 


20 RGVEDA 


invigorate and shine like a chivalrous warrior on way 
to victory. 


तं गोधिर्तृष॑णं रसं मदाय देववीतये । 
सुतं भराय सं सरंज॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Tam gobhir-vrsanam rasam madaya devavitaye. 
Sutam bharaya sam 5114. 
That exuberant ecstasy distilled through sense, 
mind and intelligence for the love and worship of 
divinity, O man, further create and develop through 


communion with the spirit of peace and beatitude for 
joyous victory in the battle of life. 


देवो देवाय धार येन्द्र॑य पवते Ua: | 
पयो यद॑स्य पीपयत्‌ ॥ ७॥ 

ds Devo devaya dharayendraya pavate sutah. 
Payo yadasya pipayat. 


Self- refulgent and generous lord divine creates 
and showers streams of distilled soma for the blessed 
illustrious human soul in communion since it is the lord 
who creates the soma originally for the seeker who cares 
for a drink of the nectar. 


आत्मा यज्ञस्य tat सुष्वाणः प॑वते a: | 
Wet नि पाति काव्य॑म्‌॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Atma yajiasya ramhya susvanah pavate sutah. 
Pratnam ni pati kavyam. 


The divine lord of joy and pure bliss, Soma, is 
the soul of yajna and, all inspiring creator of bliss, 
pervades and vibrates with power, fulfilling the seeker’s 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 7 21 


desire, and thus the lord protects and promotes the 
eternal beauty and poetry of life. 
एवा dart इन्द्रयुर्मदं मदिष्ठ वीतये । 
Tet चिद्टधिषे गिर॑ः ॥ ९॥ 
o. Eva punana indrayur-madam madistha vitaye. 
Guha ciddadhise girah. 


O lover of Indra, the soul of humanity, most 
joyous spirit, pure and purifying thus, exalt and edify 
the beauty and ecstasy of life for the peace and ultimate 
freedom of the soul since, after all, you hold the sacred 
voice of divinity in the cave of the heart. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 7 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Asita or Devala Kashyapa Rshi 
असुंग्रमिन्द॑वः पथा धर्म्रृतस्य॑ सुश्चियंः | 
विदाना अस्य योज॑नम्‌ ९॥ 
tl. Asrgram-indavah patha dharmannrtasya susri- 
yah. Vidana asya yojanam. 


Knowing the relevance of their vibrant action 
in Dharma, wise sages, brilliant and gracious, move by 
the path of rectitude following the eternal law of 
existence created by the lord of peace and glory. 


प्र धारा मध्वो अग्रियो महीरपो वि गाहते। 
हविह विष्षु वन्द्यं: ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Pra dhara madhvo agriyo mahirapo vi gahate. 
Havirhavissu vandyah. 


Most adorable of the adorables, worthy of 
worship, Soma, lord of peace and joy, first and foremost 


22 RGVEDA 


of the honey streams of life, pervades the dynamics of 
existence in the eternal law. 
प्रयुजो वाचो अग्रियो वृषाव॑ चक्रदद्वने । 
सदाभि सत्यो अध्वरः ॥ ३॥ 
De Pra yujo vaco agriyo vrsava cakradadvane. 
Sadmabhi satyo adhvarah. 


First and foremost, generous and eternal lord 
Soma of love free from violence proclaims the words 
of truth relevant to yajnic life and calls up the devotees 
to the hall of yajna in peace and bliss. 
परि यत्काव्या कविर्नृम्णा वसानो अर्षति। 
स्वंर्वाजी सिंषासति ux ॥ 

4. Pari yat kavya kavirnrmna vasano arsati. 
Svarvajl sisasati. 
When the poetic spirit of omniscience wrapped 
in glory moves and inspires the vision and imagination 
of the poet, the creative spirit flies to the heavens and 
celebrates divinity in poetry. 
पव॑मानो अभि स्पृधो विशो राजव सीदति। 
यदींमृण्वन्तिं वेधसं: ॥ ५॥ 

Pavamano abhi sprdho 1750 rajeva sidati. 
Yadimrnvanti vedhasah. 


The pure and purifying Soma rises over all rivals 
and sits on top of people like a ruler when the wise 
sages pray and move his attention and love. 

अव्यो वारे परिं प्रियो हरिर्वनेंषु सीदति। 
रेभो व॑नुष्यते मती ॥ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 7 23 


6. Avyo vare pari priyo harirvanesu sidati. 
Rebho vanusyate mati. 


Over the regions of light, dear, loved and 
destroyer of suffering, Soma, Spirit of purity and energy, 
resides in the heart of happy celebrants and, eloquent 
and inspiring, illuminates and beatifies their heart and 
intellect. 


स वायुमिन्द्र॑मश्विनां साकं मदेन गच्छति। 
रणा यो अस्य धर्मभिः ।॥ ७॥ 


de Sa vayum-indram-asvina sakam madena 
gacchati. Rana yo asya dharmabhih. 


He who happily abides by the laws of this Soma, 
spirit of vibrant purity, goes forward in life with powers 
of ruling strength and excellence and sagely people of 
noble knowledge and unfailing action. 


आ मित्रावरुणा भगं मध्व॑ः पवन्त ऊर्मय॑ः। 
विदाना अस्य शक्स॑थिः॥ ८ ॥ 


8. A mitravaruna bhagam madhvah pavanta 
urmayah. Vidana asya Sakmabhih. 


Those wise sages of knowledge, whose sweet 
will and loving emotions abide by divine love and 
friendship, freedom and justice, and excellence and 
generosity, live happy and prosperous in a state of 
vibrancy like waves of sparkling streams, by the love 
and exhilaration of Soma, spirit of peace and purity. 


अस्मभ्यं रोदसी रयिं मध्वो वाज॑स्य सातयें। 
श्रवो वसूनि सं जिंतम्‌॥ ९॥ 


24 RGVEDA 


9. Asmabhyam rodast rayim madhvo vajasya sataye. 
Sravo vasuni sam jitam. 
May heaven and earth lead us to acquisition of 


wealth, sweet homes, honour, excellence and fame for 
winning the higher victories of life. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 8 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Asita or Devala Kashyapa Rshi 


एते aint अभि rafter काम॑मक्षरन्‌। 
वर्धन्तो अस्य वीर्यभ्‌॥ १॥ 


1. Ete soma abhi priyam-indrasya kamamaksaran. 
Vardhanto asya viryam. 


These soma streams of life flow free and fulfil 
the cherished desires of humanity and exalt the creative 
splendour of the soul. 


पुनानासश्चमूषदो गच्छ॑न्तो वायु मश्विना । 
ते नो धान्तु सुवीर्यम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Punanasas-camusado gacchanto vayumasvina. 
Te no dhantu suviryam. 


The same soma streams of life distilled from 
nature, contained in deep reservoirs, vibrating in human 
veins and nerves, marshalling in social forces energise 
and motivate the vibrant scholar and the pursuers of 
jnana-yoga and karma-yoga in knowledge and action. 
May they bring us the lustre and vitality of creative 
splendour and graces of culture, sanctifying as they are. 


इन्द्रस्य सोम्‌ राध॑से पुनानो हार्दि" चोदय। 
ऋतस्य योनिमासदम्‌ 3 


MANDAL - 9/ SUKTA - 8 25 


a Indrasya soma radhase punano hardi codaya. 
Rtasya yonimasadam. 


O Soma, peace and power of the divine spirit, 
purifying and sanctifying the life of humanity, inspire 
and energise the heart and passion of Indra, the human 
soul settled at the seed centre of the truth of existence, 
for winning the ultimate success and victory of life. 


मृजन्ति त्वा दश क्षिपो हिन्वन्ति ae efter: । 
अनु faut अमादिषुः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Myjanti tva dasa ksipo hinvati sapta dhitayah. 
Anu vipra amadisuh. 


O Soma, human soul at peace, ten energized and 
energizing modes of nature, subtle and gross elements, 
give you the beautiful body form, and seven inspiring 
faculties of sense and mind inspire and move you to 
think and act. Thus equipped, let the wise sages provide 
you pleasure and enlightenment with secular and sacred 
literature. 


देवेभ्यस्त्वा dela कं सुंजानमतिं मेष्य॑ः। 
सं गोभिंवसियामसि॥ ५॥ 


Devebhyastva madaya kam srjanamati mesyah. 
Sam gobhir-vasayamasi. 


O Soma, man of peace and joy, while you are 
creating psychic and spiritual joy for the service and 
pleasure of nature and noble humanity, we, generous 
mother powers and sagely scholars, nourish and 
enlighten you with milk and noble voices of wisdom 
and vision of divinity. 


26 RGVEDA 


पुनानः कलशोष्वा वस्त्राण्यरुषो हरिः | 
परि गव्यान्यव्यत ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Punanah kalasesva vastranyaruso harih. 
Pari gavyanyavyata. 


Soma, lord of peace and purity, destroyer of 
suffering, manifests in refulgent forms of existence and 
pervades all round in stars and planets of the universe. 


Tat आ प॑वस्व नो जहि विश्वा अप fea: | 
इन्दो Grater fast ॥ ७॥ 


ds Maghona a pavasva no jahi visva apa dvisah. 
Indo sakhayama visSa. 


Lord of peace and bliss, come and purify the 
devotees, men of wealth, power and honour, and ward 
off all our negativities, oppositions, jealousies and 
enmities from us and bless us all to live together as 
friends. 


वृष्टं दिवः परिं स्रव द्युम्नं पंथिव्या अधिं । 
सहो नः सोम पृत्सु धाः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Vrstim divah pari srava dyumnam prthivya adhi. 
Saho nah soma prtsu dhah. 


O Soma, shower the lights of heaven and wealth, 
power and glory over the earth. Give us courage, 
patience and fortitude, hold on to us in battles of life 
and give us the final victory. 


नृचक्षसं त्वा वयमिन््र॑पीतं स्वर्विद॑म्‌। 
भक्षीमहि प्रजामिषम्‌ eu 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 9 27 


9. Nrcaksasam tva vayam-indrapitam svarvidam. 
Bhaksimahi prajamisam. 


All-watching guardian of humanity, omniscient 
lord of bliss, adored and self-realised by the soul of 
humanity, we pray for the gift of food and energy, light 
and knowledge, and all round happiness for all people 
of the world, your children. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 9 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Asita or Devala Kashyapa Rshi 


uk प्रिया fea: कविर्वयांसि नप््योर्हितः। 
सुवानो याति कविक्रतुः ॥ ९॥ 


| Pari priya divah kavir-vayamsi naptyorhitah. 
Suvano yati kavikratuh. 


Soma, cosmic soul, darling of the heavens and 
loved of enlightened people, poetic creator, immanent 
in his own creations, pervading all regions of the 
universe, moves around omnipresent, inspiring, creating 
and doing all those acts which are exclusively worthy 
of the omniscient and omnipotent creator. 


प्रप्र क्षयाय पन्यसे जनाय जुष्टो stat । 
वीत्यर्ष चनिया ॥ २॥ 


2 Prapra ksayaya panyase janaya justo adruhe. 
Vityarsa canisthaya. 


O Soma, loved and cherished of all, ever move 
with love and favours of grace to every home and every 
region of the world for the celebrant and all men free 
from jealousy and enmity, and bless them all with joy 


28 RGVEDA 
and life’s fulfilment. 


स सूनुर्मा तरा शुचिंजातो जाते अरोचयत्‌ | 
महान्मही ऋतावृर्धा ।॥ ३ ॥ 


a Sa sunur-matara Sucir-jato jate arocayat. 
Mahan mahi rtavrdha. 


He, creator of the universe, pure and great, self- 
manifested, illuminates the great and glorious heaven 
and earth, mothers of the created world which observe 
and exalt the eternal laws of existence. 


स aa धीतिभिवर्हितो नद्यो अजिन्वदद्रुहंः। 
या एकमश्चिं वावृधुः ॥ ॐ i 


4. Sa sapta dhitibhirhito nadyo ajinvad-adruhah. 
Ya ekamaksi vavrdhuh. 


He, exhilarating divine consciousness, is 
received through seven stages of mental and spiritual 
realisation and, thus realised, sets seven streams of 
individual consciousness, negativities eliminated, aflow 
which reveal the exalting presence of the one universal 
light of existence. 


ता अभि सन्तमस्तुंतं महे युर्वानमा ae: | 
इन्दुमिन्द्र तवं व्रते ॥ ५॥ 


5: Ta abhi santam-astrtam mahe yuvanama da- 
dhuh. Indum-indra tava vrate. 


Indra, lord of light and joy, those seven mental 
and spiritual stages of divine perception and reception 
direct the joyous soul, which is ever existent, ever young 
and inviolable, to abide in the great discipline of your 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 9 29 
divine law. 


अभि वद्धिरम्त्यः सस प॑श्यति arate: | 
क्रिविंर्दैवीरंतर्पयत्‌।॥। ६ ॥ 


6. Abhi vahnir-amartyah sapta pasyati vavahih. 
Krivir-devir-atarpayat. 


The enlightened soul, immortal and inviolable, 
user and inspirer of its human mind and sense, whom 
seven modes of Prakrti and seven pranas define in the 
existential state, overwatches the seven and, generous 
like a fount of nectar, fulfills all the seven, i.e., when 
they have fulfilled their function he retires them, and 
they resolve into their mother source of Prakrti. 


अवा कल्पेषु नः पुमस्तमांसि सोप योध्या | 
तानि पुनान जङ्कनः॥ ७॥ 

cr Ava kalpesu nah pumas-tamamsi soma yodhya. 
Tani punana janghanah. 


O Soma, soul supreme, lord of peace and joy, 
pure and purifying, cast away from us all sin and 
darkness throughout all ages and all states of existence, 
eliminate them all and protect us, save us, redeem us. 


नू नव्य॑से नवीयसे aera साधया पथः। 
प्रलवद्रोचया रुच॑ः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Nu navyase naviyase suktaya sadhaya pathah. 
Pratnavad-rocaya rucah. 


For sure and in truth, for our latest song of praise 
and for our new life of divinity, open up the paths of 
progress so that we reach you with our adorations. O 


30 RGVEDA 
lord of light, shine and illuminate as ever. 


पव॑मान महि श्रवो गामश्वं रासि वीरवं॑त्‌। 
सनां मेधां सना स्व॑: ॥ ९ ॥ 
9. Pavamana mahi 51410 gamasvam rasi viravat. 


Sana medham sana svah. 


O lord of purity purifying all, all munificent, 
give us great fame and excellence, lands and cows, 
literature and culture, horses and transport, progress and 
victory and heroic children. Give us vision and 
intelligence, give us the peace, the light and the joy of 
supreme freedom. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 10 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Asita or Davala Kashyapa Rshi 
प्र स्वानासो रथाडइवाऽर्वन्तो न श्र॑वस्यव॑ः। 
सोमासो राये अंक्रमुः।॥ ९॥ 


1. Pra svanaso ratha iva’rvanto na $ravasyavah. 
Somaso raye akramuh. 


The seekers of soma in search of food for body, 
mind and soul rush on like resounding charioteers and 
warriors of horse, and go forward for the achievement 
of life’s wealth. 


हिन्वानासो रथाइव दधन्विरे गभ॑स्त्योः । 
भरासः कारिणामिव i २॥ 


0.9 Hinvanaso ratha iva dadhanvire gabhastyoh. 
Bharasah karinamiva. 


Dynamic are the seekers like heroes 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 10 31 


commanding superfast chariots laden with riches, 
holding controls in their hands, their shouts of victory 
rising like poet’s songs of celebration. 


राजानो न प्रश॑स्तिभिः सोमासो गोभिंरञ्जते। 
यज्ञो न सप्त धातृभिः ॥ ३॥ 

Rajano na prasastibhih 50171640 gobhiranjate. 
Yajno na sapta dhatrbhih. 


Like kings celebrated by songs of praise, like 
yajna beautified by seven priests, the soma seekers are 
hallowed by songs of praise as soma is energised by 
sun-rays. 


परिं सुवानास इन्द॑वो मदय बर्हणा गिरा । 
सुता steht धार॑या ॥ 1 

4. Pari suvanasa indavo madaya barhana gira. 
Suta arsanti dharaya. 


Streams of soma distilled and consecrated by 
the hallowed voice of the Veda flow round for the joy 
of mankind. 


आपानासो विवस्व॑तो जन॑न्त उषसो ety 
सूरा अण्वं वि त॑न्वते॥ ५॥ 


5. Apanaso vivasvato jananta usaso bhagam. 
Sura anvam vi tanvate. 


The brave and brilliant seekers of soma, light 
of divinity, having drunk the glory of the rising sun at 
dawn and themselves rising in glory, extend and spread 
the light of subtle knowledge around like light of the 
sun. 


32 RGVEDA 


अप द्वारा मतीनां wer ऋण्वन्ति cared: | 
वृष्णो ate आयवः ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Apa dvara matinam pratna rnvanti karavah. 
Vrsno harasa ayavah. 


Veteran scholars and artists, blest with the 
flames and showers of the light and generosity of the 
omnificent lord of soma, open wide the doors of divine 
knowledge and will for all humanity over the world. 


समीचीनास आसते होतारः सप्तजामयः। 
पदमेकस्य पिप्र॑तः ॥ ७॥ 
५५ Samicinasa asate hotarah saptajamayah. 
Padamekasya pipratah. 
Seven priests in unison as brothers, happy and 
dedicated with peace at heart, sit on the vedi and fulfill 


the yajna in honour of one sole divinity for one sole 
purpose in the service of humanity and divinity. 


नाभा ahs आ द॑दे चक्षुञ्चित्सूर्ये सचां । 
कवेरपंत्यमा दुहे ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Nabha nabhim na a dade caksuScit surye saca. 
Kaverapatyama duhe. 


In the core of the heart we hold the yajna and 
the lord of yajna, our eye fixed on the sun with love and 
reverence, and thereby we distil the light and peace of 
existence, reflection of omniscient and creative divinity. 


अभि प्रिया दिवस्पदम॑ध्वर्युभिर्गुहां हितम्‌। 
सूर॑ः पश्यति चक्च॑सा॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 11 33 


9. Abhi priya divaspadam-adhvaryubhir-guha 
hitam. Surah pasyati caksasa. 


The brave visionary of soma creativity sees the 
heavenly light and the vision of the light giver, distilled, 
concentrated and treasured in the core of the heart by 
the performers of soma yajna. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 11 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Asita or Devala Kashyapa Rshi 


उपास्मै गायता नरः पव॑मानायेन्दंवे। 
अभि देवां gaara ॥ ९॥ 


ll; Upasmai gayata narah pavamanayendave. 
Abhi devan iyaksate. 


O leading lights of humanity, to win the wealth 
of life’s joy, work and sing in thanks and adoration for 
this infinite fount of pure bliss which overflows and 
yearns to join and inspire the noble creative performers 
of yajna. 


अभि ते मधुना पयोऽथर्वाणो अशिश्रयुः | 
देवं देवाय देवयु ॥ २॥ 


2. Abhi te madhuna payo’tharvano asisrayuh. 
Devam devaya devayu. 


O Soma, you are the lover of the noble and 
divine, and you love to bless humanity to rise to divinity. 
The Atharvans, people on the rock-bed foundation of 
piety, are steadfast, they direct their concentrated mind 
to you and drink the life giving nectar mixed with honey 
sweets of divinity. 


34 RGVEDA 


स न॑: पवस्व शं गवे शं जनाय शमर्वते। 
शं राजन्नोषधीभ्यः ॥ ३ ॥ 


a: Sa nah pavasva Sam gave $am janaya Samarvate. 
Sam rajann-osadhibhyah. 


O Soma, self-refulgent light, life of life, flow 
free and bring us fertility for the cow, agility for the 
horse and maturity for the herbs and trees, undisturbed 
efficiency for the senses, peace and tranquillity for the 
mind and soul, and peace, prosperity and joy for the 
people. 


बभ्रवे नु स्वत॑वसेऽ eure दिविस्पृशे । 
arate गाथमर्चत ux ॥ 


4. Babhrave nu svatavase’runaya divisprse. 
Somaya gatham-arcata. 


Offer songs of adoration to Soma, lord sustainer 
of the universe, self-potent and omnipresent, who 
pervades boundless even to the heights of highest 
heavens. 


हस्त॑च्युतेभिरद्विभिः सुतं सोमं पुनीतन । 
मधावा धावता wet ५ ॥ 


3: Hastacyutebhir-adribhih sutam somam puni-tana. 
Madhava dhavata madhu. 


As soma juice is extracted with stones worked 
by hands, refined and seasoned with honey and milk, 
so O lord, let my mind be refined and purified with 
repeated chants of the sacred voice, and let it be 
sanctified with the honey of devotion and let it be 
absorbed in the honey sweet of divinity. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 11 35 


weed सीदत दध्नेदभि श्रीणीतन। 
इन्दुमिन्द्र दधातन ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Namasedupa sidata dadhnedabhi srinitana. 
Indum-indre dadhatana. 


O Soma, eternal peace and joy, come, listen and 
abide by our homage at the closest, be one with our 
prayer and meditation, hold our mind and spirit in 
concentration within the ecstasy of your divine glory. 


अमित्रहा विचर्षणिः पव॑स्व सोम शं गवें। 
देवेभ्यो अनुकामकृत्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


fF Amitraha vicarsanih pavasva soma Sam gave. 
Devebhyo anukamakrt. 


O Soma, lord of eternal bliss, you eliminate the 
disturbance and negativities of the mind, you are the 
all-watching divine eye, pray flow in streams of joy and 
bring us peace and tranquillity of senses, mind and soul, 
O redeemer and giver of fulfilment to the holy and 
brilliant seekers of divinity. 


इन्द्राय सोम्‌ पात॑वे vata परिं free | 
मनख्चिन्मनंसस्पतिः॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Indraya soma patave madaya pari sicyase. 
Manascin-manasaspatih. 


O Soma, shower of divine joy, you are the eternal 
mind, cosmic master, protector and inspirer of all human 
mind, and you vibrate and constantly flow for the joy 
and fulfilment of Indra, the soul in the state of spiritual 
excellence. 


36 RGVEDA 


पव॑मान सुवीर्य' रयिं सोम रिरीहिनः। 
इन्दविन्द्रेण नो युजा ॥ ९ ॥ 
2. Pavamana suviryam rayim soma rirthi nah. 
Indavindrena no yuja. 
O Soma, beauty and joy of life, pure and 
purifying ever on the flow, our friend united with the 
mind and soul, we pray bring us courage and creativity 


of spirit, and wealth, honour and excellence of life, join 
us with divinity in communion and freedom. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 12 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Asita or Devala Kashyapa Rshi 


सोमा असूग्रमिन्द॑वः सुता ऋतस्य TSA | 
इन्द्राय मधुमत्तमाः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Soma asrgram-indavah suta rtasya sadane. 
Indraya madhuttamah. 


Showers and streams of soma, most inspiring 
honey sweets of beauty and bliss of the world of divinity 
created in the house of the cosmic flow of existence 
and distilled in holy action on the yajna vedi, are created 
for the soul in the state of excellence. 


अभि faut अनूषत गावो वत्सं न aren: | 
इन्द्र सोम॑स्य पीतये ॥ २॥ 


pm Abhi vipra anusata gavo vatsam na matarah. 
Indram somasya pitaye. 


Just as mother cows low for the calf so do the 
sages invoke and glorify Indra, lord of soma, beauty, 
joy and excellence, so that the lord may bless them with 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 12 37 


his presence and be happy with their songs of love and 
adoration. 


मदच्युत्धेति सादने सिन्धोरूर्मा faufea 
सोमो गौरी अधिं ्चितः॥ ३॥ 


ध Madacyut kseti sadane sindhor-urma vipascit. 
Somo gauri adhi Sritah. 


The joyous waves abide by the sea, the saintly 
joy of the wise abides in the Vedic voice, and the soma 
joy that is exuberant in divine ecstasy abides in the hall 
of yajna. 


दिवो नाभा विचक्चणोऽ व्यो ant महीयते। 
सोमो यः सुक्रतुः कविः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Divo nabha vicaksano’vyo vare mahiyate. 
Somo yah sukratuh kavih. 


Soma, lord of eternal bliss, omnipotent creator 
of the noble universe, omniscient visionary, centre of 
the universe of heavenly beauty, all watching, who 
transcends the best and highest, is the adorable love of 
all. 


यः सोम॑ः कल्शोष्वां अन्तः पवित्र आरितः 1 
तमिन्दुः OR षस्वजे ॥ ५॥ 

a. Yah somah kalasesvan antah pavitra ahitah. 
Taminduh pari sasvaje. 


The brilliant, the wise, seek and abide by Soma, 
joyous lord of the universe, who reflects in all forms of 
existence and abides in the holy cave of the heart. 


38 RGVEDA 


प्र वाचमिन्दुरिष्यति समुद्रस्याधि विष्टपि | 
जिन्वन्कोशं मधुश्चुतम्‌ it ६ ॥ 


6. Pra vacam-indur-isyati samudrasyadhi vistapi. 
Jinvan kosam madhuscutam. 


Soma, self-refulgent lord of bliss who pervades 
unto the bounds of space, augments the treasure-hold 
of the honey sweets of nature, inspires the holy minds, 
and the voice of divinity overflows in poetry and ecstasy. 


Reet वनस्पतिर्धीनामनन्तः Gage: | 
हिन्वानो मानुषा युगा ॥ ७ ॥ 


7. Nityastotro vanaspatir-dhinamantah sabardu- 
ghah. Hinvano manusa yuga. 


Soma eternally sung in hymns of adoration, 
creator, protector and sustainer of nature, indwelling 
inspirer of mind, intelligence and will, giver of the nectar 
of nourishment and joy, inspires and fulfils the couples 
and communities of humanity as a friend and 
companion. 


अभि प्रिया दिवस्पदा ural हिन्वानो अंर्षति। 
विप्र॑स्य धार॑या कविः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Abhi priya divaspada somo hinvano arsati. 
Viprasya dharaya kavih. 


Soma, divine poet creator, all peace and bliss, 
abiding in the heavenly beauty of the universe, inspiring 
and energising human creativity especially of the wise 
sage, sends down streams of joy in song overflowing 
the poetic imagination. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 13 39 


आ प॑वमान धारय रयिं सहस्त्र॑वर्चसम्‌। 
अस्मे इन्दो स्वाभुव॑म्‌॥ ९॥ 

A pavamana dharaya rayim sahasravarcasam. 
Asme indo svabhuvam. 


O Soma, pure, purifying and universally 
flowing, refulgent and glorious, come, bless and bring 
us wealth, honour and excellence of thousandfold lustre, 
self-sustaining and abundant. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 13 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Asita or Devala Kashyapa Rshi 


सोम॑ः पुनानो अर्षति सहस्त्र॑धारो अत्यविः 1 
वायोरिन्द्रस्य निष्कृतम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


iP Somah punano arsati sahasradharo atyavih. 
Vayorindrasya niskrtam. 


Soma, beauty, joy, power and divinity of life, 
pure, and purifying, vibrates every where and flows free 
in a thousand streams, inspiring, energising and 
protecting, it is released and sanctified by Vayu, cosmic 
energy and empowered by Indra, divine omnipotence, 
distilled by vibrant sages, received by creative humanity 
and spread abroad by ruling powers. 


पवमानमवस्यवो fadafar प्र गायत। 
सुष्वाणं देववीतये ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Pavamanamavasyavo vipramabhi pra gayata. 
Susvanam devavitaye. 


O seekers of energy, power and protection, sing 
and adore the soma of existence, lord creator and 


40 RGVEDA 
energiser, pure and purifying, omniscient giver of 
knowledge and wisdom, for the sake of divine 
excellence and felicity in life. 


पव॑न्ते वाज॑सातये सोमाः खहस््र॑पाजसः। 
गृणाना देववीतये ॥ ३॥ 

Pavante vajasataye somah sahasrapajasah. 
Grnana devavitaye. 
The Soma streams of life’s felicity flow in a 
thousand ways of energy, power and divine inspiration, 
doing honour to the lord of glory and bliss, refining 
and purifying us for favour of the divinities and for 
winning victories of honour and excellence in life. 
उत नो वाज॑सातये पव॑स्व sects: | 
द्युमदिन्दो सुवीर्यम्‌ ॥ x ॥ 

4. Uta no vajasataye pavasva brhatirisah. 
Dyumad-indo suviryam. 


O refulgent Soma, lord of peace, power, beauty 
and glory, flow, purify and empower us for victory in 
the battles of life and give us abundant food and energy 
and high order of noble creative courage and rectitude. 


ते न॑: सहस्तरिणं रयिं पवन्तामा सुवीर्यम्‌ । 
सुवाना देवास इन्द॑वः ॥॥ ९ ॥ 

5: Te nah sahasrinam rayim-pavantama suviryam. 
Suvana devasa indavah. 


May those streams of soma, divine showers of 
beauty and glory, inspiring us, energising us with 
strength and virility, flow and purify us, and give us a 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 13 41 


thousand-fold wealth, honour and glory, and high 
creative potential for further advancement. 


अत्या हियाना न aaa वाज॑सातये | 
वि वारमव्यमाशवः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Atya hiyana na hetrbhir-asrgram vdjasataye. 
Vi varam-avyam-asavah. 


The showers of soma, blessings of the lord of 
peace and protection, like fastest forces electrified to 
omnipresence by urgent masters, reach to places and 
people that need light and protection against ignorance 
and darkness. 


वाश्रा अं्षन्तीन्द॑वोऽ भि वत्सं न aaa: | 
दधन्विरे गभ॑स्त्योः ।॥ ७॥ 


4 Vasra arsantindavo’bhi vatsam na dhenavah. 
Dadhanvire gabhastyoh. 


Loving showers of divine light, peace and 
protection flow to the supplicants as mother cows move 
to the calf and are held by the dedicated in love and 
faith. 


WE इन्द्राय मत्सरः पव॑मान कनिंक्रदत्‌। 
विश्वा अप द्विषो जहि॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Justa indraya matsarah pavamana kanikradat. 
Visva apa dviso jahi. 

Let the pure and purifying showers of soma in 
divine flow, dedicated to omnipotence and to humanity 
in love roar as a cloud of rain showers, and, O roaring 
showers, throw out all jealousies and enmities of the 


42 RGVEDA 
world far away from us. 


अपघ्नन्तो अराव्णः पव॑मानाः cad st: | 
योनावृतस्यं सीदत ॥ ९॥ 


9. Apaghnanto aravnah pavamanah svardrsah. 
Yonavrtasya sidata. 


O shower of divine light, love and power, 
warding off and eliminating all unrighteous and 
uncreating elements of life, pure, purifying and flowing 
for humanity’s good, revealing the light of divinity and 
illuminating humanity, come and settle in the seat of 
truth and rectitude in the yajnic hall of humanity. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 14 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Asita or Devala Kashyapa Rshi 


परि प्रासिंष्यदत्कविः सिन्धोरूर्मावधि fra: | 
कारं विश्र॑त्पुरुस्पुहम्‌॥। 2 
॥ Pari prasisyadat kavih sindhorurmavadhi Sritah. 


Karam bibhrat purusprham. 


Pervading and reposing in transcendence over 
the dynamics of this expansive ocean of the universe, 
bearing and sustaining this poetic creation, the 
omniscient poet creator, Soma, lord of peace, joy and 
bliss, rolls and rules the world with pleasure and grace. 

गिरा यदी सब॑न्धवः पञ्च arat अपस्यवंः। 
परिष्कृुण्वन्तिं धर्णासिम्‌॥ २॥ 


0. Gira yadi sabandhavah panca vrata apasya-vah. 
Pariskrnvanti dharnasim. 


Five peoples together as kindred, five perceptive 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 14 43 


organs together with volitional sense organs, dedicated 
and committed to their law and discipline of Dharma, 
desirous to do good, all honour and adore the sustainer, 
Soma, lord of peace and joy, the earth mother, and the 
master soul with their sacred work and voice. 


आद॑स्य शुष्मिणो रसे fave देवा अमत्सत | 
यदी गोभिर्वसायते ।। ३ ॥ 


a Adasya Susmino rase visve deva amatsata. 
Yadi gobhirvasayate. 


And then in the pleasure and ecstasy of this 
Soma, lord of bliss, all sages, scholars and divines of 
the world exult when they are able to apprehend with 
their mind and senses his presence and when he feels 
pleased by their songs of adoration. 


निरिणानो वि atafa जहच्छर्यीणि तान्वा । 
अत्रा सं जिघ्रते युजा ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Nirinano vi dhavati jahaccharyani tanva. 
Atra sam jighrate yuja. 
Apprehended with discrimination and clear 
vision, it descends into the devotee’s consciousness, 


releasing light by its radiations, and, joining the devotee, 
it destroys his darkness and ignorance. 


नसीभिर्यो facade: शुभ्रो न मामृजे युवा । 
गाः कुण्वानो न निर्णिजम्‌ & 


a, Naptibhirno vivasvatah subhro na mamrje yuva. 
Gah krnvano na nirnijam. 


Shining as pure and radiant by the mind and 


44 RGVEDA 


senses of the ardent devotee, it joins the sage and, 
perfecting his mind and intelligence, reveals itself in 
vision as if in concentrated form and splendour. 


अति चिती तिरश्चता गव्या जिगात्यण्व्या | 
ठग्रुमिंयर्तिं यं विदे॥ ६॥ 


6. Ati 577 tiraScata gavya jigatyanvya. 
Vagnumiyarti yam vide. 


Pure and absolute, free from any mode or 
medium, it reveals itself by the subtlest and most pointed 
intelligential awareness of the devotee, and this confirms 
the truth of the Vedic words of revelation for the seeker 
of divinity and knowledge. 


अभि fara: सम॑ग्मत मर्जयन्तीरिषस्पतिम्‌। 
पृष्ठा गभ्णत वाजिनः ॥ ७॥ 

ce Abhi ksipah samagmata marjayantirisaspatim. 
Prstha grbhnata vajinah. 


The intelligential faculties of the soul cleansing 
themselves, together in concentration, move to the lord 
omnipotent of food, energy and intelligence and reach 
the fount and foundation of all action and attainment 
for the soul. 


परिं दिव्यानि मर्मृशाद्धिरुवानि सोम पार्थिवा। 
वसूनि arrears: ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Pari divyani marmrsad visvani soma parthiva. 
Vasuni yahysmayuh. 
O Soma, lord of peace, power and intelligence, 
pray, having collected and concentrated all heavenly 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 15 45 


and earthly wealth, honour and excellence of the world, 
come and bring them for us. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 15 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Asita or Devala Kashyapa Rshi 
एष धिया यात्यण्व्या शरो tal भिराशुभिः। 
गच्छन्निन्द्रस्य निष्कृतम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 
1; Esa dhiya yatyanvya suro rathebhir-asubhih. 
Gacchann-indrasya niskrtam. 

This Soma, spirit of peace and joy, brave 
dispeller of darkness, moves with the subtlest 
intelligence and awareness and comes by the fastest 
media of psychic communication and comes to the seat 
of its presence in the mind and soul of man. 

एष पुरू धियायते बृहते देवर्तातये। 
यत्रामृतास आसते ॥ २॥ 


ps Esa puru dhiyayate brhate devatdataye. 
Yatramrtasa asate. 


This infinite and eternal Spirit of peace, love 
and joy is ever keen to bless humanity with boundless 
piety and divinity in which men of immortal knowledge, 
karma and divine love abide. 


एष हितो fa नीयतेऽ न्तः शुभ्राव॑ता पथा। 
यदी! तुञ्जन्ति भूर्णयः ॥ ३ ॥ 


a: Esa hito vi ntyate’ntah subhravata patha. 
Yadi tunjanti bhurnayah. 


This divine Spirit is attained and internalised in 


46 RGVEDA 


the core of the heart and soul by the brilliant path of 
clairvoyance, when the passionate seekers surrender 
themselves in obedience to it. 


एष Baler दोधुं वच्छिशींते Gears TTT | 
नृम्णा दर्धान ओज॑सा ॥ ॐ ॥ 

4. Esa srngani dodhuvac-chisite yuthyo vrsa. 
Nrmna dadhana ojasa. 
This Soul, vibrating on top of the highest bounds 
of the universe, abides in repose in the world of 
existence, one with all in the multitudinous world, 
generous and virile, bearing and ruling the entire wealth 
and powers of the universe by its power and splendour. 
एष रुक्मिभिरीयते वाजी शुभभिरं शुभि॑ः। 
पतिः सिन्धूनां भव॑न्‌ ॥ ५॥ 

3D: Esa rukmibhir-tyate vajt Subhrebhir-amsubhih. 
Patih sindunam bhavan. 
It pervades every where by its holy brilliance 
of light and wide creative forces, ruling over the 
dynamics of the vibrating oceans of space. 
एष वसुनि पिब्दना परुषा ययिर्वोँ अति। 
अव शादेषु गच्छति ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Esa vasuni pibdana parusa yayivan ati. 
Ava sdadesu gacchati. 

It moves and overcomes hard and rough places 
of hidden hoarded wealth of negative powers and goes 


over to protect the powers that observe divine discipline 
in the battles of life. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 16 47 


एतं daa मर्ज्यमुप द्रोणेष्वायवः | 
प्रच्राणं wate: ॥ ७॥ 

ie Etam mrjanti marjyamupa dronesvayavah. 
Pracakranam mahirisah. 
People adore this glorious power closely 
treasured in the heart, the divine power that creates and 
gives great food, energy and advancement. 
एतमु त्यं दश feral मृजन्ति सस्त efter: | 
स्वायुधं मदिन्तमम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Etamu tyam dasa ksipo mrjanti sapta dhitayah. 
Svayudham madintamam. 

With ten pranas and seven faculties, five senses, 
mind and intellect, glorify this Soma, lord of peace and 


joy, who is most ecstatically blissful and wields noble 
powers of protection for advancement and progress. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 16 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Asita or Devala Kashyapa Rshi 


प्रते Gran ओण्योडे रसं मदाय घुष्व॑ये। 
सर्गो न तक्त्येतशः ॥ ९॥ 


। 8 Pra te sotara onyo rasam madaya ghrsvaye. 
Sargo na taktyetasah. 


O Soma, spirit of peace and bliss, your devotees, 
in order to win the highest attainments of life and to 
experience the joy of divinity, meditate and sojourn over 
spaces between heaven and earth and find the divine 
essence of existence, and then omnipresent divinity 
flows like a flood into their consciousness. O man, that 


48 RGVEDA 
essence of experience is for you. 


क्रत्वा दक्च॑स्य र॒थ्य॑म॒पो वसानमन्ध॑सा। 
गोषामण्वेषु सश्चिम ॥ २॥ 


(५१ Kratva daksasya rathyamapo vasanamandhasa. 
Gosam-anvesu sascima. 


That delightful experience of the able 
practitioner born of active meditation which guides our 
chariot of life and adorns our actions through the 
soothing experiences of mind and senses, we seek 
through our noble karma and feel in every subtle particle 
of our existence and awareness. 


अन॑पसमप्सु दुष्टर सोमं पवित्र आ aa 
पुनीहीन्द्राय पात॑वे॥ ३॥ 
Ds Anaptam-apsu dustaram somam pavitra ठ srja. 
Punthindraya patave. 
That rare soma joy of divinity rolling in 
existence, achievable but with relentless practice across 


trials and tribulations, O man, create in the purity of 
heart and sanctify for enlightenment of the soul. 


प्र पुनानस्य चेत॑सा सोम॑ः पवित्र अर्षति। 
क्रत्वा सधस्थमासंदत्‌॥। ४ ॥ 


4. Pra punanasya cetasa somah pavitre arsati. 
Kratva sadhastham-asadat. 


The soma joy of the person who is purified 
through the mind and intellect abides in the purity of 
heart, and by virtue of his karma he attains his position 
in the presence of divinity. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 16 49 


प्रत्वा नमोंधिरिन्द॑व इन्द्र सोमं असूक्षत। 
महे भराय कारिणः ॥ ५॥ 


a Pra tva namobhir-indava indra soma asrksata. 
Mahe bharaya karinah. 


Indra, lord of power, peace and joy, with songs 
of honour and salutations to you, I have created and 
offered joyous adorations to you which flow for the 
grand fulfilment of the poet creator and man of divine 
action. 


पुनानो रूपे अव्यये विश्वा अर्षन्नभि fore: | 
शूरो न गोषु तिष्ठति ।॥ ६॥ 


6. Punano rupe avyaye visva arsannabhi Sriyah. 
Suro na gosu tisthati. 


In the eternal imperishable spirit of divinity, 
abide and roll all peace, power and glories of the world 
like waves of the ocean in the midst of which the brave 
soul, having purified itself of the junk of life, sits and 
abides as a hero like a star among planets. 


दिवो न सानु पिप्युषी धारां qaed वेधसः | 
aot पवित्र अर्षति ॥ ७॥ 


q, Divo na sanu pipyusi dhara sutasya vedhasah. 
Vrtha pavitre arsati. 


Just as rain showers of heaven fall upon the 
mountain, so do the showers of soma fulfilment and 
omniscience distilled through meditation fall 
spontaneously upon the mind and soul of the man of 
purity and roll in the heart. 


50 RGVEDA 


त्वं सोम विपश्चितं तना पुनान आयुषु । 
अव्यो वारं वि धांवसि॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Tvam soma vipaSscitam tana punana ayusu. 
Avyo varam vi dhavasi. 
O Soma, lord of peace, joy and glory, you purify 
the wise among general humanity and move 


continuously to the man of choice for the sake of 
protection and advancement. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 17 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Asita or Devala Kashyapa Rshi 


प्र निम्नेनैव सिन्ध॑वो श्चन्तो वृत्राणि भूणौयः। 
सोमां असूग्रमाशवंः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Pra nimneneva sindhavo ghnanto vrtrani bhur- 
nayah. Soma asrgram-dsavah. 


Just as rivers flow down the slopes of mountains, 
so do streams of soma, divine bliss, destroying evil and 
darkness, universal, rapid and restless, flow for 
dedicated humanity. 


अभि dara इन्द॑वो ged: पृथिवीमिव | 
इन्द्रं सोमासो अक्षरन्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2 Abhi suvanasa indavo vrstayah prthivimiva. 
Indram somaso aksaran. 


As showers of rain stream forth on the earth and 
fertilize it, so do streams of soma distilled, released and 
beatifying flow to dedicated humanity, inspiring it with 
joy and creativity. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 17 51 
अत्यूर्मिर्पत्सरो मदः are: पवित्र अर्षति। 
विघ्चत्रक्षांसि देवयुः ॥ ३॥ 


Di Atyurmir-matsaro madah somah pavitre arsati. 
Vighnan raksamsi devayuh. 


Overflowing, inspiring and ecstatic, the soma 
joy of existence across the fluctuations of existential 
mind flows to humanity, destroying evil and negative 
tendencies and exciting divine love, and rolls in the 
sacred cave of the heart. 


आ Hey धावति पवित्रे aft free । 
उक्थर्यज्ञेषुं वर्धते ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. A kalasesu dhavati pavitre pari sicyate. 
Ukthair-yajnesu vardhate. 
This soma of divine vitality runs and ripples in 
forms of life, spreads from one mind to another through 
the light of discrimination and waxes and rises by songs 
of praise in yajnas. 
अति त्री ala रोचना test राजसे दिव॑म्‌। 
इष्णन्त्सूर्य न चोदयः ॥ ५ ॥ 

a. Ati tri soma rocana rohan na bhrajase divam. 
Isnant-suryam na codayah. 


O Soma, lord of light and bliss, rising as if higher 
and higher, you transcend the three worlds of earth, skies 
and the heavens and shower light and glory over the 
heavens, and then, in a state of passion as if, you animate 
the sun with power and fertility. 


अभि faut अनूषत qel-asret कारवः | 
दर्धानाश्चक्च॑सि fer ६ ॥ 


52 RGVEDA 


6. Abhi vipra anusata murdhan yajnasya karavah. 
Dadhanas-caksasi priyam. 


Poets, vibrant scholars and sages and earnest 
supplicants adore and glorify Soma in the beginning of 
yajna, reposing perfect faith and love in the all-watching 
divine lord of peace, power and glory. 


तयुं त्वा वाजिनं नरो! धीभिर्विप्रा stare: | 
मृजन्ति देवतातये ॥ ७॥ 


Te Tamu tva vajinam naro dhibhirvipra avasyavah. 
Myrjanti devatdtaye. 


That lord of might, all victorious over cosmic 
dynamics, the leading lights of humanity and vibrant 
sages in search of peace, protection and advancement 
discover as pure immaculate universal presence and, 
by their songs and actions, glorify for attaining the bliss 
and blessings of divinity. 


मधोधरिामनु क्षर तीव्रः सधस्थमासंदः। 
चारुऋतायं पीतये ।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Madhor-dharamanu ksara tivrah sadhastham- 
asadah. Carurrtaya pitaye. 


O lord of bliss and inspiration, release the 
showers of honey. You are intensely vibrant, bless our 
hall of yajna, inspire and energise the yajakas. You are 
glorious and gracious, give us the taste of truth and 
nectar of divine law beyond satiety. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 18 53 


Mandala 9/Sukta 18 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Asita or Devala Kashyapa Rshi 


परिं सुवानो गिरिष्ठाः पवित्रे सोमो! ster: | 
मदेषु सर्वधा stfu ९॥ 


I. Pari suvano giristhah pavitre somo aksah. 
Madesu sarvadha asi. 


O lord, you are Soma, peace, power and bliss, 
all creative, fertilising and inspiring, all present in 
thunder of the clouds, roar of the winds and rumble of 
the mountains, in purest of the pure. You are the sole 
sustainer of all in bliss divine. 


त्वं विप्रस्त्वं कविर्मधु प्र जातमन्धंसः। 
मदेषु सर्वधा stn २॥ 
2. Tvam vipras-tvam kavir-madhu pra jatam- 
andhasah. Madesu sarvadha asi. 
You are the vibrant sage of sages, the visionary 


poet of poets, and the honey sweet of all tastes born of 
all food. You are the sole sustainer of all in bliss divine. 


तव विश्वे स॒जोष॑सो cara: पीतिमाशत | 
मदेषु सर्वधा अंसि॥३॥ 


Tava visve sajosaso devasah pitimdsSata. 
Madesu sarvadha asi. 


All divinities of nature and humanity in love 
and faith with you yearn to drink of the divine nectar 
and they are blest with it. You are the sole sustainer of 
all in bliss divine. 


54 RGVEDA 


आ यो विश्वानि वार्या वसुनि हस्त॑योर्दधे । 
मदेषु सर्वधा अंसि॥ ४ ॥ 


4. A yo visvani varya vasuni hastayor-dadhe. 
Madesu sarvadha asi. 


You who hold in hands the entire wealth of the 
world, we cherish, you who are the sole sustainer and 
dispenser for all in bliss divine. 


य इमे रोद॑सी मही सं मातरेव Sea 
मदेषु सर्वधा अंसि॥ ५॥ 


9; Ya ime rodast mahi sam matareva dohate. 
Madesu sarvadha asi. 


You who fill these great mother-like heaven and 
earth with the wealth of food and drink and obtain for 
us all nourishments from these are the sustainer and 
provider for all in bliss divine. 


परि यो रोद॑सी उभे सद्यो वाजेंभिरर्षति। 
मदेषु सर्वधा stg i 


6. Pari yo rodasi ubhe sadyo vajebhir-arsati. 
Madesu sarvadha asi. 


You who always pervade the dynamics of both 
heaven and earth with food, energy and the spirit of 
evolution, are the sustainer and dispenser for all in bliss 
divine. 


स शुष्मी कलशोष्वा पुनानो अंचिक्रदत्‌। 
मदेषु सर्वधा अंसि॥ ७॥ 


a: Sa Susmi kalasesva punano acikradat. 
Madesu sarvadha asi. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 19 55 


O lord of bliss, all-powerful and all-purifying, 
you, who pervade all forms and regions of existence 
and proclaim your presence and power therein in action, 
are the sustainer of all in bliss divine. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 19 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Asita or Devala Kashyapa Rshi 


यत्सोम चित्रमुक्थ्यं दिव्यं पार्थिवं aa । 
तन्नः पुनान आ भ॑र।॥ ९॥ 


i, Yat soma citram-ukthyam divyam parthivam 
vasu. Tannah punana a bhara. 


O Soma, lord of peace, purity and power, purify 
for us the wealth, honour and excellence both worldly 
and heavenly which is wonderfully versatile, valuable 
and admirable, pray sanctify it and bless us with the 
sacred gift. 


युवं हि स्थः स्वर्पती इन्द्र॑श्च सोम गोप॑ती । 
ईशाना पिप्यतं धियः ॥ २॥ 


2. Yuvam hi sthah svarpati indrasca soma gopati. 
isana pipyatam dhiyah. 


O Soma, lord of peace and purity, Indra, lord of 
honour and excellence, both of you are protectors, 
sustainers and sanctifiers of earth, earthly well being, 
culture and sacred speech, of heaven and heavenly light 
and joy. Rulers and sustainers of existence, pray bless 
us with exuberant intelligence and will for holy thought, 
action and advancement. 


aut पुनान आयुषु स्तनयन्नधि बर्हिषि । 
हरिः सन्योनिमासंदत्‌॥ ३॥ 


56 RGVEDA 


a Vrsa punana ayusu stanayann-adhi barhisi. 
Harih san yonim-asadat. 


O Soma, giver of showers of fulfilment to the 
soul in living forms, purifying and sanctifying the soul 
of each one among humanity, presiding over the 
evolving forms of nature with the divine will and voice 
of thunder, taking on the role of creator through the 
dynamics of universal law, the divine Spirit abides 
immanent and pervasive in the womb of nature as the 
total seed of existence. 


अवावशन्त धीतयो वृषभस्याधि tah । 
सूनोर्वत्सस्य॑ मातरः ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Avavasanta dhitayo vrsabhasyadhi retasi. 
Sunor-vatsasya matarah. 


Just as females in season yearn for a darling off- 
spring, so do the evolving forms of Prakrti, Mother 
Nature, inspired by desire, long for the life seed of the 
omnipotent father of universal life. 


कुविद्‌ वुषण्यन्तीभ्यः पुनानो गर्भमादधंत्‌। 
याः शुक्रं दुहते पय॑ः ॥ ५॥ 

a Kuvid-vrsanyantibhyah punano garbhamada- 
dhat. Yah Sukram duhate payah. 


The great lord omnipotent Soma, pure and 
immaculate, impregnates the forms of nature 
overflowing with desire which receive the seed and 
create living milk for the growth of life. 


उप॑ शिक्षापतस्थुषो भियसमा धेहि शत्रुषु । 
पव॑मान विदा रयिम्‌॥ ६॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 20 51 


6. Upa siksapatasthuso bhiyasama dhehi Ssatrusu. 
Pavamana vida rayim. 


O lord of purity, those who stay far off, bring 
close and instruct; those who are negative, strike with 
fear; bring wealth, honour and excellence for life. 

नि शत्रोः सोम वृष्ण्यं नि शुष्ं नि वय॑स्तिर। 
दूरे वां स॒तो अन्ति वा ॥ ७॥ 


ध, Ni Satroh soma vrsnyam ni Susmam ni vayastira. 
Dure va sato anti va. 


O Soma, lord of peace, power and purification, 
negate, overcome and win over the exuberance, power 
and exploitation, and the spirit of the enemy’s enmity 
whether he is far or near. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 20 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Asita or Devala Kashyapa Rshi 


प्र कविर्देववींतयेऽ व्यो वारेभिरर्षति। 
साह्यान्विरूवां अभि स्पृध॑ः ॥ ९॥ 

i Pra kavir-devavitaye’vyo varebhir-arsati. 
Sahvan visva abhi sprdhah. 


Soma, creative poet and universal visionary, all 
protective, withstanding all rivalry and opposition, 
moves on with protection, advancement and choice gifts 
for the creative souls for their divine fulfilment. 


स fe wat जरितृभ्य आ वाजं गोम॑न्तमिन्व॑ति। 
पव॑मानः सहस्रिणम्‌ 2 


2. Sa hi sma jaritrbhya a vajam gomantam-invati. 
Pavamanah sahasrinam. 


58 RGVEDA 


He alone, pure, purifying and dynamic, brings 
for the celebrants thousandfold food, energy and 
advancement with victory inspired and infused with 
intelligence, knowledge, culture and enlightenment. 


परि विश्वानि चेत॑सा Wea wae Ue | 
aa: सोम्‌ श्रवों fae: ३॥ 


च Pari visvani cetasad 1111545८ pavase mati. 
Sa nah soma Sravo vidah. 


O lord, you give us all good things of the world 
we love with our heart’s desire. You inspire and energise 
our intellect, understanding and will for action. O Soma, 
pray bring us the wealth of honour and fame with all 
forms of life’s excellence. 


sad बृहद्यशो, मघवंद्धयो ya र यिम्‌। 
इषं स्तोतृभ्य आ भ॑र ॥ ४॥ 

4. Abhyarsa brhadyaso maghavadbhyo dhruvam 
rayim. Isam_ stotrbhya a bhara. 


Bring wide and expansive fame for the men of 
honour and generosity, bring wealth and power, bring 
food, energy, knowledge and excellence of mind and 
soul for the celebrants. 


त्वं राजेव सुव्रतो fr: सोमा विंवेशिथ। 
पुनानो AS अद्भुत ॥ ५॥ 


2: Tvam rajeva suvrato girah soma vivesitha. 
Punano vahne adbhuta. 


O Soma, you are like a ruler sustainer of the 
holy laws of existence. You are present in the hymns of 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 21 59 


the Veda and you inspire the songs of celebrants. Pure 
and purifying, O wielder and sustainer of the universe, 
you are wondrous great and sublime, the like of which 
never was and never shall be, rival there is none. 


स वह्धिरप्सु दुष्टरो मृज्यमानो गभ॑स्त्योः 1 
सोमश्चमूषु सीदति ॥ ६॥ 


6. Sa vahnirapsu dustaro mrjyamano gabhastyoh. 
Somascamiusu sidati. 


That lord Soma, burden bearer of existence, is 
the universal inspirer, energiser and enlightener, the very 
passion and fire of life, pervasive in the waters of space, 
unconquerable, blazing in the self-circuit of his own 
refulgence, and he abides in the holy ladles of yajna as 
much as in the mighty majestic armies of the universe. 


क्रोद्ुर्मरो न मंहयुः पवित्रं सोम गच्छसि । 
दधंत्स्तोत्रे सुवीर्यम्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


7. Krilurmakho na mamhayuh pavitram soma 
gacchasi. Dadhat stotre suviryam. 


O Soma, you are joyous and playful, generous 
at heart as the very yajnic creation of the exuberant 
world, you move to the heart of the celebrants with 
purity of divinity, and inspire and infuse the hymns of 
Veda and songs of the devotees with the spirit of divinity 
and creative exuberance. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 21 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Asita or Devala Kashyapa Rshi 


एते धावन्तीन्दवः सोमा इन्द्राय घुष्व॑यः। 
मत्सरासः स्वर्विदः: ॥ ९॥ 


60 RGVEDA 


I. Ete dhavantindavah soma indraya ghrsvayah. 
Matsarasah svarvidah. 


These Soma streams of divine joy and 
exhilaration, agile, mirthful, ecstatic and refulgent, flow 
free in honour of Indra, lord of the beauty and glory of 
life. 

प्रवृण्वन्तो! अभियुजः सुष्व॑ये वरिवोविदः | 
स्वयं स्तोत्रे व॑यस्कृतंः ॥ २॥ 


५९ Pravrnvanto abhiyujah susvaye varivovidah. 
Svayam stotre vayaskrtah. 


These streams of soma are graciously 
favourable, readily helpful, harbingers of wealth, honour 
and fame for the devotees and naturally and by 
themselves givers of health and longevity for the singers 
and celebrants of divinity in song. 


वृथा क्रीव्टन्त इन्द॑वः सधस्थ॑मभ्येकमित्‌। 
सिन्धोरूर्मा व्यंक्षरन्‌ ॥ ३॥ 


छ Vrtha krilanta indavah sadhastham-abhyekamit. 
sindhorurma vyaksaran. 


These streams of soma, i.e., floods of rivers, 
circulations and circumambulations of stars, planets and 
galaxies, by nature and spontaneously move from and 
back into the One and only One like the fire of yajna 
arising from and receding into the same one vedi and 
like the waves of the sea arising from, playing joyously 
on and receding into peace into the same one sea. 


एते विश्वानि arat पव॑मानास sista | 
हिता न सप्ष॑यो rat su 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 21 61 


4. Ete 1775177 varyad pavamanasa asata. 
Hita na saptayo rathe. 


All these streams of soma of the world, pure, 
purifying and flowing, abide in the One and only One 
like seven colours of the spectrum abiding in the light 
of the sun. 


आस्मिंन्पिशद्धं मिन्दवो दर्धाता वेनमादिशो। 
यो अस्मभ्यमरावा ॥ ५॥ 

a, Asmin pisangam-indavo dadhata venamadise. 
Yo asmabhyam-arava. 
All these various streams of existential matter 
and energy bearing colourful forms in this cosmic 
personality abide by one divinity which brings us total 
fulfilment. 
ऋभुर्न रथ्यं नवं दर्धाता केत॑मादिशे । 
शुक्राः प॑वध्वमणसा ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Rbhurna rathyam navam dadhata ketamdadise. 
Sukrah pavadhvam-arnasa. 


Just as an expert artist makes a new chariot and 
controls the motive power in order to reach the 
destination so, O Soma, let the pure streams flow, purify 
us, and bring us blissful enlightenment for total 
fulfilment. 


एत उ त्ये stdtagrersi वाजिनो अक्रत। 
सतः प्रासाविषुर्मतिम्‌॥ ७॥ 


7. Eta u tye avivasan kastham vajino akrata. 
Satah prasavisur-matim. 


62 RGVEDA 


Thus do these soma streams of victorious divine 
light and energy wish and shine and create and lead us 
to the supreme state of joy, and thus do they animate, 
inspire and fructify the thought and will of the truly 
wise. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 22 

Pavamana Soma Devata, Asita or Devala Kashyapa Rshi 

एते Grate आशवो tata प्र वाजिनं: | 

सगीः सृष्टा अहेषत ॥ ९॥ 
ly Ete somasa asavo ratha iva pra vajinah. 

Sargah srsta ahesata. 

These soma streams of nature and humanity fast 

as chariots on course for victory roar like floods let free. 


एते वातांइवोरव॑ः usta qed: | 
अगेरिंव war get २॥ 


2. Ete vata ivoravah parjanyasyeva vrstayah. 
Agneriva bhrama vrtha. 


These streams like winds of storm, torrents of 
rain and flames of fire roar and press forward without 
effort, spontaneously in their element. 
एते पूता विपश्चितः सोमासो दध्याशिरः | 
विपा व्यानशुर्धियंः ॥ ३॥ 

ai Ete puta vipascitah somaso dadhyasirah. 
Vipa vyanasurdhiyah. 

These living floods of energy, vibrant courses, 
soothing moons, blazing suns and whirling galaxies, 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 22 63 


pure somas all blest by light and will divine of the centre 
hold of life, inspire the will and awareness of thinking 
men. 
एते मृष्टा seat: ससृवांसो न Vista: | 
इय॑श्चन्तः पथो रज॑ः ॥ ४॥ 
4. Ete mrsta amrtyah sasrvamso na sasramuh. 
Tyaksantah patho rajah. 


All these, sparkling pure immortals ever on the 
move tire not. Pure energy they are, restless, eager to 
traverse the paths of space. 


एते पृष्ठानि रोद॑सोर्विप्रयन्तो व्यानशुः | 
उतेदमुत्तमं रज॑ः ॥ ५॥ 
=, Ete prsthani rodasorviprayanto vyanasuh. 


Utedam-uttamam rajah. 


Pressing forward on the journey all round, they 
cross the regions of heaven and earth and then reach 
the highest pinnacle of light and space in existence. 
तन्तुं Caras wad siete | 
उतेदमुंत्तमाय्य॑म्‌।॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Tantum tanvanam-uttamam-anu pravata aSsata. 
Utedam-uttamayyam. 


Moving on with the flow of life across the 
expansive web of creative existence, they reach the 
ultimate where life can reach, the infinite. 

त्वं सोम पणिभ्य आ वसु गव्यानि धारयः। 
ततं तन्तुमचिक्रदः ॥ ७॥ 


64 RGVEDA 


fe Tvam soma panibhya a vasu gavyani dharayah. 
Tatam tantum-acikradah. 


O Soma, peace, purity and wealth of existence, 
you alone bear and bring the Word, peace of settlement 
and wealth of culture and enlightenment for humanity, 
and you turn the wheel of existence, proclaim it with a 
boom and the web begins to spin out and in. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 23 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Asita or Devala Kashyapa Rshi 


सोमां असूग्रमाशवो मधोर्मदस्य ear 
अभि विश्वानि काव्या ।॥ ९॥ 


ie Soma asrgram-asavo madhormadasya dhataya. 
Abhi visvani kavya. 

I create the rapid streams of soma forms of 

existence in constant motion with the currents of 

honeyed ecstasy of nature in evolution in consonance 


with the universal poetry of divinity articulated in the 
Veda. 


अनुं vera staa: पदं नवीयो अक्रमुः | 
रुचे ज॑नन्त॒ सूर्यभ्‌॥ २॥ 


a. Anu pratnasa ayavah padam naviyo akramuh. 
Ruce jananta suryam. 


In consequence of the will divine, the eternal 
particles of Prakrti move and assume new forms of 
existence in evolution, and for the sake of light they 
create the light of stars. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 23 65 


आ प॑वमान नो भराऽ्यो अदाशुषो गय॑म्‌। 
कृधि प्रजावतीरिष: ॥ ३॥ 


Di A pavamana no bhara’ryo adasuso gayam. 
Krdhi prajavatirisah. 


O Soma, lord of purity and power, socio-cosmic 
dynamics, production and munificence, win over the 
ungiving, uncreative and selfish people and give us all 
a peaceful home and food, energy, knowledge and 
wisdom for sustenance and happy continuance of the 
human family. 


अभि diate आयवः पव॑न्ते मद्यं मद॑म्‌। 
अभि कोशं मधु श्चुत॑म्‌ ॥। ४ ॥ 


4. Abhi somdasa ayavah pavante madyam madam. 
Abhi kosam madhuSscutam. 


The joyous worlds of Soma move on pure and 
free, life for Soma devotees moves on pure and free, 
they enjoy the ecstatic beauty and sweetness of the 
world, and their homes abound in honey sweets distilled 
from life. 


ant अर्षति धर्णसिर्दधान sit रस॑म्‌। 
सुवीरों अभिशस्तिपाः ॥ ५ ॥ 


Somo arsati dharnasir-dadhana indriyam rasam. 
Suviro abhisastipah. 


The world of divine soma joy moves on, all 
sustaining, bearing cherished sweets for pleasure and 
celebration, the omnipotent is guardian of our honour 
and fame. 


66 RGVEDA 


इन्द्राय सोम पवसे देवेभ्यं: सधमाद्यः | 
इन्दो वाजं सिषाससि ॥ ६॥ 

6. Indraya soma pavase devebhyah sadhamadyah. 
Indo vajam sisasasi. 


O Soma, lord of purity and ecstasy, you flow 
with love for Indra, the karma yogi and for the men of 
noble character and action. You abide in the yajnic hall 
and home, O lord of the beauteous flow of life, and 
bless us with food, energy, victory and total fulfilment. 


अस्य पीत्वा मदानामिन्द्रो वृत्राण्यंप्रति। 
जघानं जघन॑च्य TN 
Ts Asya pitva madanamindro vrtranyaprati. 
Jaghana jaghanacca nu. 
Having drunk of the ecstasy of this divine nectar 
of purity and power, Indra has eliminated and still 


eliminates the forces of evil and darkness without 
confronting them as enemies violently. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 24 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Asita or Devala Kashyapa Rshi 


प्र सोर्मासो अधन्विषुः पव॑मानास sda: | 
श्रीणाना अप्सु मृञ्जत ।॥ ९॥ 

॥ Pra 50171650 adhanvisuh pavamanasa indavah. 
Srinana apsu mrnjata. 

Soma currents of purity, power and beauty of 
divinity, purifying and inspiring streams of life’s joy, 
sparkling, and enlightening humanity, when absorbed, 
and integrated in human thought, word and action reflect 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 24 67 
in life and glorify noble people. 


अभि गावो! अधन्विषुरापो न प्रवतां यतीः। 
पुनाना इन्द्र॑माशत ॥ २॥ 


2 Abhi gavo adhanvisurapo na pravata yatth. 
Punana indram-asata. 


The ecstasy and power of soma vibrations 
energise the mind and senses of the celebrant, purifying 
and perfecting them, and, thus purified, the senses and 
mind move to the presence of omnipotent all-joyous 
Indra like streams and rivers flowing, rushing and 
joining the sea. 


प्र प॑वमान धन्वसि सोमेन्द्रय oda | 
नृभिर्यतो वि नीयसे ॥ ३ ॥ 


2. Pra pavamana dhanvasi somendraya patave. 
Nrbhiryato vi niyase. 


O Soma, universal power and joy of existence, 
pure and purifying, you vibrate in the universe like an 
ocean of nectar. Celebrated by men of vision and 
wisdom, you arise and manifest in your glory in the 
devotee’s experience and inspire him to rise to divinity. 


त्वं सोम नृमाद॑नः पव॑स्व चर्षणीसहे । 
सस्निर्यो अनुमाद्य: us ॥ 

4. Tvam soma nrmadanah pavasva carsanisahe. 
Sasniryo anumadyah. 


O Soma, joyous lover and lord of humanity, let 
the ecstasy of your presence flow purifying for the 
protection and fulfilment of humanity, pure, generous 


68 RGVEDA 
and adorable as you are. 


इन्दो यदद्रिभिः सुतः पवित्रं परिधावसि । 
अरमिन्द्रस्य धाम्ने ।॥ ५॥ 


5. Indo yadadribhih sutah pavitram paridhavasi. 
Aram-indrasya dhamne. 


O Soma, shower of divine beauty and bliss, 
perceived, internalised and realised through the mind 
and vision of the celebrant, you vibrate and shine in 
sanctified awareness as the absolute beauty, bliss and 
glory of existence for the human soul. 


पव॑स्व वृब्रहन्तमोक्थेभिरनुमाद्य॑ः । 
शुचिः पावको अद्धुतः॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Pavasva vrtrahantamokthebhir-anumaddyah. 


Sucih pavako adbhutah. 


Flow into the heart, beatify the soul, O greatest 
destroyer of the dirt and darkness of life, in response to 
our songs of adoration. O Spirit of absolute joy, you are 
pure, sanctifier and absolutely sublime. 


शुचिं: पावक उच्यते सोम॑ः सुतस्य मध्व॑ः। 
देवावीरघशंसहा ॥ ७ ॥ 

Sucih pavaka ucyate somah sutasya madhvah. 
Devavir-aghasamsaha. 


Soma, creator and energiser of existence, 
ambrosial honey for the enlightened celebrants, is hailed 
as purifier, sanctifier and protector of the divines and 
destroyer of sin, scandal, jealousy and enmity. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 25 69 


Mandala 9/Sukta 25 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Drdhachyuta Agastya Rshi 


पव॑स्व दक्चसाधंनो देवेभ्यं: पीतये! हरे । 
Teal वायवे मद॑: ॥ ९॥ 


i, Pavasva daksasadhano devebhyah pitaye hare. 
Marudbhyo vayave madah. 


O Soma, lord of joy and versatile intelligence 
of the universe, pure, fluent and all-purifying eliminator 
of want and suffering, giver of sufficiency, flow, purify 
and sanctify the powers of noble and generous nature 
to their full satisfaction, come as ecstasy of life for 
vibrant humanity, for pranic energy and for the will and 
intelligence of the seekers of light and dynamism for 
action. 


पव॑मान धिया हितो ३ऽ भि योनिं कनिंक्रदत्‌। 
धर्मणा वायुमा fast ॥ २॥ 
2, Pavamana dhiya hito’bhi yonim_ kanikradat. 


Dharmana vayuma viSa. 


O lord of purity and power, let your presence 
concentrated by senses and mind in awareness, speaking 
aloud in the heart and soul, abide in the pranic and 
intelligential vitality of the soul with living 
consciousness of divine law and virtues of holy life and 
thus purify and sanctify us. 


सं देवैः शोभते aut कविर्योनावधि fire: | 
वृत्रहा देववीत॑मः॥ ३ ॥ 


a. Sam devaih sobhate vrsa kavir-yonavadhi pri- 
yah.Vrtraha devavitamah. 


70 RGVEDA 


Soma, omniscient poetic creator, generous and 
dear, dearest of divinities and destroyer of the evil and 
darkness of life, vibrating in the cave of the heart shines 
glorious in the soul and reflects beatific with the senses, 
mind, intelligence and will in the conduct and grace of 
the human personality. 


विर्वा रूपाण्याविशन्पुंनानो याति हर्यतः | 
यत्रामृतास आसते ।॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Visva rupanyavisan punano yati haryatah. 
Yatramrtasa asate. 
Soma, pervading all forms of existence in the 
expansive universe, pure and purifying, goes on blissful, 
beatific and gracious, the omnipresence in which the 


enlightened sages abide, having attained freedom from 
death. 


अरूषो जनयणिरः सोम॑ः पवत आयुषक्‌ | 
इन्द्रं गच्छन्कविक्रतुः ॥ ५५ ॥ 

3. Aruso janayan girah somah pavata ayusak. 
Indram gacchan kavikratuh. 


Soma, glorious and blissful omniscient creator 
of the poetry of existence articulating the divine voice 
of the Veda flows vibrant and omnipresent to loving 
humanity especially to men of action and enlightenment. 


आ प॑वस्व मदिन्तम पवित्रं धार॑या कवे। 
अर्कस्य योनिमासदम्‌ & ॥ 


6. A pavasva madintama pavitram dharaya kave. 
Arkasya yonim-asadam. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 26 71 


O Soma, most exuberant poetic omnipresence, 
come in a wave of ecstasy and majesty to bless the pure 
heart of the celebrant which is the seat of the soul and 
of the golden glow of divinity. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 26 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Idhmavaha Dardhachyuta Rshi 


तम॑मृश्चन्त वाजिनमुपस्थे अदिं तेरधिं । 
विप्रासो अण्व्या fer ९॥ 

0 Tamamrksanta vajinam-upasthe aditeradhi. 
Vipraso anvya dhiya. 


Sages with their subtle mind and intellect, reason 
and passion, glorify that exuberant bright and potent 
Soma, lord of universal action and victory, on the vedi 
in the lap of mother earth. 


तं mal अभ्यनूषत सहस्रधार मक्ितम्‌। 
इन्दुं धर्तारमा faa: २॥ 
2: Tam gavo abhyanusata sahasradharamaksi-tam. 


Indum dhartarama divah. 


That blissful Soma, sustainer of the refulgent 
heavens, whose generous and inexhaustible grace flows 
in a thousand streams, the songs of Veda, rays of the 
sun, and the stars and planets, indeed all that move in 
the moving universe celebrate and adore. 


तं वेधां मेधर्याह्यन्पव॑मानमधि ata | 
धर्णसिं भूरिधायसम्‌ ३॥ 


ध Tam vedham medhayahyan pavamanamadhi 
dyavi. Dharnasim bhuridhayasam. 


72 RGVEDA 


That divine and all sustaining, pure and 
purifying, foundation of existence, wielder and sustainer 
of infinite forms, stars and galaxies, the sages with their 
thought, imagination and vision visualise, contemplate 
and realise unto the heights of heaven. 


तमंह्यन्भुरिजोर्धिया संवरसानं विवस्व॑तः। 
पतिं'वाचो अदाभ्यम्‌ ४ ॥ 


4. Tamahyan bhurijordhiya samvasanam vivasva- 
tah. Patim vaco adabhyam. 


Hymns of the Veda, wise sages and infinite 
forms of existence, all with their light, motions, wisdom 
and vision celebrate and adore that Soma, lord of 
omniscience, peace and purity who shines radiant in 
the light of the sun between heaven and earth and who, 
fearless and indomitable, holds, protects, promotes and 
speaks through the voice of eternity. 


तं सानावधिं जामयो हरि" हिन्वन्त्यरद्िभिः। 
हर्यतं भूरिचक्षसम्‌॥ ५ ॥ 

5. Tam sanavadhi jamayo harim hinvantyadri-bhih. 
Haryatam bhuricaksasam. 

Sages in unison, with their highest and most 
intense mental and spiritual faculties, adore, celebrate 
and realise that Soma on top of existence who is glorious 
and blissful, destroyer of suffering, and universal 


watcher, dispenser and disposer of the world of 
existence. 


तं त्वां हिन्वन्ति aera: पव॑मान गिरावृध॑म्‌। 
इन्दविन्द्राय मत्सरम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 27 73 


6. Tam tva hinvanti vedhasah pavamana giravr- 
dham. Indavindraya matsaram. 


O Soma, universal spirit of beauty and bliss, 
pure, purifying and ever flowing, so glorious as you are 
celebrated in songs of the universal Vedic eternity, self- 
realised sages adore and exalt you for the joy and 
ultimate salvation of the human soul. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 27 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Nrmedha Angirasa Rshi 


एष कविरभिष्टुतः पवित्रे अधिं तोते। 
पुनानो घ्नन्नप Feral: ॥ ९॥ 


1. Esa kavir-abhistutah pavitre adhi toSate. 
Punano ghnannapa sridhah. 


This Soma, creative, inspiring and poetic spirit 
of universal joy, pure and sanctifying, manifests in the 
pure and pious consciousness of the devotees, 
eliminating disturbing negativities when it is 
contemplated with a concentrated mind. 


एष इन्द्राय वायवे स्वर्जिंत्परिं षिच्यते | 
पवित्रे दक्चसाध॑नः॥ २॥ 
2. Esa indraya vayave svarjit pari sicyate. 
Pavitre daksasadhanah. 
This all potent and versatile divine spirit of 
universal joy manifests in the pure consciousness of the 


karma-yogi and wins the light of heaven for the vibrant 
meditative soul. 


74 RGVEDA 


एष नृभिर्विं नीयते दिवो मूर्धा gat qa: | 
सोमो वनेषु विश्ववित्‌ ॥ ३॥ 


Esa nrbhirvi niyate divo murdha vrsa sutah. 
Somo vanesu visvavit. 


This Soma, joyous spirit of divinity, is the 
summit of heaven, infinitely generous, self-existent and 
omniscient, and with meditation, the ecstasy of it is 
collected in abundance in the consciousness by the 
dedicated sages. 


एष Ten चिक्रदत्पवंमानो हिरण्ययुः | 
इन्दुः सत्राजिदस्तुंतः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Esa gavyur-acikradat pavamano hiranyayuh. 
Induh satrajidastrtah. 


It loves the earth and earthly joys and loves to 
give, speaking loud and bold its own eternal Word, it is 
pure and purifier, it loves the golden beauty and 
prosperity of life and loves to bless, it is soothing and 
self-refulgent beautiful, conqueror of all battles of 
cosmic dynamics, and eternally invincible. 


एष सूर्येण हासते पव॑मानो अधि द्यवि । 
पवित्र मत्सरो मद॑ः ॥ ५ ॥ 


= Esa suryena hasate pavamano adhi dyavi. 
Pavitre matsaro madah. 


It rises and abides with the sun on top of the 
regions of light and, internalised in the pure mind and 
clairvoyant consciousness, it is the divine ecstasy of 
the celebrant. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 28 75 


एष शुष्म्य॑सिष्यददन्तरिंश्चे वृषा a: | 
पुनान इन्दुरिन्द्रमा ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Esa susmyasisyadad-antarikse vrsa harih. 
Punana indur-indrama. 

This Soma Spirit of eternal joy is omnipotent, 
all pervasive in space, infinitely generous, eliminator 
of suffering, and, purifying and sanctifying the human 
soul, it is the ultimate bliss of existence. 

Mandala 9/Sukta 28 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Priyamedha Angirasa Rshi 


एष वाजी हितो नृभिर्विंश्व विन्मन॑सस्पतिः। 
अव्यो वारं वि धांवति॥ ९॥ 


I, Esa vajt hito nrbhir-visvavin-manasaspatih. 
Avyo varam vi dhavati. 


This supreme all potent soma light and joy of 
the universe is realised by earnest sages within. It is all 
aware over the universe, master controller of the 
universal mind energy, all saviour and protector, and 
without delay it rises and manifests in the inner self of 
its favourite blessed devotee. 


एष पवित्रे अक्षर त्सोमो। cereal: सुतः। 
विश्वा धामान्याविशन्‌ २॥ 
Zi Esa pavitre aksarat somo devebhyah sutah. 
Visva dhamanyavisan. 
This Soma, divine presence and bliss, emerges 


and vibrates in holy minds, distilled by them through 
meditation for the noble souls while it rolls in majesty 


76 RGVEDA 
in and over all regions of the universe. 


एष देवः शभायतेऽ धि योनावमर्त्यः | 
वृत्रहा दैववीतंमः॥ ३ ॥ 

3 Esa devah subhayate’dhi yonavamatryah. 
Vrtraha devavitamah. 


This self-refulgent, immortal divine presence, 
highest lover of noble and generous souls, pervades and 
shines all over in the universe through its mode of 
Prakrti, dispelling darkness and eliminating evil. 


एष वृषा कनिक्रद दृशभिर्जा मिभिर्यतः। 
अभि द्रोणानि धावति॥ ४॥ 


4. Esa vrsa kanikradad-dasabhir-jamibhir-yatah. 
Abhi dronani dhavati. 


This omnificent shower of generous divinity 
vibrating by the dynamics of Prakrti and her tenfold 
mode of subtle and gross elements proclaims its 
presence loud and bold in beauteous forms of mutations 
and manifestations of nature in the universe. 


एष सूर्यमरोचयत्यव॑ंमानो विचर्षणिः | 
विश्वा धामानि विश्ववित्‌ ॥ ५५ ॥ 
5: Esa suryam-arocayat pavamano vicarsanih. 
Visva dhamani visvavit. 
This soma illuminates the sun, pure, purifying 


and dynamic, watching all, pervading all regions of the 
universe, knowing and controlling all that is in existence. 


एष शुष्म्यदाभ्यः सोम॑ः पुनानो अर्षति | 
देवावीरघशंसहा ॥ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 29 77 
6. Esa Susmyadabhyah somah punano arsati. 
Devavir-aghasamsaha. 


This mighty undauntable Soma, pure and 
purifying, pervades and rolls in the universe everywhere, 
protector and promoter of the good and destroyer of sin 
and scandal. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 29 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Nrmedha Angirasa Rshi 


प्रास्य धारा अक्षर न्वृरष्णः सुतस्योज॑सा। 
देवो अनुं प्रभूषतः ॥ ९॥ 
Ile Prasya dhara aksaran vrsnah sutasyaujasa. 
Devan anu prabhusatah. 
In character with its self-refulgence, and 
glorifying its divine powers in nature and humanity, the 


streams of this mighty virile Soma, pure and immaculate, 
flow forth with the light and lustre of its omnipotence. 


ae मृजन्ति वेधसो Word: कारवो गिरा। 
ज्योतिं्जज्ञानमुक्थ्य॑म्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 

2. Saptim mrjanti vedhaso grnantah karavo gira. 
Jyotir-jajnanam-ukthyam. 

Sages embellish and exalt the might of the 
omniscient and omnipotent Soma, poets and artists, with 
the language of their art, celebrate the divine light thus 
emerging and rising more and more admirable. 

सुषहा सोम at ते Gara प्रभूवसो । 
वधी समु द्रमुक्थ्य॑म्‌॥ २३ ॥ 


78 RGVEDA 


>. Susaha soma tani te punanaya prabhuvaso. 
Vardha samudram-ukthyam. 


O Soma, lord of universal wealth, power and 
honour, those divine showers of generosity, those songs 
of adoration and lights of glory, are holy and winsome 
for your celebrant. Let the admirable ocean rise and 
expand. 


विश्वा वसुनि संजयन्पव॑स्व सोम धार॑या । 
इनु द्वेषांसि सध्य॑क्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Visva vasuni samjayan pavasva soma dharaya. 
Inu dvesamsi sadhryak. 


Flow forth profusely, O Soma, lord of peace and 
glory, by stream and shower, bringing and bestowing 
abundant wealth, honour and excellence of the world 
on us, and throw out all jealousy, enmity and malignity 
far away from us. 


Tat सु नो अर॑रुषः स्वनात्सं॑मस्य कस्य॑ चित्‌। 
निदो यत्र॑ SAS ॥ ५ ॥ 
5: Raksa su no ararusah svanat samasya kasya cit. 


Nido yatra mumucmahe. 


O Soma, save us, protect us fully against the 
arrogance, pride and malignity of the selfish hoarder 
and uncharitable exploiter and from whoever else be 
like that, and let us ever be fearless and free from 
scandal, malignity and anxiety. 


एन्दो पार्थिवं रयिं दिव्यं प॑वस्व amar 
द्युमन्तं शुष्ममा भ॑र ॥ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 30 79 


6. Endo parthivam rayim divyam pavasva dhara- 
ya. Dyumantam susmama bhara. 


O Soma, blissful as the moon and generous as 
showers of rain, pure and purifying, flow forth, sanctify 
us and bring us streams of wealth, honour and excellence 
of the earth and heaven, bear and bring us divine 
strength, forbearance and fortitude of a high order of 
freedom and progress. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 30 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Bindu Angirasa Rshi 


want अस्य शुष्मिणो वृथा पवित्र अक्षरन्‌ । 
पुनानो वाच॑मिष्यति ॥ ९॥ 


९ Pra dhara asya Susmino vrtha pavitre aksaran. 
Punano vacamisyat. 


For one who, purifying himself, seeks favour 
of the divine speech, Sarasvati, showers of the light and 
power of this soma, mighty, creative and energising 
divinity, spontaneously stream forth into the sacred 
heart. 


इन्दुर्हियानः सोतृभिरमज्यमानः कनिक्रदत्‌ । 
safe वग्रुमिद्ियम्‌॥ २॥ 


2. Indurhiyanah sotrbhir-mrjyamanah kanikradat. 
Tyarti vagnum-indriyam. 


The lord of light and bliss, when solicited by 
seekers and celebrants, feels exalted, and, speaking loud 
and bold unto the heart and soul of the supplicant, 
inspires and augments their perception, intuition and 
eloquence. 


80 RGVEDA 


आ नः शुष्मं Jord वीरव॑न्तं Geer | 
पव॑स्व सोम॒ धार॑या ॥ ३॥ 

a: A nah Susmam nrsahyam viravantam puruspr- 
ham. Pavasva soma dharaya. 
O Soma, lord of strength and enlightenment, let 
showers of strength worthy of the brave and victorious 
inspiring to prowess and chivalry loved by all flow to 
us in streams of plenty and abundance. 
प्र सोमो अति धार॑या पव॑मानो असिष्यदत्‌। 
अभि द्रोणान्यासदम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Pra somo ati dharaya pavamano asisyadat. 
Abhi dronanyasadam. 


Let soma, pure and purifying lord of peace, light 
and power, flow and advance in shower and streams of 
innocence and purity into the celebrants’ heart and soul. 


अप्सु त्वा ele eh हिन्वन्त्यद्विभिः। 
इन्दविन्द्राय पीतये ।। ५ ॥ 

a Apsu tva madhumattamam harim hinvantyadri- 
bhih. Indavindraya pitaye. 


O Soma, spirit of light, peace and joy, the 
celebrants, by earnest words, thoughts and acts, invoke, 
adore and exalt you, sweetest of the sweets in life’s 
honey, destroyer of suffering, fear and anxiety, and urge 
you on to bless the heart of the supplicant to his full 
satisfaction. 


सुनोता मधुमत्तमं सोममिन्द्राय atch | 
चारुं शधीय मत्स॒रम्‌ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 31 81 


0; Sunota madhumattamam somam-indraya vajrine. 
Carum sardhaya matsaram. 


O yajakas, create the sweetest honeyed soma, 
delicious and exhilarating, to augment the strength, 
forbearance and fortitude of the adamantine soul and, 
through words, thoughts and actions, to offer it in 
gratitude to Indra, lord omnipotent wielder of the 
thunderbolt of justice and dispensation. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 31 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi 


प्र सोमासः स्वाध्यवै: पवमानासो अक्रमुः | 
रयिं कुण्वन्ति चेत॑नम्‌ 2 


ile Pra somasah svadhyah pavamanaso akramuh. 
Rayim krnvanti cetanam. 


Exhilarating, thoughtful, pure and purifying 
soma powers of divine nature and humanity flow, 
advance, create and promote wealth, honour and 
excellence of enlightenment and divine awareness. 


दिवस्पुथिव्या अधि भवेन्दो द्युम्नवर्धनः। 
भवा वाजानां पतिः ॥ २॥ 


2 Divas-prthivya adhi bhavendo dyumnavardha- 
nah. Bhava vajanam patih. 


Supremely excellent soma spirit of the universe, 
be the promoter and exalter of our wealth, power and 
enlightenment on earth and in heaven and be the 
protector and promoter of the food, energy and 
excellence of our human community. 


82 RGVEDA 


तुभ्यं वातां अधिप्रियस्तुभ्य॑मर्षन्ति सिन्ध॑वः। 
सोम वर्धन्ति ते मह॑ः ॥ ३॥ 


Tubhyam vata abhipriyas-tubhyam-arsanti 
sindhavah. Soma vardhanti te mah. 


O Soma, lord of supreme felicity, the dearest 
most pleasant winds blow for you, the rolling seas flow 
for you, and they all exalt your glory. 


आ प्यायस्व समेतु ते favad: सोम quay 
भवा वाज॑स्य संगथे ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. 4 pyayasva sametu te viSvatah soma vrsnyam. 
Bhava vajasya samgathe. 


Glory be to you, Soma, pray promote and exalt 
us, may your exalted shower of blessings come from 
all round. O lord, be with us in all our battles of peace, 
progress and prosperity. 


तुभ्यं meal घृतं पयो aul gee अश्चितम्‌। 
वर्षिष्ठे अधि सान॑वि।॥५॥ 


a: Tubhyam gavo ghrtam payo babhro duduhre 
aksitam. Varsisthe adhi sanavi. 


O lord bearer and sustainer of the universe, in 
your honour do stars and planets, lands and cows and 
all energies of nature create inexhaustible milky 
nutriments of life and adore you on top of generosity 
and universal love. 


स्वायुधस्य॑ ते सतो भुव॑नस्य पते वयम्‌ | 
इन्दों सखित्वमुश्मसि ॥ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 32 83 


6. Svayudhasya te sato bhuvanasya pate vayam. 
Indo sakhitvam-usmasi. 


O lord of the universe, excellent and blissful, 
we desire and pray for your friendship, eternal and 
imperishable wielder of supreme power of creation, 
protection and promotion as you are. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 32 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Shyavashva Atreya Rshi 


प्र सोमासो मदच्युतः श्रव॑से नो मघोनः 1 
सुता विदथे अक्रमुः ॥ ९॥ 


i Pra somaso madacyutah sravase no maghonah. 
Suta vidathe akramuh. 


May the streams of soma, nectar sweet and 
exhilarating, distilled and sanctified in yajna, flow for 
the safety, security and fame of our leading lights of 
honour, power and excellence. 


आदीं त्रितस्य योष॑णो ef! हिन्वन्त्यद्रिभिः। 
इन्दुमिन्द्राय पीतये ॥ २॥ 


2. Adim tritasya yosano harim hinvantyadribhih. 
Indum-indraya pitaye. 


And the vibrant thoughts and words of the sage 
beyond three fold bondage of body, mind and soul, with 
all perceptions of sense and conceptions of mind 
concentrated, rise, reach and exalt the lord of peace and 
joy, destroyer of suffering, for the enlightenment and 
ecstasy of the human soul. 


84 RGVEDA 


set हंसो sat गणं विश्वंस्यावीवशन्मतिम्‌। 
अत्यो न गोभिरज्यते ॥ ३॥ 


Adim hamso yatha ganam visvasyavivasan- 
matim. Atyo na gobhir-ajyate. 


And just as a hansa bird joins its flock and just 
as a horse is controlled by reins to reach the destination, 
so does the soul, having controlled and concentrated 
all senses, mind and intelligence, rise and join the 
presence of Divinity, its ultimate haven and home. 


उभे सोमावचाक॑शन्मृगो न तक्तो अर्षसि । 
सीदंन्रृतस्य STAT Us 


4. Ubhe somavacakasan mrgo na takto arsasi. 
Sidann-rtasya yonima. 


O Soma, lord of peace and joy over-watching 
both heaven and earth, as a lion moves and rambles 
freely at will in the forest, so do you pervade and vibrate 
in the world of Prakrti well seated at the centre in the 
vedi of yajna, at the seat of human psyche and in the 
dynamic laws of existence. 


अभि गावो अनूषत योषां जारमिव प्रियम्‌ । 
अगंन्नाजिं यथां हितम्‌॥ ५॥ 


om Abhi gavo anusata yosa jaramiva priyam. 
Agannajim yatha hitam. 


Just as a maiden admires, longs for and meets 
her darling lover, so do all perceptions of sense and 
conceptions of mind with the consciousness concentrate 
on the divine presence as is their love and faith and 
reach their end and aim. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 33 85 


अस्मे dfs quasi मघवद्धयश्च मद्यं च। 
सनिं Berga श्रव॑ः ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. 4 5771८ dhehi dyumadyaso maghavadbhyasca 
mahyam ca. Sanim medhamuta Sravah. 


For all of us, for the leading lights of power, 
honour and excellence, and for me too, bring honour 
and fame enriched with enlightenment, bring us food 
and energy, high order of mind and intelligence and total 
fulfilment for the soul. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 33 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Trita Aptya Rshi 


प्र सोमासो विपण्चितोऽपां न यन्त्यूर्मयः 1 
वनानि महिषाडइंव ॥ ९॥ 
I. Pra somaso vipascito’pam na yantyurmayah. 
Vanani mahisa iva. 
Just as waves of water rise to the moon and great 
men strive for things of beauty and goodness, so do 
inspired learned sages, lovers of dynamic peace and 


goodness, move forward to realise the supreme power 
and Spirit of the Vedic hymns. 


अभि द्रोणानि aaa: शुक्रा ऋतस्य धारया | 
वाजं गोम॑न्तमक्षरन्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 
2: Abhi dronani babhravah sukra rtasya dharaya. 


Vajam gomantam-aksaran. 


Just as pure, powerful, brown nectar streams of 
soma shower milky energies to fill the casks of 
exhilarating drink for the aspirants, so do seasoned self- 


86 RGVEDA 


realised scholars and teachers of Vedic knowledge and 
experience, pure at heart and clairvoyant in vision and 
intelligence, let flow powerful exhilarating streams of 
knowledge and enlightenment in channels of truth, law 
and immortality for competent and conscientious 
seekers of life’s fulfilment. 


सुता इन्द्राय वायवे वरूणाय WHA: | 
arat अर्षन्ति विष्ण॑वे ॥ ३ ॥ 


Suta indraya vayave varunaya marudbhyah. 
Soma arsanti visnave. 


Knowledge, wisdom and expertise, valuable and 
blissful as soma, collected and refined by sages and 
scholars of vision and experience, flows on for Indra, 
the ruling soul, Vayu, the vibrant people, Varuna, powers 
of judgement and dispensation, Maruts, stormy warriors, 
and Vishnu, universal sustaining powers of life and 
humanity. 


frat वाच उदीरते गावो मिमन्ति aa: । 
हरिरेति कनिक्रदत्‌ ॥ ४॥ 

4. Tisro vaca udirate gavo mimanti dhenavah. 
Harireti kanikradat. 

Three Vedic voices of knowledge, action and 
prayer, loud and bold, enlighten and inspire to goodness, 
organs of perception and volition urge to good action, 
while earth and milch cows are profuse in fertility, and 
the lord of bliss, destroyer of suffering, manifests bright 
and blissful as life goes on in a state of prosperity. 


अभि ब्रह्मीरनूषत यह्ीत्ऋतस्य॑ मातरः । 
मर्मृज्यन्ते दिवः शिशुम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 34 87 
=) Abhi brahmir-anusata yahvir-rtasya matarah. 
Marmrjyante divah Ssisum. 


Holy voices, creators and sustainers of the rule 
of truth and rectitude, ceaselessly flow around strong, 
refining and doing honour to the teacher, scholar and 
learner as they enlighten and sanctify the child of 
heaven, the rising generation. 


रायः संमुद्रांश्चतुरोऽ स्मभ्यं सोम faved: | 
आ प॑वस्व सहस्रिणः ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Rayah samudrams-caturo’smabhyam soma 


visvatah. A pavasva sahasrinah. 


Flow free, O Soma, divine power, pure and 
bright, bring us from all around the four oceans of wealth 
and knowledge a thousandfold. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 34 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Trita Aptya Rshi 


प्र सुवानो धार॑या तनेन्दुर्हिन्वानो att te 
रुजद्‌ Foe व्योज॑सा ॥ ९॥ 
i, Pra suvano dharaya tanendurhinvano arsati. 
Rujad-drlha vyojasa. 
Creating, inspiring and impelling life onward 
all round with streams of divine energy and ambition, 
Soma, blissful creativity of the lord omnipotent, goes 


on, breaking down strongholds of negativity, evil and 
darkness all round with its might and lustre. 


सुत इन्द्राय वायवे वरुणाय wee: | 
सोमो अर्षति विष्णवे ।॥ २॥ 


88 RGVEDA 


2: Suta indraya vayave varunaya marudbhyah. 
Somo arsati visnave. 


Soma, physical, psychic and spiritual streams 
of energy released by divine creativity, flow all round 
for Indra, men of power, Vayu, men of energy, Varuna, 
men of judgement, Maruts, men of ambition, and 
Vishnu, men of knowledge, wisdom and sustaining 
generosity. 


वृषाणं वृष॑भिर्यतं सुन्वन्ति rarer: | 
दुहन्ति शक्म॑ना पयं: ॥ ३ ॥ 


ai Vrsanam vrsabhir-yatam sunvanti somamadri- 
bhih. Duhanti sakmana payah. 


Effusive and abundant generative energy of 
soma, divine creativity, collected and controlled by virile 
and visionary sages with adamantine discipline of body, 
sense and mind, later scholarly yogis distil and advance 
further with their spiritual power and thus create still 
higher food for the soul. 


भुव॑त्तरितस्य मर्ज्यो भुवदिन्द्राय मत्सरः | 
सं रूपैरज्यते हरिः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Bhuvat tritasya marjyo bhuvad-indraya matsa- 
rah. Sam rupairajyate harih. 


Soma, lord of peace and bliss, is the object of 
pure meditation for the yogi past the bonds of body, 
sense and mind, the object for inspiration and ecstasy 
for the yogi of power on way to aesthetic meditation, 
and for the average person he is perceived through the 
infinite forms of divine reflection in life. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 35 89 


अभीमृतस्य विष्टपं दुहते पृषश्निंमातरः। 
चार प्रियतमं हविः ॥ ५॥ 


Abhimrtasya vistapam duhate prsnimatarah. 
Caru priyatamam havih. 


The infinite forms of versatile nature imbibe and 
assimilate the spirit of divinity on top of the truth and 
felicity of existence, and that is the dearest and most 
beautiful divine gift worthy of choice and acceptance. 


स्मेनमहुता इमा गिरो! अर्षन्ति सस्तत: | 
sate अवीवशत्‌ ६ ॥ 
6. Samenam-ahruta ima giro arsanti sasrutah. 


Dhenurvasro avivasat. 


These simple and innocent songs of praise and 
appreciation rising higher and higher reach Soma, lord 
of peace and bliss, and may he, kind and loving as a 
parent, accept and cherish it as a gift of love and faith. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 35 
Pavaman Soma Devata, Prabhuvasu Angirasa Rshi 


आ न॑: पवस्व धार॑या पव॑मान र यिं पृथुम्‌। 
यया ज्योतिर्विंदासिं नः ॥ ९॥ 


i A nah pavasva dharaya pavamana rayim pr-thum. 
Yaya jyotir-vidasi nah. 


O Soma, lord of purity, pray purify and sanctify 
us with showers of divine peace, and bring us wealth, 
honour and excellence of high order by virtue of which 
you are the sole lord and giver of light and grandeur to 
us. 


90 RGVEDA 


इन्दो! समुद्रमीङ्कय पव॑स्व विश्वमेजय | 
रायो धर्ता न ओज॑सा ॥ २॥ 


pA Indo samudram-inkhaya pavasva visvamejaya. 
Rayo dharta na ojasa. 


O lord of peace, heavenly light and beauty, all 
pervasive vitaliser of the oceans of space, energiser of 
the cosmos to move and expand by your omnipotence 
and refulgence, wielder, controller and giver of universal 
wealth, honour and excellence, pray radiate your 
refulgence and glory, purify and bless us too. 


त्वरयां वीरेण वीरवोऽ भि ष्याम पृतन्यतः | 
क्षरा णो अभि वार्यम्‌॥ ३॥ 


3; Tvaya virena viravo’ bhi syama prtanyatah. 
Ksara no abhi varyam. 


By your heroic gift of bravery and fortitude, let 
us win our rivals, contestants and enemies. Let choice 
wealth, honour and excellence flow to us. 


प्र ard Rerfa सिषांसन्वाजसा ऋषिः । 
व्रता विदान आयुधा ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Pra vajam-indur-isyati sisasan vajasa rsih. 
Vrata vidana ayudha. 


Indu, lord of soma beauty and grandeur, loves 
and inspires victory, rousing the devotee with strength, 
courage and fortitude; He is all watching omniscient 
guardian; knowing and controlling laws and disciplines 
of Dharma, is ever awake with protection and 
dispensation by the arms of justice. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 36 91 


तं गीर्भिंवीचमीद्कयं dart वासयामसि । 

सोमं जनस्य गोप॑तिम्‌॥ ५ ॥ 
Tam girbhir-vacam-inkhyam punanam vasaya- 

masi. Somam janasya gopatim. 

With hymns of adoration we exalt and glorify 

Soma, inspirer of song, purifier, saviour and guardian 
of humanity and their lands, cows and culture. 

विश्वो यस्य॑ व्रते जनों दाधार धर्मणस्पते: | 

पुनानस्यं प्रभूव॑सोः ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Visvo yasya vrate jano dadhara dharmanaspate. 

Punanasya prabhuvasoh. 


We adore and glorify Soma, lord of universal 
wealth, honour and excellence, ordainer and guardian 
of Dharma and all purifier, who holds and sustains the 
entire world of humanity in his law of existence. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 36 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Prabhuvasu Angirasa Rshi 


असंजिं teal यथा पवित्र चम्वोः सुतः। 
कार्ष्मन्वाजी न्य॑क्रमीत्‌ 2 


1. Asarji rathyo yatha pavitre camvoh sutah. 
Karsman vaji nyakramit. 


Just as a passionate champion warrior shoots to 
the goal straight, so does Soma, potent spirit of peace, 
purity and glory, invoked and celebrated with devotion 
in the purity of heart and soul, descends to the centre 
core of the heart without delay. 


92 RGVEDA 


स वद्धिः सोम जागुविः पव॑स्व देववीरति । 
अभि कोशं मधुश्चुतम्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


0.0 Sa vahnih soma jagrvih pavasva devavirati. 
Abhi kosam madhuscutam. 


O Soma, burden bearer of existence, inspirer and 
giver of enlightenment, ever awake and giver of 
awakenment, lover of celebrants of divine mind, we 
pray, let the streams of honeyed soma of light and joy 
flow free to the heart of the devotee. 


सनो ज्योतींषि get पव॑मान fa रोचय। 
क्रत्वे दक्षाय नो हिनु॥३॥ 


2: Sa no jyotimsi purvya pavamana vi rocaya. 
Kratve daksaya no hinu. 


O Soma, lord of light, peace and joy, pure, 
purifying and timeless, let the lights of knowledge shine 
upon us and inspire and motivate us to engage and 
achieve expertise and success in the science of yajnic 
creation and production for the common good. 


शुम्भमान seca गभ॑स्त्योः | 
पव॑ते वारे अव्यये ॥ ¥ ॥ 


4. Sumbhamana rtayubhir-mrjyamano gabhas-tyoh. 
Pavate vare avyaye. 


Glorious Soma, eternal divine light and energy 
of the universe, adored and glorified by the lovers of 
truth, natural law and creative yajna for universal social 
causes, flows ceaselessly and constantly in the 
imperishable circuit of its own light and supremacy in 
the cosmos. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 37 93 


स विश्वा दाशुषे वसु सोमो दिव्यानि पार्थिवा। 
पव॑तामान्तरिंश्च्या ॥ ५ ॥ 

र Sa visva dasuse vasu somo divyani parthiva. 
Pavatam-antariksya. 
May Soma, we pray, purify and set aflow all 
wealth, honour and excellence of the world, earthly, 
heavenly and of the middle regions for the generous 
yajamana and all. 
आ दिवस्पृष्ठमश्वयुर्गव्ययुः सोम रोहसि | 
वीरयुः श॑वसस्पते ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. A divasprstham-asvayur-gvyayuh soma rohasi. 
Virayuh Savasaspate. 

O Soma, lord of purity, power and life energy, 
giver of strength and courage, lover of lands, cows and 
culture, horses, victory and advancement, brave warriors 
and noble progeny for humanity, you pervade and 
prevail not only on earth and in the skies, you shine in 


glory on top of heaven too for the sake of devoted 
celebrants. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 37 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Rahugana Angirasa Rshi 
स सुतः पीतये वृषा सोम॑: पवित्रँ अर्षति । 
विघ्चत्रक्षांसि देवयुः ॥ ९॥ 


|: Sa sutah pitaye vrsa somah pavitre arsati. 
Vighnan raksamsi devayuh. 


Soma, supremely generous Spirit of existence, 
self-revealed, self-realised by the devotee, lover or 


94 RGVEDA 


divine souls, manifests and vibrates in the pure heart of 
the devotee, eliminating negativities, sin and evil, for 
the pleasure and ecstasy of the celebrant. 


स पवित्रँ faaeron हरिरर्षति धर्णसिः। 
अभि योनिं कनिंक्रदत्‌॥ २॥ 


me Sa pavitre vicaksano harirarsati dharnasih. 
Abhi yonim kanikradat. 


Soma, all watching omniscient, destroyer of 
suffering, omnipotent wielder and sustainer of the 
universe, pervades and vibrates in Prakrti, proclaiming 
its presence loud and bold as thunder. 


स वाजी रोचना fea: पव॑मानो fa धावति। 
रक्षोहा वार॑ मव्ययम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 

3: Sa vajt rocana divah pavamano vi dhavati. 
Raksoha varam-avyayam. 
This dynamic omnipotent Spirit, light of heaven, 
pure and purifying, vibrates universally and rushes to 
the chosen imperishable soul of the devotee, destroying 
negativities, sin and evil. 
स त्रितस्याधि सान॑वि पव॑मानो अरोचयत्‌। 
जामिधः सूर्य" सह।॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Sa tritasyadhi sanavi pavamano arocayat. 
Jamibhih suryam saha. 


Soma, pure, purifying, and all pervasive across 
and ever on top of the three worlds of space and three 
dimensions of time, shines with the sun and other 
kindred luminaries. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 38 95 


स daa gut सुतो व॑ रिवोविदरदाभ्यः। 
सोमो वाज॑मिवासरत्‌॥ & ॥ 

Sa vrtraha vrsa suto varivovid-adabhyah. 
Somo vajamivasarat. 
Soma, destroyer of darkness, generous, self- 
manifestive, self-revealed and self discovered, lord giver 
of the best of wealth and excellence of the world, fearless 
and undaunted, pervades and vibrates in existence as 
Shakti, divine omnipotent energy. 
स देवः कविनेषितो ३५ भि द्रोणानि धावति। 
इन्दुरिन्द्राय मं हना ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Sa devah kavinesito’bhi dronani dhavati. 
Indurindraya mamhana. 


Self-refulgent generous Soma divine, celebrated 
by poets, rushes to manifest, brilliant, blissful and great, 
in the heart of the devotees for the soul’s joy. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 38 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Rahugana Angirasa Rshi 


एष उ स्य वृषा रथोऽ व्यो aR भिरर्षति। 
गच्छन्वाजं सहस्रिणम्‌ ९॥ 


if Esa € sya vrsa ratho’vyo varebhirarsati. 
Gacchan vajam sahasrinam. 


This Soma spirit of joy in existence, mighty 
generous, all protective omnipresent mover, extremely 
charming, creating and giving thousandfolds of wealth, 
honour and excellence, vibrates by its dynamic presence 
at the highest and brightest in the heart of choice souls 


96 RGVEDA 


and in choice beauties of existence. 


एतं त्रितस्य योष॑णो हरि हिन्वन्त्यद्विंभिः। 
इन्दुमिन्द्राय पीतये ॥ २॥ 


2: Etam tritasya yosano harim hinvantyadribhih. 
Indumindraya pitaye. 


This Spirit of joy, eliminator of suffering, happy 
voices of the sage past three bondages of body, mind 
and soul adore, with the intensity of adamantine 
meditation for the spiritual joy of general humanity. 


एतं त्यं हरितो दशं मर्मृज्यन्ते अपस्युवः | 
याभिर्मदाय seta ३॥ 


a Etam tyam harito dasa marmrjyante apasyuvah. 
Yabhirmadaya sumbhate. 


This Soma, ten senses and ten pranas of the 
devotee, well controlled past sufferance and pointed to 
concentrative meditation, present in uninvolved purity 
of form, by which experience the bright presence is 
glorified for the soul’s joy. 


एष स्य मानुषीष्वा श्येनो न विक्षु सीदति। 
गच्छञ्जारो न योषित॑म्‌॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Esa sya manusisva Syeno na viksu sidati. 
Gacchanjaro na yositam. 


This Soma pervades and shines in the generality 
of humanity like the eagle, victorious conqueror of the 
skies, shining and radiating like the moon, lover and 
admirer of its darling, the lovely night. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 39 97 


एष स्य मद्यो tats व॑ चष्टे दिवः शिरः । 
य इन्दुवारि माविशत्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 

Esa sya madyo raso'va caste divah 5757141. 
Ya indur-varam-avisat. 
This ecstatic bliss, honey sweet of life’s joy, 
appears like the rising sun at dawn when, as the beauty 
and glory of existence, it reflects in the heart of the 
chosen soul. 
एष स्य पीतये सुतो eke fer erate: | 
क्रन्दन्योनिमभि fre & ॥ 

6. Esa sya pitaye suto harir-arsati dharnasih. 
Krandan yonimabhi priyam. 

This Soma spirit of joy, self-manifestive, all 
wielder and sustainer, reflects with a boom in its darling 
form, the golden womb of Prakrti, and rolls around for 


the joyous experience of humanity eliminating pain and 
sufferance. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 39 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Brhanmati Angirasa Rshi 


stented बृहन्मते परिं प्रियेण धाम्ना i 
यत्र देवा इति aT ९॥ 
1. Asurarsa brhanmate pari priyena dhamna. 
Yatra deva iti bravan. 
O Soma, spirit of universal joy and infinite light 
of intelligence, flow fast forward with your own 


essential and dear light and lustre of form and come 
where the divines dwell, and proclaim your presence. 


98 RGVEDA 


परिष्करृण्वन्ननिंष्कृतं sare यातयन्निषः | 
वृष्टं दिवः परिं स्रव ॥ २॥ 
0.0 Pariskrnvann-aniskrtam janaya yatayann-isah. 
Vrstim divah pari srava. 
Go forward cleansing, purifying and perfecting 
the uninitiated, leading people to strive for food, energy 


and advancement. Indeed, bring the showers of the light 
of heaven on earth. 


सुत Ufa पवित्र आ त्विषिं दर्धान ओजसा । 
विचक्षाणो विरोचयं॑न्‌॥ ३॥ 


3. Suta eti pavitra a tvisim dadhana ojasa. 
Vicaksano virocayan. 


Soma, universal watchful guardian and light 
giver of the world, discovered and realised in the self, 
wearing its celestial light and lustre, manifests and 
shines in the pure soul of the devotee. 


अयं स यो दिवस्परि रघुयामा पवित्र आ। 
सिन्धोरूर्मा व्यक्षरत्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Ayam sa yo divaspari raghuyama pavitra a. 
Sindhorurma vyaksarat. 
This Soma is the spirit of joy which, at instant 
and universal speed, descends and manifests in the 


devotee’s pure soul from the light of divinity and 
stimulates oceanic waves of ecstasy to roll in the heart. 


आविर्वासन्परावतो अथो statad: Ua: | 
इन्द्राय सिच्यते Fah ५ ॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 40 99 


=) Avivasan paravato atho arvavatah sutah. 
Indraya sicyate madhu. 


Self-manifested, illuminating the soul from far 
as well as from near, it rains showers of honey sweets 
of divine ecstasy for the soul. 


समीचीना अनूषत हरिं हिन्वन्त्यद्विभिः। 
योनावृतस्य सीदत ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Samicina anusata harim hanvantyadribhih. 
Yonavrtasya sidata. 


Devoted yajakas in faith and perfect form 
together adore and glorify Soma, eliminator of pain, 
and with adamantine practice of meditation stimulate 
its presence to power and ecstasy for themselves. O 
Soma, pray, arise and bless the yajnic as well as the 
psychic vedi with your presence, the vedi that is your 
own seat of Truth and divine Law. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 40 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Brhanmati Angirasa Rshi 


पुनानो अक्रमीदभि विश्वा मृधो fret for: | 
शुम्भन्ति विप्रं धीतिभिः॥ ९॥ 
iF Punano akramidabhi visva mrdho vicarsanih. 
Sumbhanti vipram dhitibhih. 
Soma, spirit of universal purity and purification, 
all watching, faces and overcomes all adversaries of 


the carnal world. Sages celebrate and glorify the vibrant 
all prevailing spirit with songs of adoration. 


100 RGVEDA 


आ योनिमरुणो रुह द्रमदिन्द्रं Gat Ta: | 
qa सद॑सि सीदति ॥ २॥ 


2. A yonimaruno ruhad-gamad-indram vrsa sutah. 
Dhruve sadasi sidati. 


The glorious light of divinity, self-manifested 
and self-existent, pervades its natural abode, the world 
of Prakrti, and the generous spirit pervades the human 
soul too, and while it seats itself in the unshakable faith 
of man, the human soul too, purified and sanctified, 
abides in the eternal presence of divinity. 


al cf महामिन्दोऽ स्मभ्यं सोम faved: | 
आ प॑वस्व सहस्त्रिणम्‌।॥। 3 ॥ 


a Nu no rayim mahamindo’smabhyam soma 
visvatah. A pavasva sahasrinam. 


Soma, lord of universal glory, blissful 
omnipresence, bring us great wealth, honour and 
excellence of the world from all around, let it flow to us 
in a thousand streams. 


विश्वां सोम पवमान द्युम्नानींन्दवा भ॑र । 
विदाः संहस्तरिणीरिष॑ः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Visva soma pavamana dyumnanindava bhara. 
Vidah sahasrinirisah. 


O Soma, spirit of universal bliss and beauty, 
bring us the light, lustre and glory of all the world. Bless 
us with a thousandfold food, energy and advancement 
in knowledge, culture and values of Dharma. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 41 101 


स न॑ः पुनान आ भ॑र रयिं स्तोत्रे सुवीर्यभ्‌। 
जरितुर्वर्धया गिर॑ः ॥ ५॥ 

a Sa nah punana a bhara rayim stotre suviryam. 
Jaritur-vardhaya girah. 
May the lord, Soma, pure and purifying, bring 
us wealth, honour and excellence, bless us with divine 
strength and generous heroism for the celebrant, and 
elevate and exalt the devotees’ songs of adoration. 
पुनान इन्दवा भ॑र सोमं द्विबर्हसं रयिम्‌। 
वृष॑न्निन्दो न उक्थ्यम्‌ ।॥। ६ ॥ 

6. Punana indava bhara soma dvibarhasam rayim. 
Vrsannindo na ukthyam. 


O Soma, lord of peace, beauty, power and divine 
bliss, bring us the honour, excellence and glory of both 
the worlds, earth and heaven, and, O generous lord, bless 
us with excellence worthy of celebration in sacred song 
for presentation to divinity. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 41 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Medhyatithi Kanva Rshi 
प्रये गावो न भूर्णीयस्त्वेषा अयासो अक्रमुः | 
wed: कृष्णामप त्वच॑म्‌ ॥ ९॥ 
I. Pra ye gavo na bhurnayas-tvesa ayaso akramuh. 
Ghnantah krsnamapa tvacam. 
We adore the ceaseless radiations of divinity 
which, like restless rays of the sun, blazing with lustrous 


glory, move and shower on the earth and dispel the dark 
cover of the night. 


102 RGVEDA 


सुवितस्य मनामहेऽ ति सेतुं दुराव्य॑म्‌। 
erat दस्युमव्रतम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


pA Suvitasya manamahe’ ti setum duravyam. 
Sahvamso dasyum-avratam. 


We honour and adore that divine bridge to peace 
and prosperity, otherwise difficult to cross, which faces 
and overcomes selfish, uncreative and destructive 
elements of life addicted to lawlessness. 


शृण्वे वृष्टेरिव स्वनः पव॑मानस्य शुष्पिर्णः। 
चर॑न्ति विद्युतो! दिवि u ३॥ 


3. Srnve vrsteriva svanah pavamanasya susminah. 
Caranti vidyuto divi. 


The music of divinity, pure, purifying and 
edifying, is heard like showers of rain on earth, like 
flashes of lightning and roar of thunder which shine 
and rumble over the sky. This is the reflection of the 
might, majesty and generosity of Soma. 


आ प॑वस्व महीमिषं गोम॑दिन्दो हिर॑ण्यवत्‌ । 
अश्वांवद्वाजवत्सुतः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. A pavasva mahimisam gomadindo hirnyavat. 
Asvavad-vajavat sutah. 


O Soma, divine presence of might, majesty and 
bliss concentrated in the mind and soul, let showers of 
great energy and pure prosperity flow, abounding in 
lands and cows, knowledge and culture, golden beauties 
of riches, horses, speed and progress of achievement, 
and then attainment of the ultimate victory. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 42 103 


स प॑वस्व विचर्षण आ मही रोद॑सी पृण । 
उषाः सूर्यो न रस्मिभिः we ui 
Sa pavasva vicarsana ठ mahi rodasi prna. 
Usah suryo na rasmibhih. 
O lord all watchful, ever awake, fill the great 
earth and heaven with prosperity, light and beauty of 


life like the sun which blesses the dawn with the beauty 
and glory of its rays of light. 


परि णः शर्मयन्त्या धास्या सोम fagad: | 
सरा रसेव विष्टप॑म्‌।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Pari nah sarmayantya dharaya soma visvatah. 
Sara raseva vistapam. 


O Soma, spirit of beauty, bliss and peace, just 
as the universe from centre to summit abounds in the 
beauty and majesty of divinity, so let us all in heart and 
soul be blest with showers of peace and pleasure of total 
well-being from all around our life in space and time. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 42 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Medhyatithi Kanva Rshi 


जनयत्रोचना दिवो जनयन्नप्सु सूर्यभ्‌। 
वसानो गा अपो हरिः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Janayan rocana divo janayannapsu suryam. 
Vasano ga apo harih. 


Soma, giver of peace, creator and sustainer of 
the world of existence, eliminator of want and suffering, 
creates the regions of heavenly light, creates the stars 
in space, and creates the waters and the planets such as 


104 RGVEDA 
earth, pervading, bearing and transcending them all. 


एष West मन्म॑ना देवो eazy | 
धास्या पवते सुतः ॥ २॥ 


2: Esa pratnena manmana devo devebhyaspari. 
Dharaya pavate sutah. 


This divine Soma, light and life of the world, 
self-realised by the sages and adored with ancient and 
eternal hymns of the Veda, vibrates for them in the heart 
and soul and sanctifies them with showers of heavenly 
bliss. 


वावृधानाय तूर्व॑ये पव॑न्ते वाज॑सातये | 
सोमाः सहस्त्र॑पाजसः ॥ ३ ॥ 


3; Vavrdhanaya turvaye pavante vajasataye. 
Somah sahasrapajasah. 


Mighty powerful streams of Soma, full of 
thousand-fold vigour and promise flow for the karma- 
yogi, progressive man of initiative, creative ambition 
and efficiency of action, sanctifying and preparing him 
for the achievement of his goal. 

दुहानः प्रत्रमित्पय॑ः पवित्रे परि षिच्यते। 
कऋरन्द॑न्देवों अजीजनत्‌ ॥। ४ ॥ 
4. Duhanah pratnamit payah pavitre pari sicyate. 


Krandan devan ajijanat. 


Creating the eternal life-giving food of divine 
ecstasy for the soul, the presence of blissful Soma 
vibrates in the heart of the celebrant and, calling out as 
if loud and bold, awakens the dormant divine 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 43 105 
potentialities of the devotee to active possibilities. 


अभि विश्वानि वार्याभि eat searael: | 
सोम॑ः पुनानो stefan ५॥ 

a. Abhi visvani varya’bhi devan rtavrdhah. 
Somah punano arsati. 
Soma, purifying the heart and soul of humanity, 
creates and brings up all the choice wealth, honours 
and excellences of the world for the noble and generous 
brilliancies of humanity dedicated in service to the laws 
and values of truth and rectitude in life. 
Tia: सोम वीरवदश्वावद्वाज॑वत्सुतः। 
पव॑स्व लहतीरिषंः ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Gomannah soma viravad-asvavad-vajavat sutah. 
Pavasva brhatirisah. 


O Soma, adored and glorified in self-realisation, 
let streams of pure abundant food, energy, possibilities 
and achievements flow for us, rich in lands and cows, 
honour and culture, noble progeny and brave warriors, 
horses, speedy progress and victories, vibrant initiative 
and perfect fulfilment. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 43 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Medhyatithi Kanva Rshi 
यो अत्यं इव मृज्यते गोभिर्मदाय हर्यतः। 
तं गीर्भिवीसयामसि ॥ ९॥ 
९ Yo atya iva mrjyate gobhirmadaya haryatah. 
Tam girbhir-vasayamasi. 


The Soma which is radiant and pure like virgin 


106 RGVEDA 


energy of nature and most blissful in experience is 
realised for spiritual joy through the senses, mind and 
intelligence. 


तं नो विश्वा अवस्युवो गिर॑ः शुम्भन्ति पूर्वथा | 
इन्दुमिन्द्राय पीतये ॥। २॥ 


De Tam no visva avasyuvo girah sumbhanti purva- 
tha. Indumindraya pitaye. 


That Soma of beauty, bliss and glory, all our 
senses, in search of protection and advancement, adore 
and glorify as ever before for the spiritual joy of the 
soul. 


पुनानो याति हर्यतः सोमो गीर्भिः apa: | 
विप्र॑स्य मेध्यातिथेः ॥ ३॥ 


3: Punano yati haryatah somo girbhih pariskrtah. 
Viprasya medhyatitheh. 


Pure and purifying, blissful in experience, 
adored and glorified with songs of divinity by the vibrant 
sagely celebrant dedicated to the yoga of the knowledge 
way, Soma vibrates in the soul. 


पव॑मान विदा रयिमस्मभ्यं सोम सुश्रिय॑म्‌। 
इन्दों सहस्त्र॑वर्चसम्‌॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Pavamana vida rayim-asmabhyam soma susri- 
yam. Indo sahara-varcasam. 


O Soma, gracious and blissful, pure and 
purifying divinity, bring us wealth, honour and 
excellence sanctified in truth, beauty and grace of the 
light and lustre of a thousand suns. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 44 107 


इन्दुरत्यो न वाजसूत्कनिंक्रन्ति पवित्र आ। 
यदक्षारति देवयुः ॥ ५ ॥ 
Induratyo na vajasrt kanikranti pavitra a. 
Yadaksarati devayuh. 
O Soma, Spirit of light, beauty and grace of life’s 
vitality, moving fast like showers of energy in life’s 
evolution in the service of divine purpose, come into 


the pure heart of the dedicated sage and flow free loud 
and bold with the message of the divine presence. 


पव॑स्व वाज॑सातये विप्र॑स्य गृणतो वृधे। 
सोम रास्व॑ सुवीर्यम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Pavasva vajasataye viprasya grnato vrdhe. 
Soma rasva suviryam. 


Come, O Soma, bless and sanctify the dedicated 
celebrant for advancement and achievement of his life’s 
mission and bring us noble vigour and vitality, a brave 
progeny and heroic powers of progress. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 44 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Ayasya Angirasa Rshi 


प्रण इन्दो महे तन॑ ऊर्मिं न बिभ्र॑ंदर्षसि। 
अभि देवों अयास्यं: ॥ ९॥ 
1. Pra na indo mahe tana urmim na bhibhradar- 
sasi. Abhi devan ayasyah. 
O Soma, vibrant and fast, bearing waves of light 
and energy of divinity, you radiate to the noble and 


brilliant divine souls for our great advancement and 
achievement all round in life. 


108 RGVEDA 


मती जुष्टो धिया हितः सोमो हिन्वे परावति | 
विप्रस्य धार॑या कविः ॥ २॥ 


pA Mati justo dhiya hitah somo hinve paravati. 
Viprasya dharaya kavih. 


Soma, omniscient poet creator, whether far or 
near in human consciousness, invoked by vision and 
intelligence through concentration of the mind and 
senses of sagely celebrants in meditation, inspires the 
devotee with showers of ecstasy. 


अयं देवेषु जागृविः सुत एति पवित्र आ। 
सोमो याति विचर्षणिः ॥ ३॥ 


3. Ayam devesu jagrvih suta eti pavitra a. 
Somo yati vicarsanih. 


This Soma of divine vigour and ecstasy, all 
watchful, ever awake among the divines, flows free, 
and when it is invoked for realisation, it moves and rises 
to bless the holy heart and soul of the celebrant. 


स न॑: पवस्व वाजयुश्चंक्राणश्चारुमध्वरम्‌ | 
बर्हिष्मां आ विवासति ux ui 


4. 9८ nah pavasva vajayus--cakranascarum-adhva- 
ram. Barhisman व vivasati. 


O Soma, blissful, watchful and gracious, lover 
of vibrant aspirants of divine progress, beautifier and 
sanctifier of our yajna with holiness and grace, the vedi 
is prepared, the grass is spread, the fire is awake, the 
yajamana invokes you, adores and glorifies, pray come 
and bless the celebrants’ yajna. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 45 109 


सनो भर्गाय वायवे विप्र॑वीरः सदावुंधः। 
सोमो देवेष्वा य॑मत्‌॥ ५ ॥ 


॥ Sa no bhagaya vayave vipravirah sadavrdhah. 
Somo devesva yamat. 


May Soma, eternal and infinite, inspirer of the 
holy and brave, come among our noble and generous 
congregations of yajna and bless us with honour and 
excellence of a progressive social order vibrant as the 
winds. 


स नों अद्य aqua क्रतुविद्रातुवित्तमः। 
वाजं जेषि श्रवो बृहत्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Sano adya vasuttaye kratuvid-gdatuvittamah. 
Vajam jesi Sravo brhat. 


Let us celebrate Soma: He, most poetic visionary 
of the knowledge of holy, creative and progressive 
action, comes and blesses us with the achievement and 
victory of success, progress and continuous growth of 
abundant food, inexhaustible energy, high excellence, 
universal fame and rising glory. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 45 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Ayasya Angirasa Rshi 


स प॑वस्व मदाय कं नुचक्ां देववीतये | 
इन्दविन्द्राय पीतये ।। ९॥ 
0 Sa pavasva madaya kam nrcaksa devavitaye. 
Indavindraya pitaye. 
O Soma, spirit of light, and joy, omniscient all 
watchful guardian of humanity, let streams of peace, 
joy and well-being, pure and sacred, flow for the soul’s 


110 RGVEDA 


exhilaration in divine experience for its dedication to 
the service and satisfaction of the divinities. 


स नो अर्षाभि दृत्यं † त्वमिन्द्राय तोशसे | 
देवान्त्सखिंभ्य आ वर॑ म्‌॥ २॥ 


2: Sano arsabhi dutyam tvam-indraya toSsase. 
Devantsakhibhya a varam. 


O Soma, come like a harbinger of peace and 
joy for the divine experience and ecstasy of the soul, 
and as giver of holy and higher perception and vision 
for our friends. 


उत त्वाम॑रूणं वयं MRS मदाय कम्‌। 
विनो राये दुरो वृधि॥३॥ 


2: Uta tvamarunam vayam gobhiranjmo madaya 
kam. Vi no raye duro vrdhi. 


O vibrant lord of light and glory, with 
concentration of mind and senses and with holy words 
of praise and prayer, we adore you. Pray bring us peace 
and joy and perfect well being, and open wide the doors 
of progress for the advancement of our wealth, honour 
and excellence. 


अत्यू पवित्र॑मक्रमीद्वाजी धुरं न याम॑नि। 
इन्दुर्देवेषु पत्यते ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Atyu pavitram-akramid vajt dhuram na yamani. 
Indurdevesu patyate. 


As the omnipotent divine energy is on top as 
burden bearer of the course of existence, so is Soma, 
peace and exhilaration of the spirit on top of the course 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 46 111 


of the pure heart and soul of the devotee and it flows 
into the psyche of the divine souls as the spirit of peace 
and joy of life. 
समी सखायो अस्वरन्वने ऋ्रीव्य॑न्तमत्य॑विम्‌। 
इन्दुं नावा अनूषत ।॥ ५ ॥ 
9, Sami sakhayo asvaran vane krilantamatyavim. 
Indum nava anusata. 


Let friends and devotees on the vedi celebrate 
Soma, spirit of universal joy, sportive and protective in 
the beautiful world, and let their songs of adoration 
glorify the spirit of peace, beauty and divine glory. 
dat पवस्व धास्या यर्या पीतो विचश्चसे। 
इन्दो स्तोत्रे सुवीर्यम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Taya pavasva dharaya yaya [716 vicaksase. 
Indo stotre suviryam. 
O Soma, spirit of joy and glory, flow pure, purify 
and sanctify us by that very stream of exhilaration by 
which, received, loved and adored, you inspire the 


enlightened celebrant with manly vigour and divine 
heroism. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 46 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Ayasya Angirasa Rshi 
असूग्रन्देववीतयेऽ त्यासः कृत्व्याइव । 
क्षरन्तः पर्वतावृधंः॥ ९॥ 


1. Asrgran devavitaye’tyasah krtvya iva. 
ksarantah parvatavrdhah. 


Performers of heroic action, like universal 


112 RGVEDA 


presences grown to veteran heights by knowledge and 
action, are born and created for divine service of the 
world and they let flow streams of soma joy for general 
humanity. 


परिंष्करतास इन्द॑वो योषेव पिर्व्यावती । 
वायुं सोमा असृक्षत ॥ २॥ 


me Pariskrtasa indavo yoseva pitryavati. 
Vayum soma asrksata. 


Initiated, cultured and sanctified like the sacred 
maiden of her holy parents, these brilliant veterans of 
knowledge, action and joyous character, having 
mastered subtle subjects and divined into the mysteries 
of life, create and release streams of soma joy for the 
life around. 


एते सोमास इन्द॑वः प्रय॑स्वन्तश्चमू Tar: | 
इन्द्रं वर्धस्ति कर्मभिः॥३॥ 


छ Ete somasa indavah prayasvantas-camu sutah. 
Indram vardhanti karmabhih. 


These joyous veterans, brilliant in mind, well 
trained and self-directed, trying to act well in planned 
and well-defined channels, exalt the glory of Indra, their 
self and the nation by their performance and social 
success. 


आ धावता सुहस्त्यः शुक्रा गृभ्णीत मन्धिर्ना। 
गोभिः श्रीणीत मत्स॒रम्‌॥ ४॥ 


4. A dhavata suhastyah Sukra grbhnita manthina. 
Gobhih Srinita matsaram. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 47 113 


Experts of noble hand and versatile mind, come, 
take hold of the pure and powerful materials with 
specialised tools and, with tempering mix and 
refinement, create the instruments of joyous social 
development. 


स प॑वस्व धनंजय प्रयन्ता राध॑सो Fe: | 
अस्मभ्यं सोम गातुवित्‌ ॥ & ॥ 


Sa pavasva dhananjaya prayanta radhaso mahah. 
Asmabhyam soma gatuvit. 


O Soma, lord of joy and noble knowledge, 
winner of wealth and holy power, creator of great 
infrastructure for development, pure and powerful 
expert of the paths of history and social development, 
pray let the streams of peace and joy flow for us. 


एतं daa मर्ज्यं पव॑मानं दश॒ क्षिपः । 
इन्द्राय मत्स॒रं मद॑म्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Etam mrjanti marjyam pavamanam dasa ksipah. 
Indraya matsaram madam. 


This Soma, lord of peace and joy, pure, potent 
and adorable, ten senses, ten pranas, ten forms of subtle 
and gross orders of Prakrti elements serve in conjunction 
with the mind and intelligence of nature and humanity, 
and create the joy and excitement of evolution and 
development in life in honour of Indra, humanity and 
the lord ruler of humanity. 


114 RGVEDA 


Mandala 9/Sukta 47 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Kavi Bhargava Rshi 


अया सोम॑ः सुकृत्यया म हश्चिंदभ्य॑ वर्धत | 
मन्दान उद्‌ वुंषायते ।॥ ९॥ 
1. Aya somah sukrtyaya mahascid-abhyavardhata. 
Mandana udvrsayate. 
This Soma, lordly Spirit of peace and joy, feels 
great by this yajnic act of homage and, happy and 
exalted, loves to advance and exalt the celebrants. 


PAM कत्वां चेतन्ते दस्युतर्हणा । 
ऋणा च॑ धृष्णुश्चयते ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Krtanidasya kartva cetante dasyutarhana. 
Rna ca dhrsnuscayate. 


The deeds done and to be done by this Soma, 
by which he destroys negativities and dispels darkness 
are known, and, daring and powerful, he acquits the 
celebrants of debts and obligations. 


sreare इन्द्रियो रसो वर॑: सहस्रसा Yaa 
उक्थं यद॑स्य जाय॑ते ॥ ३॥ 


ध At soma indriyo raso vajrah sahasrasa bhuvat. 
Uktham yadasya jayate. 


And when the song of adoration is sung in 
honour of this Soma, then the spirit of peace and inner 
strength, inner joy, adamantine courage and rectitude 
edifying the mind and sense of the celebrant arise a 
thousandfold in the soul. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 48 115 


स्वयं कविर्विधर्तरि विप्राय रल्र॑मिच्छति। 
यदीं मर्मृज्यते धियः us ॥ 


4. Svayam kavir-vidhartari vipraya ratnamicchati. 
Yadi marmrjyate dhiyah. 


When this Soma is adored and celebrated by 
thoughts, words and deeds, then he, himself a poet 
creator and visionary, in order to support and reward 
the celebrant, decides to bless the devotee with the 
jewels of life’s wealth of his choice. 


सिषासतू रयीणां वाजेष्वर्वतामिव | 
भरेषु जिग्युषामसि ॥ ५५ ॥ 
a, Sisasatu rayinam vajesvarvatamiva. 
Bharesu jigyusamasi. 
O Soma, lord of peace, prize and joy, you love 
to give and you are the giver of all jewels of wealth and 
honour to all aspirants: like success to the pioneers in 


the race for life’s glory, and victory to the ambitious 
warriors in the battles of life’s excellence. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 48 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Kavi Bhargava Rshi 
तं त्वां नृम्णानि बिभ्र॑तं सधस्थेषु महो fea: | 
चारु सुकृत्ययेमहे ॥ ९ ॥ 


| Tam tva nrmnani bibhratam sadhasthesu maho 
divah. Carum sukrtyayemahe. 


O Soma, Spirit of peace, purity and power, with 
holy acts of homage in the halls of yajna, we invoke, 
adore and worship you, lord of beauty and bliss, and 


116 RGVEDA 


exalt you in action, harbinger of the jewels of wealth, 
honour and excellence from the lofty regions of the light 
of heaven. 


संवक्तधृष्णुमुक्थ्यं महामहिव्रतं मद॑म्‌। 
शतं पुरो रुरुक्षणिम्‌ eu 
= Samvrktadhrsnum-ukthyam mahamahivratam 


madam. Satam puro ruruksanim. 


We worship you, eliminator of arrogance and 
pride, adorable, observer of lofty vows of discipline, 
inspiring, and breaker of a hundred strongholds of 
darkness. 


stdear रयिमभि watt सुक्रतो fea: 1 
सु पर्णो अंव्यधिर्भर्त्‌॥ ३॥ 

3: Atastva rayimabhi rajanam sukrato divah. 
Suparno avyathir-bharat. 


For this reason of your glory and inspiring 
nature, O lord of holy action and self-refulgent ruler, 
controller and dispenser of wealth, honour and 
excellence, the veteran sage and scholar can invoke you 
from the heights of heaven without fear and difficulty. 


विश्व॑स्मा seas ot सार्धारणं TENA | 
गोपामृतस्य विर्भरत्‌ si 

4. Visvasma it svardrse sadharanam rajasturam. 
Gopamrtasya virbharat. 


The sage and scholar of lofty vision and 
imagination, in order that all visionaries of the world 
may perceive your heavenly majesty, communicates his 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 49 117 


experience of your presence who are present 

everywhere, who give motion to the energy of nature in 

the cosmic dynamics and who rule and protect the laws 

of eternal truth which govern the course of existence. 
stat हिन्वान 2 xa ज्यायो महित्व्मानशो | 
अधथिष्टिकृद्िचंर्षणिः ॥ ५॥ 

a Adha hinvana indriyam jyayo mahitvam-anasSe. 
Abhistikrd-vicarsanih. 


And so, the inspirer of the power of senses, mind 
and intelligence, giver of fulfilment to the devotees, all 
watching Soma, divine Spirit of peace, power and 
enlightenment, pervades and abides in and over 
existence as the supreme power of divine glory. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 49 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Kavi Bhargava Rshi 


पव॑स्व वृष्टिमा सु नोऽ पामूर्मिं faaeahy | 
अयक्ष्मा बुं हृतीरिषंः ॥ ९॥ 

1. Pavasva vrstima su no’pam-urmim divaspari. 
Ayaksma brhatirisah. 
Soma, lord of peace and plenty, give us holy 
showers of waters, wave on wave of the rain, and give 
us abundant food, energy and knowledge free from 
pollution and negativities. 
त्यां पवस्व धार॑या यया गाव॑ serra 
जन्यास उप॑ नो गृहम्‌॥ २॥ 

2. Taya pavasva dharaya yaya gava ihagaman. 
Janyasa upa no grham. 


118 RGVEDA 


Shower and purify us with that stream of power 
and purity of peace and plenty by which our senses, 
mind and intelligence, socially and positively motivated, 
may be balanced in our personality and we may feel at 
home with ourselves. 


घृतं प॑वस्व धास्या यज्ञेषुं देववीत॑मः। 
अस्मभ्यं वृष्टिमा प॑व ॥ 3 


ai Ghrtam pavasva dharaya yajnesu devavitamah. 
Asmabhyam vrstima pava. 


Let ghrta shower in streams, pure and powerful 
in our yajnas, O lord and guardian of the noble and 
divine worshippers. Bring us fulfilment and purify all 
our intentions, purposes and motivations of life. 


स न॑ ऊर्जे व्यव्ययं पवित्रं धाव धास्या। 
देवासः शुणवन्हि कम्‌॥ ४॥ 
4. Sa na urje vyavyayam pavitram dhava dharaya. 
Devasah srnavan hi kam. 
For energy, give us showers in streams of 


imperishable purity of heart, and let the noble devotees 
hear the blissful music of the rain. 


पव॑मानो असिष्यदद्रक्षां स्यपजङ्घ नत्‌। 
प्रलवद्रोचय्रुच॑: ॥ ५ ॥ 
चः Pavamano asisyadad-raksamsyapajanghanat. 
Pratnavad-rocayan rucah. 
May Soma, pure and purifying, all pervasive, 
destroy all evils and negativities, and continue to 


illumine the brilliant regions of the universe, 
macrocosmic as well as microcosmic, as ever before. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 50 119 


Mandala 9/Sukta 50 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Uchathya Angirasa Rshi 


उत्ते शुष्पास ईरते सिन्धोरूर्मेरिव स्वनः। 
वाणस्य चोदया पविम्‌॥ ९॥ 


| ॥ Ut te Susmasa trate sindhor-urmer-iva svanah. 
Vanasya codaya pavim. 


Higher and higher rise and roll your powers, 
purities and forces, roaring like waves of the sea. Keep 
up the motion of the wheel of life, let the swell of music 
rise on with the chant going on. 


प्रसवे त उदीरते तिस्रो वाचो ware: 1 
यदव्य एषि सान॑वि ॥ २॥ 


2 Prasave ta udirate tisro vaco makhasyuvah. 
Yadavya esi sanavi. 


When you rise and reach the pinnacle of yajna 
which deserves to be protected and promoted, then as 
you rise in intensity, the priests’ chant of the three voices 
of Rks, Samans and Yajus also swells to the climax. 


अव्यो वारे परि प्रियं ah हिन्वन्त्यद्विंभिः। 
पव॑मानं मधुश्चुतम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. Avyo vare pari priyam harim hinvantyadribhih. 
Pavamanam madhuSscutam. 


The devotees, who are seekers of your protection 
for advancement in their heart of hearts, intensify their 
awareness through relentless concentration and meditate 
on your presence dearer than dearest, eliminator of 
negative fluctuations of mind, pure and purifying spirit 


120 RGVEDA 
of divinity replete with honey sweets of ecstasy. 


आ प॑वस्व मदिन्तम पवित्रं धार॑या कवे। 
अर्कस्य योनिंमासरद॑म्‌॥। ४ ॥ 


4. A pavasva madintama pavitram dharaya kave. 
Arkasya yonimasadam. 


Flow in and purify, O poetic visionary and most 
exhilarating Spirit of ecstasy, the sacred heart of the 
celebrant in streams of beauty, light and sweetness to 
join the celebrant at the centre of his faith and devotion. 
स प॑वस्व मदिन्तम गोभिरञ्जानो अक्तुभिः। 
इन्दविन्द्राय पीतये ॥। ५॥ 

a, Sa pavasva madintama gobhir-anjano aktubhih. 
Indavindraya pitaye. 


Flow on, most exhilarating Spirit, adored and 
exalted by concentrative mind and senses of the seeker 
in meditation, flow on for ecstatic experience of the 
soul. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 51 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Uchathya Angirasa Rshi 
अध्वयो अद्रिभिः सुतं सोमं पवित्र आ gst 
पुनीहीन्द्राय पातवे ui ९ ॥ 


iF Adhvaryo adribhih sutam somam pavitra ठ srja. 
Punthindraya patave. 


O high priest of soma yajna, create the 
awareness of Soma, spirit of purity and divinity collected 
and concentrated by the senses and mind in the heart, 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 51 121 


and sanctify and intensify it there for exhilaration of 
the soul. 


दिवः पीयूष॑मुत्तमं सोममिन्द्राय वचिणें। 
सुनोता मधुमत्तमम्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Divah piyusam-uttamam somam-indraya vajrine. 
Sunota madhumattamam. 


Create the highest honey sweet Soma of divine 
consciousness, highest exhilarating experience of the 
light of heaven for the soul’s awareness, and then rise 
to adamantine power against all possible violations. 


तव त्य इन्दो अन्ध॑सो देवा मधोर्व्यश्नते। 
पव॑मानस्य मरुतं: ॥ ३॥ 


a: Tava tya indo andhaso deva madhor-vyasnate. 
Pavamanasya marutah. 


Then, O Soma, Spirit of divinity, the noblest, 
most vibrant generous and brilliant souls have a drink 
of the elixir of your honey sweet presence flowing 
exuberantly at the purest. 


त्वं हि सोम वर्धंय॑न्त्सुतो मदाय yore | 
वृष॑न्तस्तो तारं मूतये ।॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Tvam hi soma vardhayant-suto madaya bhur- 
naye. Vrsant-stotaram-utaye. 


Soma, lord of purity, peace and power, you alone 
are the object of meditation, supplication and exaltation 
for the ecstasy, vibrancy and protected progress of life, 
you alone promote the celebrant to the top of sovereignty 
and give him showers of joy. 


120 RGVEDA 
अभ्य॑षं विचक्षण पवित्रं धार॑या aa: | 
अभि वाज॑मुत sta: ५॥ 


श Abhyarsa vicaksana pavitram dharaya sutah. 
Abhi vajamuta sruvah. 


Flow on, O lord all watchful guardian of 
humanity, and, realised in meditation, rain in showers 
on the pure heart and bring in abundance of food and 
energy for the body, mind and soul, and give us the 
ultimate victory of fame in the world and fulfilment 
across the world of time. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 52 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Uchathya Angirasa Rshi 
परि द्युक्षः सनद्र॑यिर्भर द्वाजं नो अन्ध॑सा | 
सुवानो ste पवित्र आ॥ ९॥ 
Le Pari dyuksah sanadrayir-bharadvajam no 
andhasa. Suvano arsa pavitra a. 


Light of the light of heaven, treasure-hold of 
world’s wealth, with wealth, food and energy for body, 
mind and soul arise and manifest in the pure heart, 
inspiring it to a state of peace and benediction. 


da प्रतलरेभिरध्व॑भिरव्यो वारे परि fra: 1 
Peasant यात्तनां ॥ २॥ 

pm Tava pratnebhir-adhvabhir-avyo vare pari pri- 
yah. Sahasradharo yat tana. 


Let your dear protected celebrant, sanctified by 
a thousand streams of divine favours, rise to the 
cherished state of fulfilment by the ancient and eternal 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 52 123 
paths of divinity and Vedic lore. 


cet यस्तमींद्कयेन्दो न दानंमीद्कय | 
वधैर्वधस्नवीद्कय।॥ ३॥ 


3 Carurna yas-tam-inkhayendo na danamin-khaya. 
Vadhair-vadhasnavinkhaya. 


Indu, spirit of peace, plenty and generosity, 
inspire him who is receptive and generous as a cloud, 
move him like charity in flow. O shaping power of hard 
discipline, shape him through hardness and inspire him 
to the good life of generosity and joy. 


नि शुष्म॑मिन्दवेषां पुरुहूत जनानाम्‌ । 
यो अस्मो आदिदेशति ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ni Susmam-indavesam puruhuta jananam. 
Yo asman adideSati. 
Indu, lord of peace and plenty who rule over 
us, invoked, adored and worshipped pray increase the 


power and prosperity of those people who follow the 
rule of your law of discipline and generosity. 


शातं न॑ इन्द ऊतिभिः geet वा शुचींनाम्‌। 
पवस्व मंहयद्रयिः ॥ ५॥ 


Satam na inda utibhih sahasram va sucinam. 
Pavasva mamhayad-rayih. 


O lord of light, purity and plenty, with divine 
powers and protections bless us with hundreds and 
thousands of life’s purities and shower upon us 
abundance of wealth, honour and excellence worthy of 
that purity. 


124 RGVEDA 


Mandala 9/Sukta 53 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Avatsara Kashyapa Rshi 


उत्ते शुष्मासो अस्थु tail भिन्दन्तो अद्रिवः। 
नुदस्व याः dere: ९॥ 

1. Ut te Susmaso asthu rakso bhindanto adrivah. 
Nudasva yah parisprdhah. 

O lord of mountains, thunder and clouds, your 
powers and forces stand high, breaking down the 
negative and destructive elements of life. Pray impel or 
compel the adversaries to change or remove them from 
the paths of progress. 


अया निंजधिरोज॑सा रथस द्धे धने हिते । 
स्तवा अबिभ्युषा हृदा ॥ २॥ 

= Aya nijaghnirojasa rathasange dhane hite. 
Stava abibhyusa hrda. 


By this power and valour of yours you eliminate 
the negative forces. In this battle of the body chariot on 
hand in this life, we adore you with a fearless heart, 
you being the protector and guide. 


अस्य॑ व्रतानि नाधृषे पव॑मानस्य GSAT । 
रुज यस्त्वां पृतन्यति ॥ ३॥ 
Sy Asya vratani nadhrse pavamanasya dudhya. 
Ruja yastva prtanyati. 
The rules and laws of this mighty creative and 


dynamic power no one can resist with his adverse force. 
O Soma, whoever opposes you, break open and destroy. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 54 125 


तं हिन्वन्ति मदच्युतं हरिं नदीषु वाजिनंम्‌। 
इन्दुमिन्द्राय मत्सरम्‌ ॥ ॐ ॥ 
4. Tam hinvanti madacyutam harim nadisu vaji- 


nam. Indum-indraya matsaram. 


That giver of showers of sweetness and joy, lord 
of peace and power, destroyer of suffering, energising 
and flowing in streams of the universal dynamics of 
existence, people admire and adore, he is the joy and 
ecstasy of the living soul. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 54 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Avatsara Kashyapa Rshi 


अस्य प्रलामनु द्युतं शुक्रं PTS HSA: | 
पय॑: सहस्रसामृषिम्‌ ९॥ 


ii. Asya pratnamanu dyutam sukram duduhre ahra- 
yah. Payah sahasrasam-rsim. 


Men of vision and science of yajna, in pursuit 
of the ancient and eternal Vedic tradition of this lord of 
light, peace and purity, distil the brilliant, pure and 
powerful and visionary knowledge of a thousandfold 
nourishing and inspiring gifts of existence. 


अयं सूर्य इवोपद्गयं सरांसि धावति। 
aa प्रवत आ feat २॥ 

2: Ayam surya ivopadrg-ayam saramsi dhavati. 
Sapta pravata a divam. 


This Soma, like the sun, all watching and 
illuminating, sets rivers, seas and energies aflow, 
pervading therein on earth and in the seven-fold light 


126 RGVEDA 
of the sun upto the regions of light. 
अयं विश्वानि तिष्ठति पुनानो भुव॑नोपरि। 
सोमो देवो न सूर्यः ॥ ३॥ 


De Ayam visvani tisthati punano bhuvanopari. 
Somo devo na suryah. 


This Soma, lord of light, peace and power, pure 
and purifying, pervades all regions of the universe in 
and above, like the divine light which illuminates all 
regions of the universe. 


uk णो cadiaa aril अर्षसि गोम॑तः। 
पुनान इन्दविन्द्रयुः ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Pari no devavitaye vajan arsasi gomatah. 


Punana indavindrayuh. 


Indu, spirit of peace, beauty and plenty, lover 
of men of knowledge and power, purifying and 
sanctifying the world, bring us food and energy for the 
body, mind and soul for the service and fulfilment of 
the men of brilliance and generosity. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 55 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Avatsara Kashyapa Rshi 
यवंयवं नो अन्ध॑सा पुष्ट पुष्टं परिं स्रव । 
सोम विश्वां च सौभ॑गा ॥ ९॥ 


1. Yavam-yavam no andhasa pustam-pustam pari 
srava. Soma visva ca saubhaga. 


Soma, Spirit of peace, power and plenty, flow 
forth, vitalise, purify and inspire us with fresh energy, 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 55 127 


power and grace of culture at every stage of our growth, 
acquisition and progress, beatify all our good fortune 
and prosperity of life in the world. 


इन्दो यथा तव स्तवो यथां ते जातमन्ध॑सः। 
नि बर्हिषि प्रिये स॑दः ॥ २॥ 


2 Indo yatha tava stavo yatha te jatam-andhasah. 
Ni barhisi priye sadah. 


O lord of beauty and grace, as you pervade your 
own glory of adoration, your own creation, power and 
nourishments of food and inspiration, so pray come, 
bless our vedi of yajna, our life and work through the 
world. 


उत नो गोविद॑श्ववित्पव॑स्व सोमान्ध॑सा। 
med aa भिः ॥ ३॥ 


a Uta no govid-asvavit pavasva somandhasa. 
Maksutamebhir-ahabhih. 


And O Soma, lord of energy, wealth and 
advancement, master of knowledge and progress, by 
the shortest time of the days ahead, bless and beatify us 
with food for body, mind and soul, rich in lands, cows 
and culture, horses, advancement and progressive power 
and achievement. 


यो जिनाति न जीय॑ते हन्ति शत्रुमभीत्य । 
स प॑वस्व सहस्रजित्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Yo jinati na jiyate hanti Satrum-abhitya. 
Sa pavasva sahasrajit. 


You, who always excel, win or vanquish, who 


128 RGVEDA 


no one can excel, win or vanquish, who advance and 
destroy the destructive adversary, pray advance, 
energise, purify and empower us too, winner of a 
thousand battles. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 56 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Avatsara Kashyapa rshi 


परि सोम॑ ऋतं बृहदाशुः पवित्रे srttar 
विश्चत्रक्षांसि देवयुः ॥ ९॥ 
Le Pari soma rtam brhadasuh pavitre arsati. 
Vighnan raksamsi devayuh. 
Soma is the universal truth and law of eternity, 
instant and omnipresent, lover of the noble, brilliant 
and generous people, destroyer of negative and 


destructive forces, and it rolls in the heart of pure and 
pious souls, inspires, energises and advances them. 


यत्सोमो वाजमर्ष fa शतं धारां अपस्युवः | 
इन्द्र स्य सख्यमाविशन्‌॥ २॥ 

2. Yat somo vajamarsati Satam dhara apasyuvah. 
Indrasya sakhyamavisan. 


When Soma releases the divine energy and 
enthusiasm of life, men of initiative and creativity 
enjoying friendship and communion with divinity 
experience the ecstasy of life flowing in a hundred 
streams. 


अभि car योष॑णो ast जारं न कर्न्यानूषत | 
मृज्यसे सोम सातये ॥ ३ ॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 57 129 


a Abhi tva yosano dasa jaram na kanyanusata. 
Mrjyase soma sdataye. 


Ten youthful organs of perception and volition, 
concentrated, directed and integrated with mind, 
intelligence and consciousness serve and help the soul 
to commune with you, Soma, like a loving maiden 
communing with her lover, and then, O Supersoul and 
master of the soul, you shine in the heart’s core for the 
ultimate victory and fulfilment of the devotee. 


त्वमिन्द्राय विष्ण॑वे स्वादुरिन्दो of स्रव । 
नृन्त्स्तोतृन्पाह्यंहसः ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Tvam-indraya visnave svadur-indo pari srava. 
Nrnt-stotrn pahyamhasah. 
O Soma, spirit of peace and bliss, let divine 
ecstasy flow forth for Indra, celebrant of power, and 
Vishnu, omnipresence oriented soul, and protect and 


promote the leading lights of humanity free from sin 
and dedicated to divinity. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 57 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Avatsara Kashyapa Rshi 


प्र ते ant असश्चतो दिवो न य॑न्ति qed: | 
अच्छा वाजं सहस्रिणम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


I, Pra te dhara asascato divo na yanti vrstayah. 
Accha vajam sahasrinam. 


O Soma, the ceaseless streams of your 
inexhaustible ecstasy flow like rains of heavenly light, 
bringing thousandfold strength, energy and joy for the 
celebrants. 


130 RGVEDA 


अभि प्रियाणि काव्या विश्वा aartort अर्षति। 
हरिस्तुञ्जान आयुधा ॥ २॥ 

pA Abhi priyani kavya visva caksano arsati. 
Haris-tunjana ayudha. 

Soma, spirit of joy, destroyer of suffering, 
watching all human activity, flows forth for its dear 
favourites, striking its arms against adverse forces. 

स मर्मृजान आयुभिरिभो राजेव wad: | 
श्येनो न वंसु षीदति ॥ ३॥ 


Sa marmrjana ayubhir-ibho rajeva suvratah. 
Syeno na vamsu sidati. 


Soma, adored and glorified by people, as a self- 
controlled, powerful and brilliant ruler ever awake and 
unfailing power, pervades in the human common-wealth 
and the entire world of sustenance. 

स नो विश्वां दिवो वसूतो पुंथिव्या अधिं। 
पुनान इन्दवा ATU ॥ 


4. Sano visva divo vasuto prthivya adhi. 
Punana indava bhara. 


Soma, lord of wealth, beauty and excellence, 
ever pure and sanctifying, may, we pray, bring us all 
the wealth, honour and fame of life on earth and the 
light and magnificence of heaven. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 58 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Avatsara Kashyapa Rshi 


तरत्स मन्दी धावति धारां सुतस्यान्धसः | 
तरत्स मन्दी धावति॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 58 131 


im Tarat sa mandi dhavati dhara sutasyandhasah. 
Tarat sa mandi dhavati. 

Soma, Spirit of peace, beauty and bliss, saving, 
rejoicing, fulfilling, flows on. The stream of delight 
exhilarating for body, mind and soul flows on full of 
bliss. Crossing over the hurdles of life, delighted all 
over, the celebrant goes on. 


उस्रा de वसूनां मर्तस्य देव्यव॑सः। 
तरत्स मन्दी धावति॥ २॥ 


2: Usra veda vasunam martasya devyavasah. 
Tarat sa mandi dhavati. 


Mother source of wealth, honour and 
enlightenment, divine power that commands the saving 
art for the mortals, saviour, delightful, giver of fulfilment 
flows on. 


ध्वस्रयोः पुरुषन्त्योरा सहस्राणि ददाहे | 
तरत्स मन्दी धावति॥ ३॥ 


a Dhvasrayoh purusantyora sahasrani dadmahe. 
Tarat sa mandi dhavati. 


Let us receive a thousand gifts of the divine 
soma power that destroys evil and exalts humanity. 
Saving, delighting and fulfilling, the stream of divine 
bliss flows on. 


आ ययोस्तिंशतं तन। सहस्राणि च cate 
तरत्स मन्दी धावति॥ ४॥ 


4. A yayostrimsatam tana sahasrani ca dadmahe. 
Tarat sa mandi dhavati. 


132 RGVEDA 


The divine Soma energy and power, destroyer 
of evil and saviour of human good, of which we get 
thirty virtues and a thousand other gifts, flows on saving, 
delighting, delightful. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 59 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Avatsara Kashyapa Rshi 


पव॑स्व गोजिद॑श्वजिद्विंश्वजित्सोम रण्यलित्‌। 
प्रजावद्रल्लमा भ॑र॥ ९॥ 


Le Pavasva gojid-asvajid-visvajit soma ranyajit. 
Prajavad-ratnama bhara. 


Victorious over senses and mind, victorious over 
will and ambition, victorious over the world, victorious 
over pleasure, pride and victory, O Soma, life of life, 
flow on and bring us jewels of children, family life and 
noble generations. 


पव॑स्वाद्धयो अदाभ्यः पवस्वौष॑धीभ्यः। 
पव॑स्व धिषणाभ्यः ॥ २॥ 


ps Pavasvadbhyo adabhyah pavasvausadhibhyah. 
Pavasva dhisanabhyah. 


O vitality of Soma, divine energy, flow on and 
energise us with fluent systemic energy of body and 
mind, redoubtable and undaunted power, flow in and 
on with herbs and sanatives, energise, purify and 
sanctify with self-controlled will and invincible will 
divine. 


त्वं सोम पव॑मानो विश्वानि दुरिता az 
कविः dle नि बर्हिषि 3 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 60 133 
Tvam soma pavamano visvani durita tara. 
Kavih sida ni barhisi. 

O Soma, pure and purifying energy and divine 
inspiration, cross over hurdles, eliminate evil tendencies 
and, O omniscient vision and creativity, be seated on 
the holy vedi and in the mind. 

पव॑मान स्वर्विदो जाय॑मानोऽभवो महान्‌ । 
इन्दो विश्वां अभीदंसि॥ ॥ 


4. Pavamana svarvido jayamano’bhavo mahan. 
Indo visvan abhidasi. 


O Soma, divine spirit of bliss, unborn, great, 
ever manifesting anew, lord controller and giver of 
heavenly joy, you are supreme over everything of the 
world. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 60 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Avatsara Kashyapa Rshi 


प्रगायुत्रेण गायत पव॑मानं विचर्षणिम्‌। 
इन्दुं सहस्त्र॑चक्षसम्‌॥ ९॥ 

I. Pra gayatrena gayata pavamanam vicarsanim. 
Indum sahasracaksasam. 

O devotees, sing and enthusiastically celebrate 
with gayatri hymns Soma, pure, purifying and ever 
flowing in cosmic dynamics, all moving, omnipresent 
Spirit of bliss and joy, lord of a thousandfold vision 
and voice of Infinity. 

तं त्वा सहस्त्र॑चक्षसमथो' सहस््र॑भर्णसम्‌। 
अति वारमपाविषुः ॥ २॥ 


134 RGVEDA 
2: Tam tva sahasr-acaksasam-atho sahasrabha- 
rnasam. Ati varam-apavisuh. 


That Supreme lord most adorable, of infinite 
vision and voice and infinite sustenance of life and 
existence, extremely lovable, worthiest of choice, you 
internalise and sanctify in the heart and soul. 
अति anradamt असिष्यदत्कलशं अभि धावति। 
इन्द्र स्य हार्याविशन्‌॥ ३ ॥ 

2 Ati varan pavamano asisyadat kalasan abhi 
dhavati. Indrasya hardyavisan. 


Soma, lord supreme of the dynamic flow of life, 
giver of choicest favours, pervading and shining at the 
core of human heart and soul, manifests and vitalises 
all forms of existence. 

इन्द्र॑स्य सोम राध॑से शं प॑वस्व विचर्षणे | 
प्रजावद्रेत आ भ॑र ॥४॥ 


4. Indrasya soma radhase Sam pavasva vicarsane. 
Prajavadreta a bhara. 


O Soma, Spirit of peace, power and bliss, all 
watching, all moving, bring us showers of peace and 
purity for the soul’s fulfilment, and vest us with creative 
vitality and virility for continuance of life through 
generations and generations. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 61 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Amahiyu Angirasa Rshi 


अया वीती परि era यस्त॑ इन्दो Wear | 
अवाहन्नवतीर्नव ।॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 61 135 


im Aya vit pari srava yasta indo madesva. 
Avahan navatirnava. 


O Soma, joyous ruler and protector of life, let 
this creative peace, presence, power and policy of yours 
prevail and advance, promoting those who join the 
happy advance, and repelling, dispelling, even 
destroying ninety-and-nine strongholds of darkness 
which obstruct the progress. 


पुर॑ः सद्य इत्थाधिये दिवोदासाय शम्ब॑रम्‌ । 
अध त्यं तुर्वशं यदुम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2 Purah sadya itthadhiye divodasaya sambaram. 
Adha tyam turvasam yadum. 


Go on thus always advancing for the people 
dedicated to positive good work in thought, policy and 
action, accelerating, controlling and balancing the forces 
of peace, progress and restless ambition. 


परिं णो अश्व॑मश्वविद्रोमं दिन्दो fava | 
क्षरा सहस्तरिणीरिषंः ॥ ३॥ 


a Pari no asvam-asvavid-gomad-indo hiranyavat. 
Ksara sahasrinirisah. 


And for us, let abundant streams of food, energy 
and wealth of a thousandfold riches and variety flow 
abounding in horses, transport and progress, lands, cows 
and beauties of culture and literature, gold and golden 
graces. O creator, ruler and controller of peace and joy, 
you know the values and dynamics of evolution and 
progress. 


136 RGVEDA 


पव॑मानस्य ते वयं पवित्र॑मभ्युन्दतः। 
सखित्वमा quae ४ ॥ 

4. Pavamanasya te vayam pavitram-abhyundatah. 
Sakhitvama vrnimahe. 


O Soma, pure and purifying lord and ruler of 
life, the streams of your peace, plenty and piety overflow. 
We pray for abiding love and friendship with you. 
ये ते पवित्र॑मूर्मयोऽ भिक्षरन्ति ear 
तेभिर्नः सोम STNG 

5: Ye te pavitram-urmayo ’bhiksaranti dharaya. 
Tebhirnah soma mrlaya. 

The streams of your piety, purity, peace and 
plenty rain in showers for the pure heart and soul in 


humanity. O Soma, with those showers, pray bless us 
with happiness, prosperity and all round well being. 


स न॑ः पुनान आ at tf वीरव॑तीमिष॑म्‌। 
ईशानः सोम विश्वतः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sa nah punana a bhara rayim viravatimisam. 
Isanah soma visvatah. 


O Soma, lord ruler and benefactor of the entire 
world, pure and purifier of all, bring us food and energy 
for body, mind and soul, versatile wealth and power 
abounding in brave and heroic progeny for future 
generations. 


एतमु त्यं दश feral मृजन्ति सिन्धुमातरम्‌ । 
सर्मादित्येभिरख्यत ।॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 61 137 


7. Etamu tyam dasa ksipo mrjanti sindhumataram. 
Samadityebhir-akhyata. 


Such as you are, O ruling soul, ten senses, ten 
pranas, ten subtle and gross modes of Prakrti and ten 
directions of space, all glorify you, mother source of all 
fluent streams of world energies shining with the zodiacs 
of the sun and all other brilliancies of nature and 
humanity. 


समिन्द्र॑णोत वायुना सुत एति पवित्र आ। 
सं सूर्यस्य रस्मिभिः॥८॥ 


8. Samindrenota vayuna suta eti pavitra a. 
Sam suryasya rasmibhih. 


O Soma, spirit of peace, plenty and energy of 
the universe, you flow with the wind and cosmic 
dynamics and, with the rays of the sun, you shine as the 
very light of life which, realised and internalised, abides 
vibrant in the pure heart and soul. 


स नो भगाय aera पूष्णो प॑वस्व मधुमान्‌ । 
ares वरुणे च।॥ ९॥ 


6 Sa no bhagaya vayave pusne pavasva madhu- 
man. Carurmitre varune ca. 

O Soma, beautiful, blissful, honey spirit of the 
sweets of existence, flow free and purifying for the glory 
of life, for vibrant forces, for the power of health and 
growth, and for the friendly and discriminative people 
among humanity. 


उच्या ते जातमन्ध॑सो दिवि षद्भूम्या द॑दे । 
उग्रं शर्म महि sta: ॥ ९०॥ 


138 RGVEDA 


10. Ucca te jatam-andhaso divi sadbhumya dade. 
Ugram sarma mahi sravah. 


O Soma, high is your renown, great your peace 
and pleasure, born and abiding in heaven, and the gift 
of your energy and vitality, the earth receives as the 
seed and food of life. 


एना विश्वान्यर्य आ द्युम्नानि मानुषाणाम्‌ 
सिषासन्तो वनामहे ९९॥ 
11. Enda visvanyarya ठ dyumnani manusanam. 
Sisasanto vanamahe. 
Soma is the lord of humanity and the earth. By 
virtue of him and of him, we ask and pray for all food, 


energy, honour and excellence for humanity, serving 
him and sharing all the benefits together. 


सन इन्द्राय यज्य॑वे वरुणाय wea: | 
वरिवोवित्परि aa ९२॥ 


12. Sana indraya yajyave varunaya marudbhyah. 
Varivovit pari srava. 


Soma, lord of peace and purity, power and piety, 
creator, controller and commander of the entire wealth 
of life, flow on by the dynamics of nature and bless us 
for the benefit of power and glory, yajna and unity 
among the yajakas, judgement and right values and the 
vibrant forces of law and order. 


उपो Yaa HS परिष्कृतम्‌ । 
इन्दुं देवा अयासिषुः ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Upo su jatam-apturam gobhir-bhangam pari- 
skrtam. Indum deva ayasisuh. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 61 139 


Soma, spirit of beauty, grace and glory, divinely 
created, nobly born, zealous, destroyer of negativity, 
beatified and celebrated in songs of divine voice, the 
noblest powers of nature and humanity adore, share and 
enjoy. 


तमिद्वर्धन्तु नो frit वत्सं संशिश्वरीरिव | 
य इन्द्र॑स्य Seay: ॥ ९४॥ 


14. = Tamidvardhantu no giro vatsam samSisvaririva. 
Ya indrasya hrdamsanih. 


As mother cows love, cheer and caress the calf, 
so let our songs of adoration celebrate and exalt Soma, 
love and grace of the heart of Indra, life’s glory on top 
of existence. 


अषौ णः सोम शं wea gare पिप्युषीमिषम्‌ | 
वधी समुद्रमुक्थ्यम्‌ ।॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Arsa nah soma sam gave dhuksasva pipyusimi- 
sam. Vardha samudram-ukthyam. 


O Soma, peaceable ruling powers of the world, 
rise, move forward and create conditions of peace and 
progress for the earth, work for nature, animal wealth 
and environment, advance human culture, create 
nourishing food and productive energy for comfort and 
common good and, thus, exalt the grace and glory of 
human life, rolling like the infinite ocean. 


पव॑मानो अजीजनदिवण्चित्रं न त॑न्यतुम्‌। 
ज्योतिर्वेश्वानरं बृहत्‌ ॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. Pavamano ajijanad-divascitram na tanyatum. 
Jyotir-vaisvanram brhat. 


140 RGVEDA 


Let Soma, progressive, active and zealous power 
dedicated to humanity and divinity, create the light and 
culture of universal expansive order from the light of 
heaven, sublime, awful and beautiful as the light and 
resounding roar of thunder and lightning. 


पव॑मानस्य ते रसो मदो! राजन्नदुच्छुनः | 
वि वारमव्यंमर्षति।॥ ९७॥ 

17. | Pavamanasya te raso mado rajannaducchunah. 
Vi varam-avyamarsati. 


O Soma, beauty, grace and joy of life, refulgent 
power, as you flow, pure and purifying, the pleasure 
you release, the ecstasy you inspire, and the peace you 
emanate free from negativities, radiates to the mind and 
soul of the loved celebrant. 


पव॑मान रसस्तव दक्षो वि राजति द्युमान्‌। 
ज्योतिर्विंश्वं TAZ ॥ ९८ ॥ 

18. Pavamana rasastava dakso vi rajati dyuman. 
Jyotir-visvam svardrse. 


O vibrant bliss of the world, the purity, pleasure 
and ecstasy of yours, versatile and refulgent, radiates 
over space and time as universal light of divinity for 
humanity to have a vision of the heaven of bliss. 


यस्ते मदो Quast पवस्वान्ध॑सा। 
देवावीरघशंसहा ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Yaste mado varenyas-tena pavasvandhasa. 
Devavir-aghasamsaha. 


The soma ecstasy that’s yours, that is the highest 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 61 141 


love of our choice. Flow on, radiate, and sanctify us 
beyond satiation with light divine for the soul, protector 
and saviour as you are of the holy and destroyer of sin 
and evil for the good. 


जक्चिरवृत्रम॑मित्रियं सस्निर्वाजं दिवेदिवे । 
गोषा ॐ अश्वसा अंसि॥ २०॥ 

20. Jaghnir-vrtram-amitriyam sasnir-vajam dive- 
dive. Gosa u asvasa asi. 
Soma, power and peace of divinity, destroyer 
of the evil and darkness of negative forces, constant 
catalytic force of nature in creative evolution day in 
and day out, you are the giver of earthly life and dynamic 
motion for onward progress. 
divert अरुषो भ॑व सूपस्थाभिर्न safer: | 
सीदञ्छ्येनो न योनिमा 1 २९॥ 

21. Sammislo aruso bhava supasthabhirna dhenu- 
bhih. Stdanchyeno na yonima. 


Be bright and blazing, integrated with creative 
powers of growth, perception and imagination, 
sojourning over space and time yet resting in your seat 
at the centre of existence. 


स प॑वस्व य आविथेन्द्रं वृत्राय eda | 
वव्रिवांसं महीरपः ॥ २२॥ 


22. Sa pavasva ya avithendram vrtraya hantave. 
Vavrivamsam mahirapah. 


Lord of the joy of existence, for constant 
conversion, elimination and destruction of negativity 


142 RGVEDA 


you protect and promote the creative, structural and 
developmental forces of nature in great evolutionary 
dynamics on way to positive growth and progress. 


सुवीरासो वयं धना जयेम सोम tea: | 
पुनानो वर्धं नो गिर॑ः ॥ २३॥ 


23. Suviraso vayam dhana jayema soma midhvah. 
Punano vardha no girah. 


O Soma, virile lord of creation and evolution, 
bless us so that, blest with noble warlike progeny, we 
may win the wealth of life. Pure and purifying lord, 
exalt our intellect and imagination and our songs of 
adoration for divinity. 


त्वोतांसस्तवाव॑सा स्याम॑ वन्वन्त आमुरः | 
सोमं व्रतेषु जागृहि ॥ २४॥ 

24. Tvotasas-tavavasa syama vanvanta amurah. 
Soma vratesu jagrhi. 


Safe under your power and protection, serving 
and celebrating you in adoration, let us be destroyers of 
negativities, jealousies and enmities. O Soma, ever 
awake as you are, keep us awake in the observance of 
divine law and discipline of holiness. 


अपघ्न्प॑वते मृधोऽ प सोमो अरराव्णः। 
गच्छन्निन्द्रस्य निष्कृतम्‌ ॥ २५॥ 


25. Apaghnan pavate mrdho’pa somo aravnah. 
Gacchann-indrasya niskrtam. 


Destroying the destroyers, eliminating the 
selfish, ungenerous hoarders and parasites, Soma, divine 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 61 143 


creativity in nature and humanity attains to its yajnic 
end and aim in the existential order created by 
omnipotent Indra. 


महो at राय आ भ॑र पव॑मान जही Fel: | 
रास्वेन्दो वीरवद्यशः ॥ २६ ॥ 


26. Maho no raya a bhara pavamana jahi mrdhah. 
Rasvendo viravadyasah. 


Lord Supreme of beauty, splendour and grace, 
pure and purifying, ever awake, bring us wealth of the 
highest order, eliminate the destructive adversaries and 
bless us with honour, excellence and fame, and continue 
the human family with noble and brave generations. 


न त्वां ङतं चन हुतो राधो दित्सन्तमा मिंनन्‌। 
यत्पुनानो मखस्यसे ॥ २७॥ 


27. NatvaSsatam (वाव hruto radho ditsantama minan. 
Yat punano makhasyase. 


Lord of peace and purity, purifier and saviour 
of the celebrants, when you please to bless the devotee 
with prosperity and fulfilment in life’s yajna, not a 
hundred adversaries can stop or frustrate you. 


पवस्वेन्दो वृषां सुतः कृधी नों यशसो जनें। 
विश्वा अप द्विषो जहि॥ २८ ॥ 

28. | Pavasvendo vrsa sutah krdhi no yaSaso jane. 
Visva apa dviso jahi. 


Soma, lord of purity and generosity, light and 
splendour, served and realised through yajnic life, 
protect and purify us, help us join the community of 


144 RGVEDA 


honour and excellence, ward off and eliminate all 
malignity, jealousy and enmity from our life. 
अस्य॑ ते सख्ये वयं तवेन्दो द्युम्न SAH | 
सासह्याम पृतन्यतः ॥ २९॥ 
29. Asya te sakhye vayam tavendo dyumna uttame. 
Sasahyama prtanyatah. 


O lord of truth, beauty and generosity, within 
the fold of your friendship and in the state of your 
highest honour and excellence, let us face and win over 
all the adversaries. 
या ते भीमान्यायुधा तिग्मानि सन्ति धूर्वणे। 
रक्षा समस्य नो निदः ॥ २३०॥ 

30. Ya te bhimanyayudha tigmani santi dhurvane. 
Raksa samasya no nidah. 


Whatever are your sharpest and most awful 
weapons for the destruction of destroyers, with those 
weapons, pray, protect us against all maligners and 
enemies. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 62 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Jamadagni Bhargava Rshi 
एते अंसूग्रमिन्द॑वस्तिरः ufestarsra: । 
विश्वान्यभि सौभ॑गा 2 


im Ete asrgram-indavas-tirah pavitram-aSsavah. 
Visvanyabhi saubhaga. 


These vibrant forces of humanity dedicated to 
peace and joy for all, above pettiness and negativities, 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 62 145 


move on with noble work for humanity toward the 
achievement of all wealth, honour and excellence. 


विश्चन्तो दुरिता पुरु सुगा diene वाजिनः | 
तना कृण्वन्तो अर्वते ॥ २॥ 


2. Vighnanto durita puru suga tokaya vajinah. 
Tana krnvanto arvate. 


Overcoming and eliminating the many evils and 
undesirables of life, creating peace and comfort, wealth 
and honour for vibrant humanity and their progress 
through future generations, they go on as warriors and 
pioneers of the human nation. 


कृण्वन्तो वरिवो गवेऽभ्यंरषन्ति सुष्टुतिम्‌। 
इव्छामस्मभ्यं संयतम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


Krnvanto varivo gave’bhyarsanti sustutim. 
Ilam-asmabhyam samyatam. 


Creating, collecting and preserving noble wealth 
and strength and sustenance for us and for our lands 
and cows and the honour and culture of our tradition, 
they go on winning appreciation and admiration. 


असव्यंशुर्मदायाऽप्सु दक्षो गिरिष्ठाः। 
श्येनो न योनिमासंदत्‌॥। ४ ॥ 


4. Asavyamsur-madaya’ psu dakso giristhah. 
Syeno na yonimasadat. 


The peace and pleasure of life’s ecstasy in 
thought and action, and the expertise well founded on 
adamantine determination is created by Savita, the 
creator, like the flying ambition of the soul and it is 


146 RGVEDA 

settled in its seat at the heart’s core in the personality. 
शुभ्रमन्धो देववातमप्सु धूतो नृभिः सुतः। 
स्वद॑न्ति गावः पयोभिः ॥ ५॥ ति 


5. Subhram-andho devavatam-apsu dhito nrbhih 
sutah. Svadanti gavah payobhih. 


The radiant food of ambition created by people, 
energised by noble leaders, sanctified in action, the 
people enjoy seasoned with delicacies of cow’s milk. 


आदीमश्वं न हेतारोऽ श्ंशुभन्नमृताय । 
मध्वो रसं सधमादे ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Adimasvam na hetaro’ susubhann-amrtaya. 


Madhvo rasam sadhamade. 


And this ecstasy of the fruit of active ambition, 
honey sweet of joint achievement in yajnic action, 
leading lights of the nation like yajakas exalt and glorify 
as the progressive sociopolitical order of humanity for 
permanence and immortal honour. 


यास्ते धारां मधुश्चुतोऽ सूंग्रमिन्द ऊतये । 
ताभिः पवित्रमासदः ॥ ७॥ 

Yaste dhara madhuscuto’srgram-inda utate. 
Tabhih pavitram-asadah. 


O Soma, spirit of ambition, action and glory of 
life, the honey sweet streams of your ecstasy flow for 
the protection and sanctification of life. With those 
streams come and flow in the holy yajnic hall of action. 


सो अर्षेन्द्राय पीतये तिरो रोर्माण्यव्यर्या । 
सीदन्योना वनेष्वा ॥ ८ ॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 62 147 


8. So arsendraya pitaye tiro romanyavyaya. 
Sidan yona vanesva. 


O Soma, spirit of holy action and life’s sanctity, 
settle in your seat of yajnic action in the nation’s heart 
for the honour and excellence of human values and flow 
free down the permanent annals of human history and 
tradition. 


त्वमिन्दो oR स्रव स्वादि अद्धिःरोभ्यः। 
वरिवोविद्‌ घृतं पय॑ः ॥ ९ ॥ 

a, Tvamindo pari srava svadistho angirobhyah. 
Varivovid-ghrtam payah. 


O Soma, dynamic spirit of action, joy and glory 
of life, harbinger of the best of wealth and honour, flow 
sweet and most delicious for vibrant sages and scholars 
and release streams of milk and ghrta for humanity. 


अयं विचर्षणिर्हितः पव॑मानः स चेतति। 
हिन्वान आप्यं बृहत्‌॥ ९०॥ 
10. Ayam vicarsanir-hitah pavamanah sa cetati. 


Hinvana apyam brhat. 


This Soma, divine spirit of action, honour and 
joy, 1s all watching, all beneficent, all inspiring, moving 
and dynamic, ever wakeful, setting in motion the flow 
on for attainment of vast achievable success and 
fulfilment. 


एष वृषा वृष॑व्रतः पव॑मानो अशस्तिहा । 
करद्वसूनि दाशुषे ।॥ ९९॥ 


11. Esa vrsa vrsavratah pavamano aSastiha. 
Karadvasuni dasuse. 


148 RGVEDA 


This virile giver of showers of fulfilment, the 
very commitment incarnate of divinity to beneficence, 
always flowing, creating and giving, destroyer of 
calumny and evil doers, creates and provides wealth, 
honour and excellence for the generous yajnic givers. 


आ प॑वस्व सहस्त्रिणं रयिं गोम॑न्तमण्विन॑म्‌। 
पुरुश्चन्द्रं पुरुस्पृहम्‌ ॥ ९२ ॥ 
12. 4 pavasva sahasrinam rayim gomantam-aSsvinam. 


Puruscandram purusprham. 


O Soma, come, flow and bring us piety and 
purity of a thousandfold wealth of lands, cows, literature 
and culture, horses, speed and progressive success all 
beautiful and universally cherished. 


एष स्य परि षिच्यते मर्मुज्यमान आयुभिः | 
उरुगायः कविक्रतुः ॥ ९३ ॥ 
13. Esa sya pari sicyate marmrjyamana ayubhih. 
Urugayah kavikratuh. 
Such is Soma, spirit of life’s beauty and glory, 
that flows pure, purifying and sanctifying on top, exalted 


and glorified by celebrant humanity, universally admired 
as poetic visionary, creator and harbinger of holiest 


glory. 
Geeta: grader विमानो रज॑सः cafe: | 
इन्द्राय पवते मद: ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Sahasrotih satamagho vimano rajasah kavih. 
Indraya pavate madah. 


Soma, divine spirit and power of a thousand 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 62 149 


ways of protection, a hundred modes of wealth and 
power, commanding controller of the energies of life, 
visionary creator of beauty and poetry, 1s dynamic, ever 
fluent, and it creates and releases joy and ecstasy for 
the honour of Indra, glory of the human social order. 


गिराजात इह स्तुत इन्दुरिन्द्राय धीयते। 
विर्योना वसताविव ni ९५॥ 


15. Gira jata iha stuta indurindraya dhiyate. 
Viryona vasataviva. 


Indra, the best man of supreme spirit and power 
of light, peace and bliss, born and raised here in the 
social order, initiated, admired and confirmed by the 
voice of the land is appointed in place and position of 
authority for a purpose like an arrow fixed on the bow 
for a target. 


पव॑मानः सुतो नृभिः सोमो वाज॑मिवासरत्‌। 
चमूषु शक्म॑नासदंम्‌॥ ९६ ॥ 
16. = Pavamanah suto nrbhih somo vajamivasarat. 


Camusu Sakmanasadam. 


Soma, the spirit and person of peace and joy, 
pure and purifying, selected and anointed by leading 
lights of the people, should move and act like power 
and competence incarnate in places and positions with 
his powers and obligations for the purpose specified. 


तं त्रिपृष्ठ Hare? wa युञ्जन्ति यात॑वे | 
ऋषीणां सप्त धीतिभिः ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Tam triprsthe trivandhure rathe yunjanti ydtave. 
Rsinam sapta dhitibhih. 


150 RGVEDA 


Him they enjoin to the three-level, triple 
structural chariot of the nation, with sevenfold 
intelligence, will and execution of the visionaries of 
life. 

तं सोतारो धनस्पृत॑ंमाशं वाजाय ara | 
हरिं हिनोत वाजिनम्‌ ९८ ॥ 


18. Tam sotaro dhanasprtam-asum vajaya yatave. 
Harim hinota vajinam. 


That leader and dashing pioneer, instant in 
response and action, winner of life’s battles for wealth, 
honour and excellence, destroyer of want and suffering, 
O performers of the nation’s Soma yajna, exalt and 
exhort for onward progress and fulfilment of humanity’s 
joint and common mission on earth. 


आविशन्कलशं सुतो विश्वा अर्षन्नभि fra: 1 
शूरो न गोषुं तिष्ठति ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Avisan kalasam suto visva arsannabhi sriyah. 
Suro na gosu tisthati. 


Taking over his positions of office, the leader, 
pioneer and ruler presides over lands and affairs of the 
order like a brave warrior moving forward and winning 
all wealth, honours, excellence and graces for the 
people, exhorted and exalted by them. 


आ त॑ इन्दो मदाय कं val दुहन्त्यायवः | 
देवा देवेभ्यो मधुं i २०॥ 


20. A ta indo madaya kam payo duhantyayavah. 
Deva devebhyo madhu. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 62 151 


O lord of peace, grace and joy, to your pleasure 
and the pleasure of holy powers, the people and the 
noblest brilliant people of the land create and distil the 
sweets and sanatives of peace and nourishment from 
the life around. 


आ नः सोमं पवित्र आ सृजता मधुंमत्तमम्‌। 
देवेभ्यो देवश्चुत्तमम्‌॥ २९॥ 


21. Anahsomam pavitra a srjata madhumatta-mam. 
Devebhyo devasruttamam. 


O performers and partners of humanity’s yajnic 
social order, create, preserve and extend our soma of 
the nation’s joy, beauty and grace, sweetest honeyed 
soma ever heard of by the divinities, on the sacred earth 
in honour of the holiest of holies. 


एते सोमा असृक्षत गृणानाः श्रव॑से महे। 
मदिन्तमस्य धार॑या ॥ २२॥ 


22. Ete soma asrksata grnanah 5८17८5८ mahe. 
Madintamasya dharaya. 


These somas of human beauty, culture and 
graces celebrated in song are created for the great 
sustenance of fame, honour and excellence of life by 
the stream of the most exciting annals of human history. 


अभि गव्यानि वीतये नृम्णा पुनानो steiha | 
सनद्वाजः परि स्रव ॥ २३॥ 


23. Abhi gavyani vitaye nrmna punano arsasi. 
Sanadvajah pari srava. 


O Soma, exciting peace, pleasure and excellence 


152 RGVEDA 


of the human nation, you move forward, pure, purifying 
and glorified, to achieve the wealth of lands and cows, 
culture and literature, and the jewels of human 
excellence for lasting peace and well being. Go on ever 
forward, creating, winning and giving food and 
fulfilment for the body, mind and soul of the collective 
personality. 


उत नो गोम॑तीरिषो विश्वां अर्ष परिष्टुभः | 
गृणानो SAAT ॥ २४ ॥ 
24. Utano gomatiriso visva arsa paristubhah. 
Grnano jamadagnina. 
O Soma, lord of peace, joy and grace, glorified 
by the sage of vision and lighted fire, bring us all the 
world’s wealth of food, energy and knowledge abundant 


in lands and cows and graces of culture of permanent 
and adorable value. 


पव॑स्व वाचो stra: सोम॑ चित्राभिरूतिभिः 
अभि विश्वानि काव्या ॥ २५॥ 
25. Pavasva vaco agriyah soma citrabhirutibhih. 
Abhi visvani kavya. 
O Soma, you are the leading light. With various 
and wonderful modes of protection and preservation, 
purify and sanctify the speech of humanity and let it 


flow free and fine. Be the same preserver, sanctifier and 
promoter of all the art and literature of the world. 


त्वं संमुद्रियां अपो frat वाच॑ ईरय॑न्‌। 
पव॑स्व विश्वमेजय ॥ २६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 62 153 


26. Tvam samudriya apo’griyo vaca trayan. 
Pavasva viSvamejaya. 


O mover, shaker and inspirer of the world, you 
are the first and foremost leading light, flow forth 
purifying, sanctifying and energising the oceanic 
vapours and waters of space, and inspiring and 
preserving the eternal Word and the speech, manners 
and cultures of the world of humanity. 


तुभ्येमा भुव॑ना कवे feet सोम तस्थिरे । 
तुभ्य॑मर्षन्ति सिन्ध॑वः ॥ २७॥ 


27. Tubhyema bhuvana kave mahimne soma tasthire. 
Tubhyamarsanti sindhavah. 


O Soma, lord of omniscient vision and creation, 
these world regions of the universe abide in constant 
steadiness in homage to you, and the seas on earth and 
in space roll in honour to you. 
प्रत feat न वृष्टयो धारां यन्त्यसश्चतः | 
अभि शुक्रामुं पस्तिर॑म्‌॥ २८ ॥ 

28. Pra te divo na vrstayo dhara yantyasascatah. 
Abhi sukram-upastiram. 


Like showers of light from heaven, the streams 
of your grace shower upon the bright world of humanity 
below on the wide earth, incessantly. 

इन्द्रायेन्दुं पुनीतनोग्रं दक्षाय साध॑नम्‌। 
ईशानं वीतिराधसम्‌॥ २९ ॥ 


29. = Indrayendum punitanogram daksaya sadha-nam. 
Isanam vitiradhasam. 


154 RGVEDA 


O people of the earth, performers of soma yajna, 
create, purify and energise the bright soma of passion, 
peace and vision of life in honour of Indra, ruler, 
versatile achiever and provider of the means and modes 
of life for all round happiness and well being. 


पव॑मान ऋतः कविः सोम॑: पवित्रमासंदत्‌। 
दधंत्स्तोत्रे सुवीर्यम्‌ ॥ ३०॥ 
30. Pavamana rtah kavih somah pavitram-asadat. 
Dadhat stotre suviryam. 
May Soma, pure, purifying and energising, 
eternal Truth, omniscient creator, peaceful and blissful, 
come and bless the pure heart and soul of the devotee 


vesting the song and spirit with strength and holy 
passion. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 63 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Nidhruvi Kashyapa Rshi 


आ प॑वस्व सहस्तरिणं रयिं सोम सुवीर्यम्‌। 
अस्मे श्रवांसि धारय ॥ ९॥ 
1. A pavasva sahasrinam rayim soma suviryam. 


Asme Sravamsi dharaya. 


Soma, ruling power of creative wealth, joy and 
fluent energy, let a thousandfold wealth of virility, 
courage and creativity, pure and purifying, flow to us 
and vest us with food, energy, fame and excellence of 
life. 


इषमूर्ज" च पिन्वस इन्द्राय मत्सरिन्त॑मः। 
चमूष्वा नि षीदसि un २॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 63 155 


2. Isamurjam ca pinvasa indraya matsarintamah. 
Camusva ni sidasi. 

Since you, ruler and most ecstatic creator, 
produce, develop and release an abundance of food, 
energy and knowledge to fullness and overflowing and 
preside over the resource centres and organisations of 
protection and production for the glory of humanity: 


सुत इन्द्राय विष्णवे सोम॑ः कलशे अक्षरत्‌ | 
मधुमां अस्तु वायवे 3 


9, Suta indraya visnave somah kalase aksarat. 
Madhuman astu vayave. 


Let that soma, plenteous overflow of peace, 
prosperity and joy, created, distilled and purified, roll 
in minds and human communities and be as sweet as 
honey for Indra, leaders of knowledge and power, 
Vishnu, generality of people all over the globe, and 
Vayu, vibrant powers of progress and pioneers of 
constant advancement in every field of activity. 


एते अंसृग्रमाशवोऽ fa हवरांसि aera: | 
सोमा ऋतस्य धार॑या ॥ 2 ॥ 

4. Ete asrgram-asavo’ti hvaramsi babhravah. 
Soma rtasya dharaya. 

These somas, powers of peace, prosperity and 
joy, dynamic, fast and determined, advance, overcoming 
forces of crookedness, intrigue and negativity by the 
path of universal truth and law. 

इन्द्र वर्धन्तो अप्तुरः कृण्वन्तो विश्वमार्यम्‌। 
अपघ्न्तो अराव्णः॥ ५॥ 


156 RGVEDA 


a Indram vardhanto apturah krnvanto visvamar- 
yam. Apaghnanto aravnah. 


They advance vibrant, relentless at top speed, 
glorifying life, making the world noble and nobler, 
reducing and eliminating the forces of uncreativity, 
negativity and selfishness. 


सुता अनु स्वमा रजोऽभ्यंर्षन्ति qual: | 
इन्द्रं गच्छन्त इन्द॑वः ne ॥ 


6. Suta anu svama rajo’bhyarsanti babhravah. 
Indram gaccanta indavah. 


These determined forces of peace and progress 
trained and committed to positive values of universality, 
vibrant and fast, advance in their own essential nature 
and realise the highest ideals of Indra, central power of 
united humanity and common values. 


अया प॑वस्व धारया यया सूर्यमरोचयः | 
हिन्वानो मानुषीरपः ॥ ७॥ 


a, Aya pavasva dharaya yaya suryam-arocayah. 
Hivnano manustrapah. 


Lord of the universe, by the energy with which 
you give light to the sun, by the same light and energy 
inspire the will and actions of humanity and purify us. 


अयुक्त सूर एत॑शं पव॑मानो मनावधि । 
अन्तरिश्चेण ada i ८ ॥ 


8. Ayukta sura etaSam pavamano manavadhi. 
Antariksena ydatave. 


The light of the world, pure, radiant and 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 63 157 


inspiring over man and mind, joins the man of super 
fast intelligence and inspires him to rise and fly over 
paths of the skies. 


उत त्या हरितो दश सूरो! अयुक्त यात॑वे | 
इन्दुरिन्द्र इतिं qa ९ ॥ 
५.१ Uta tya harito dasa suro ayukta yatave. 


Indurindra iti bruvan. 


And the man of brilliance and superfast 
intelligence, yoking ten motive forces to go over paths 
of the skies exclaims: “Indra is great, kind and 
gracious!” and he flies over the paths of his holy choice. 


परीतो ara सुतं गिर्‌ इन्द्राय wea 
अव्यो वारेषु सिञ्चत i ९०॥ 


10. Parito vayave sutam gira indraya matsaram. 
Avyo varesu sincata. 


And now, O celebrants, for the man of vibrant 
action and power and far reaching vision among the 
best of choice, pour out showers of sunniest and most 
exciting soma appreciation and the best of safe guards. 


पव॑मान विदा रयिमस्मभ्यं सोम दुष्टरम्‌। 
यो दूणाशो! वनुष्यता ॥ ९९॥ 
11. Pavamana vida rayimasm-abhyam soma dusta- 


ram. Yo dunaso vanusyata. 


O Soma, lord of light and vibrancy of spirit, 
pure, purifying and sanctifying, exalted and 
overflowing, bring us wealth, honour and excellence 
of the rarest order unassailable by uncreative destroyers. 


158 RGVEDA 


अभ्यर्ष सहस्त्रिणं रयिं गोम॑न्तमणश्विनंम्‌। 
अभि वाजमुत श्रव॑ः ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Abhyarsa sahasrinam rayim gomantamasvi-nam. 
Abhi vajamuta sravah. 


Let flow to us a thousandfold wealth of lands 
and cows, arts and culture, horses and progressive 
achievements. Bring us also speed, energy, and 
victorious success, and undying fame and excellence. 


सोमो देवो न gels द्विंभिः पवते सुतः। 
दर्धानः कलशो TAT ९३॥ 
13. Somo devo na suryo’dribhih pavate sutah. 


Dadhanah kalase rasam. 


Soma, self-existent divine power of creativity, 
radiates, energises and purifies all like the generous 
refulgent sun vesting the sap of life in every form of 
existence. 


एते धामान्यायीं शुक्रा ऋतस्य धार्या | 
वाजं गोम॑न्तमक्षरन्‌ ॥ ९४ ॥ 

14. Ete dhamanyarya sukra rtasya dharaya. 
Vajam gomantam-aksaran. 

These, showers of soma, divine creative power, 
great and dynamic, pure and powerful, rain down on 
earth in streams of life sap and motherly process of 
natural law, giving the milk of nourishment and vibrant 
fulfilment to all forms of existence. 

सुता sate विणो सोमासो दध्याशिरः। 
पवित्रमत्यक्षरन्‌ ॥ १५ ॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 63 159 


15.  Suta indraya vajrine somaso dadhyasirah. 
Pavitram-atyaksaran. 


The showers of soma, distilled and purified from 
the motherly womb of nature, for the mighty ruling order 
of life, wielding the thunderbolt of justice and 
dispensation, radiate and sanctify every pious heart and 
soul. 


प्र सोम मधुमत्तमो राये अष पवित्र आ। 
मदो यो दववीत॑मः॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. Pra 5777८ madhumattamo raye arsa pavitra a. 
Mado yo devavitamah. 


O Soma, lord of peace and bliss, let the highest 
joy, the best of honey sweets, most exhilarating and most 
divinely blest, flow free to the pure and pious soul of 
the celebrant for the sake of wealth, honour and 
excellence of life’s fulfilment. 

तमीं मृजन्त्यायवो हरिं नदीषु वाजिनंम्‌। 
इन्दुमिन्द्राय मत्सरम्‌ ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Tami mrjantyayavo harim nadisu vajinam. 
Indumindraya matsaram. 

That shower of soma, sparkling brilliant, most 
exhilarating, destroyer of suffering and pain, seeping 
in the heart and flowing in the streams of life, the yajakas 
exalt and adore for the glory of life. 


an प॑वस्व हिरंण्यवदश्वावत्सोम वीरव॑त्‌। 
वाजं गोमन्तमा ATU ९८ ॥ 


18. 4 pavasva hiranyavad-asvavat soma viravat. 
Vajam gomantama bhara. 


160 RGVEDA 


Flow, O Soma, purify and exhilarate us, bearing 
golden graces of beauty, progressive success, brave 
progeny, vibrant victory and the prosperity of lands, 
cows, arts and culture. 


परि वाजे न वाजयुमव्यो वारेषु fasac | 
इन्द्राय मधुमत्तमम्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 
19. Pari vaje na vajayum-avyo varesu sincata. 


Indraya madhumattamam. 


As in war you send up a heroic warrior to battle, 
so in times of peace of your choice create the sweetest 
and most brilliant soma of beauty and joy for the glory 
of the human order. 


कविं daa asf धीभिर्विप्रा steer: 1 
वृषा कनिक्रदर्षति ॥ 20 ॥ 

20. Kavim mrjanti marjyam dhibhir-vipra avasya- 
vah. Vrsa kanikrad-arsati. 
Vibrant sages and scholars who need assistance 
and protection exalt Soma, lord of peace and joy, 
adorable and omniscient visionary, with songs and 
creative actions, and the potent and generous lord 
responds in loud tones of heroism and moves forward 
to action. 
वृष॑णं धीभिरप्तुरं सोम॑मृतस्य धार॑या | 
मती विप्राः सम॑स्वरन्‌ ॥ २९॥ 

21.  Vyrsanam dhibhir-apturam somam-rtasya dha- 
raya. Mati viprah samasvaran. 


Vibrant poets, sages and scholars, with their 
thoughts, holy actions and spontaneous songs of truth 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 63 161 


and sincerity, celebrate Soma, generous giver, brave 
warrior and instant conqueror. 


पव॑स्व देवायुषगिन्द्रं गच्छतु ते Aa: | 
वायुमा रोह efor २२॥ 


22. Pavasva devayusag-indram gacchatu te madah. 
Vayuma roha dharmana. 


O Soma, self-refulgent and self-joyous lord of 
peace and bliss, let your presence vibrate and purify us. 
Let your ecstatic bliss reach Indra, the ruler, for the glory 
of mankind. May you with your divine power and 
presence emerge and rise in the heart of vibrant devotees. 


पव॑मान नि तोशसे रयिं सोम श्रवाय्य॑म्‌। 
प्रियः समुद्रमा विंश ॥ २३॥ 


23. Pavamana ni {0545८ rayim soma Sravayyam. 
Priyah samudrama viSa. 


Soma, pure and purifying omnificent lord, you 
grant ample and praise-worthy wealth, honour and 
excellence to the devotees. Pray, let your dear and 
blissful presence arise in the ocean-like time and space 
of human existence, inspire the depth of the heart and 
save the supplicant. 


अ पश्चन्प॑वसे Wel: क्रतुवित्सोम मत्सरः। 
नुदस्वादेवयुं जन॑म्‌ ॥ २२ ॥ 


24. Apaghnan pavase mrdhah kratuvit soma matsa- 
rah. Nudasvadevayum janam. 


O Soma, lord of absolute peace, purity, power 
and holiness of action, omnipotent and blissful, you 
vibrate in existence destroying sin and evil. Pray impel 


162 RGVEDA 


the impious people to truth, piety and creative 
generosity, or punish and eliminate them like hurdles 
in the creative paths of piety and rectitude. 


पव॑माना असृक्षत सोमाः शुक्रास इन्द॑वः | 
अभि विश्वानि काव्या ॥ २५॥ 


25. Pavamana asrksata somah sukrasa indavah. 
Abhi visvani kavya. 

Streams of bright energising soma flow, pure 
and purifying, among the songs of universal poetry of 
divinity. 

पव॑मानास sera: शुभ्रा अ॑सूग्रमिन्द॑वः। 


aed विश्वा अप द्विष॑ः ॥ २६॥ 
26. Pavamanasa asavah subhra asrgam-indavah. 
Ghnanto visva apa dvisah. 


Pure and purifying, instant and effective, bright 
and blazing streams of soma like warriors of nature flow 
and advance in action, creating peace and plenty for 
life, dispelling and eliminating all jealous and 
destructive forces from society. 


पव॑माना दिवस्पर्यन्तरिक्षादसृक्षत। 
पृथिव्या अधि सान॑वि ॥ २७॥ 


27. Pavamana divasparyantariksad-asrksata. 
Prthivya adhi sanavi. 


Pure and purifying Somas, evolutionary powers 
of nature, divinity and humanity, creative, protective 
and defensive, are created from the regions of light 
above, the middle regions and the earth and, on top of 
the course of evolution and progress, they remain ever 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 63 163 
active for life in the service of divinity. 


पुनानः सोम धार येन्दो विश्वा अप fered: | 
जहि रक्षांसि सुक्रतो ॥ २८ ॥ 


28. Pundanah soma dharayendo visva apa sridhah. 
Jahi raksamsi sukrato . 


O Soma, creative divinity, bright, blissful and 
dynamic, pure and purifying spirit of holy action, flow 
by the stream and shower of life and grace, ward off all 
hurdles of negativity and eliminate all evil forces of 
destruction. 


अपघ्नन्त्सोम tart sad कनिंक्रदत्‌। 
द्युमन्तं SAAT २९॥ 
29. Apaghnantsoma raksaso’bhyarsa kanikradat. 
Dyumantam Susmam-uttamam. 
O Soma, spirit of creative peace and prosperity, 
dispelling and eliminating negative and destructive 
forces, roaring with success of positive progress, let 


streams of peace and prosperity flow full with highest 
strength, sweetness and light. 


अस्मे वसूनि धारय सोम॑ दिव्यानि पार्थिवा। 
इन्दो विश्वानि art 30 ul 

30. Asme vasuni dharaya soma divyani parthiva. 
Indo visvani varya. 


O Soma, lord of peace, prosperity and divine 
bliss, bring us all wealth, honour and excellence of the 
earth and heavenly light. O spirit of beauty and grace, 
bless us with all the wealth of success and fulfilment of 


164 RGVEDA 


our highest choice on earth and beyond. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 64 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Kashyapa Maricha Rshi 


वृषा सोम gat अंसि वृषां देव quad: | 
वृषा ध्मीणि दधिषे ॥ ९॥ 

if Vrsa soma dyuman asi vrsa deva vrsavratah. 
Vrsa dharmani dadhise. 

O Soma, divine spirit of peace and prosperity, 
you are virile, omnipotent and generous, refulgent and 
abundant giver of light, self-committed to showers of 
generosity for humanity and all life in existence. O 
generous and mighty lord, you alone ordain, maintain 
and sustain the laws of Dharma in nature and humanity. 


quia वृष्ण्यं शवो वृषा वनं वृषा मद्‌: | 
सत्यं वृषन्वृषेदसि ॥ २॥ 

2. Vrsnaste vrsnyam savo vrsa vanam vrsa madah. 
Satyam vrsan vrsedasi. 

Generous as you are, your strength rains in 
showers, generous is your plenitude, generous is the 
bliss of your joy and ecstasy. Eternal truth, shower of 
generosity, you are the ultimate generous giver of the 
joy of life. 

अश्वो न चक्रदो वृषा सं गा इन्दो समर्वतः | 
विनो राये दुरो afer ३॥ 


3; Asvo na cakrado vrsa sam ga indo samarvatah. 
Vi no raye duro vrdhi. 


Like the roar of thunder you are loud and bold 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 64 165 


in manifestation in existence. O dynamic presence of 
infinite light and generous flow of energy, you pervade 
and energise our perceptions and our will for action and 
advancement. Pray open and widen the doors of wealth, 
honour and excellence for us all. 


असक्षत प्र वाजिनो गव्या aratar अश्वया | 
शुक्रासो! वीर याशवंः ॥  ॥ 


4. Asrksata pra vajino gavya 50171450 aSsvaya. 
Sukraso virayasavah. 


Vibrant heroes blest with the soma spirit of 
peace, progress and brilliance, pure and potent, inspired 
with ambition for lands, cows and culture, horses, 
advancement and achievement, and advancement of the 
brave generations of humanity move forward with the 
spirit of generous creativity. 


शुम्भमाना ऋतायुभिमज्यमाना गभस्त्योः | 
पव॑न्ते वारे अव्यये ।। ५॥ 
39, Sumbhamana rtayubhir-mrjyamand gabhas-tyoh. 
Pavante vare avyaye. 
Blest and beatified by lovers of truth and divine 
law, seasoned and tempered by light of the sun and heat 
of fire, heroic men of the soma spirit of peace and 


prosperity work vibrant on choice positions in the 
imperishable order of divine existence. 


ते विश्वा दाशुषे वसु सोमा दिव्यानि पार्थिवा । 
पव॑न्तामान्तरिश्ष्या ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Te visva dasuse vasu soma divyani parthiva. 
Pavantamantariksya. 


166 RGVEDA 


May the soma spirits of nature and humanity 
initiate, purify and direct all world’s wealth, honour and 
excellence, peace and progress, of earthly, heavenly and 
middle order of the skies to flow to the generous and 
creative people of yajna and self-sacrifice. 


पव॑मानस्य विश्ववित्प्र ते सगौ असृक्षत | 
सूर्यस्येव न र॒श्मय॑ः ॥ ७ ॥ 

qs Pavamanasya visvavit pra te sarga asrksata. 
Suryasyeva na rasmayah. 


Lord of the universe, pure, refulgent and 
purifying, as you manifest in the flux of existence your 
creations of peace and beauty flow and radiate like rays 
of the sun. 


केतुं कृण्वन्दिवस्परि विश्वां रूपाभ्यंर्षसि। 
समुद्रः सोम पिन्वसे ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Ketum krnvan divaspari visva rupabhyarsasi. 
Samudrah soma pinvase. 


Creating the lights of your existential presence 
over the regions of heaven above, you reveal your power 
by the beauty of forms you create, O Soma, universal 
home of infinite bliss, and expand the possibilities of 
life’s joy. 

हिन्वानो वाच॑मिष्यसि पव॑मान विधंर्मणि। 
अक्रन्दिवो न सूर्यः ॥ ९ ॥ 


9; Hinvano vacamisyasi pavamana vidharmani. 
Akran devo na suryah. 


Invoked in yajna and inspiring songs of 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 64 167 


adoration you love, pure, purifying and pervasive in 
the world of various forms and functions, you radiate 
like the refulgent sun and transcend the world in 
existence. 


इन्दः पविष्ट॒ चेत॑नः प्रियः कवीनां मती । 
सृजदश्वं Tata ॥ ९०॥ 

10. Induh pavista cetanah priyah kavinam mati. 
Srjadasvam rathiriva. 


Soma, lord of bliss, is self-refulgent and holy, 
purest and most purifying, omniscient, dearest love of 
the poets and celebrants, and wisest of the wise. Creating 
the dynamic world of matter, energy and mind, he abides 
like the master of the universal chariot. 


ऊर्मिर्यस्ते पवित्र आ देवावीः पर्यक्षरत्‌। 
सीद॑न्रृतस्य योनिमा ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Urmiryaste pavitra त devavih paryaksarat. 
Sidannrtasya yonima. 


The light divine that is yours, most heavenly, 
radiates blissfully in the pious heart and soul, abiding 
in the seat of its own law of eternal truth. 


a al अर्ष पवित्र आ मदो यो दववीत॑ंमः। 
इन्दविन्द्राय पीतये ।॥। ९२॥ 


12. Sanoarsa pavitra a mado yo devavitamah. 
Indavindraya pitaye. 


Let that divine ecstasy which is most heavenly 
radiate and vibrate in our pure heart, O lord of beauty 
and bliss, for the fulfilment of the soul. 


168 RGVEDA 


इषे प॑वस्व धार॑या मृज्यमानो मनीषिभिः 1 
इन्दो रुचाभि गा इहि॥ ९३॥ 


13. Ise pavasva dharaya mrjyamano manisibhih. 
Indo rucabhi ga ihi. 


Shower in streams of purity and power and bless 
us with food, energy and fulfilment, adored and exalted 
as you are by sages, scholars and thoughtful devotees. 
O lord of bliss and beauty, come and, with the light and 
joy of your presence, sanctify our senses and mind, 
vision and intelligence. 


पुनानो वरिवस्कृध्यूर्जं जनाय गिर्वणः | 
हरे सृजान आशिरम्‌ ex ॥ 


14. = Punano varivaskrdhyurjam janaya girvanah. 
Hare srjana asiram. 


Pure and purifying, adorable, adored and 
exalted, saviour from sin and evil, want and suffering, 
create the best of wealth, energy and ecstasy for 
humanity, giving all round joy and well being for body, 
mind and soul. 


पुनानो देववीतय इन्द्र॑स्य याहि Prepay 
द्युतानो ahaha: ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Punano devavitaya indrasya yahi niskrtam. 
Dyutano vajibhiryatah. 


Purified, bright and clear Soma, songs of 
adoration for service of divinity, go upto the presence 
of Indra, lord omnipotent. Shining powerful, sent up, 
inspired by enthusiastic celebrants, rise up to divinity. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 64 169 


प्र हिन्वानास इन्दवोऽ च्छा समुद्रमाशवः | 
धिया जूता असृक्षत ॥ ९६॥ 

16. Pra hinvanasa indavo’ccha samudramasavah. 
Dhiya juta asrksata. 


Soma songs of adoration, inspired streams of 
the joyous spirit of poetry, bright and energetic, move 
to infinite divinity and, energised by thought, pleasure 
and awareness, flow in concentration to Indra, 
omnipotent soul. 


wise आयवो वृथां समुद्रमिन्द॑वः। 
SAGA योनिमा ॥ ९७॥ 
17. Marmrjanasa ayavo vrtha samudramindavah. 


Agmannrtasya yonima. 


Purified and sanctified devotees, bright, clear 
and radiant, spontaneously concentrate on the infinite 
oceanic presence of divinity and reach the central origin 
of the moving universe and the dynamics of existence. 


परि णो याह्यस्मयुर्विश्वा वसून्योजसा | 
पाहि नः शर्म॑ वीरव॑त्‌॥ ९८ ॥ 

18. (दलं no yahyasmayurvisva vasunyojasa. 
Pahi nah Sarma viravat. 


O lord of peace, light and beauty divine, lover 
of us all, bring us all wealths of the world with the light 
and lustre of glory. Protect our peace and home blest 
with brave progeny. 


मिमाति afatder: पदं asi set FH: | 
प्र यत्स॑मुद्र आहितः ॥ ९९ ॥ 


170 RGVEDA 


19.  Mimati vahniretasah padam yujana rkvabhih. 
Pra yat samudra ahitah. 

When the mind, agile communicative medium 
of experience and awareness, joins the object of 
meditation by virtue of all yajnic senses collected and 
concentrated in the ocean-like depth of infinity, the yogi 
reaches divine consciousness, voluable, in a state of 
undisturbed stability. 


आ यद्योनिं“हरिण्ययमाशुऋतस्य सीद॑ति | 
जहात्यप्रचेतसः ॥ २०॥ 

20. <A yadyonim hiranyayam-asurrtasya sidati. 
Jahatyapracetasah. 


When the soul is established in the golden light 
of divinity which is the centre origin of the flow of 
existence, then without any delay it eliminates all junk 
of ignorance. 
अभि वेना अंनूषतेयंक्चन्ति wala: | 
मज्जन्त्यविचेतसः ॥ २९॥ 

21. Abhi vena anusateyaksanti pracetasah. 
Majjantyavicetasah. 


Enlightened sages adore, exalt and join the 
divine infinity of bliss while the ignorant get drowned 
in the existential ocean they fail to cross. 


इन्द्रायेन्दो मरुत्वते पव॑स्व मधुंमत्तमः। 
ऋतस्य योनिंमासद॑म्‌॥ २२॥ 


22. Indrayendo marutvate pavasva madhumatt-amah. 
Rtasya yonimasadam. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 64 171 


O Soma, enlightened joy of spiritual purity and 
bliss, flow into the consciousness of the vibrant soul of 
the devotee as an offering to Indra, lord of universal 
power and joy who abides at the heart of universal truth 
and law of existence. 


तं त्वा faut वचोविदः परिष्कृण्वन्ति aera: | 
सं त्वां मृजन्त्यायवः ॥ २३॥ 


23. Tamtvavipra vacovidah pariskrnvanti vedha-sah. 
Sam tva mrjantyayavah. 


O Soma, lord of purity, joy and power of the 
world, wise sages and the Vedic voice adore, exalt and 
glorify you, and the people of knowledge concentrate 
on you as the sole object of meditation. 


रसं ते मित्रो अर्यमा पिब॑न्ति वरुणः कवे। 
पव॑मानस्य Wed: ॥ २४॥ 


24. Rasam te mitro aryama pibanti varunah kave. 
Pavamanasya marutah. 


O creative poet of existence and omniscience, 
pure, purifying and ever flowing divinity, Mitra, 
enlightened all-loving people, Aryama, men of 
judgement and discrimination, Varuna, people of 
rectitude worthy of universal choice, Maruts, vibrant 
warriors of peace and heroes of karmic progress, all 
drink and enjoy the nectar sweets of your presence in 
company. 


त्वं सोम विपश्चितं पुनानो वाच॑मिष्यसि । 
इन्दो सहस्त्र॑भर्णसम्‌ ॥ २५॥ 


25. Tvam soma vipascitam punano vacamisyasi. 
Indo sahasrabharnasam. 


172 RGVEDA 


O Soma, Indu, pure and purifying joy of divinity, 
you love, inspire and energise the Vedic voice of wisdom 
and omniscience which bears a thousand jewels of 
knowledge and science. 


उतो सहस््र॑भर्णसं वाचं सोम मखस्युव॑म्‌ । 
पुनान इन्दवा भ॑र ॥ २६॥ 

260. Uto sahasra-bharnasam vacam soma makha- 
syuvam. Punana indava bhara. 


Indu, Soma, pure, purifying and sanctifying 
omnipresence of divinity, bear and bring us the divine 
voice of a thousand beauties, wealths and graces, the 
giver of infinite gifts of yajna. 
पुनान ईन्दवेषां Yee जनानाम्‌ । 
प्रियः समुद्रमा विंश ॥ २७॥ 

27. Punana indavesam puruhiuta jananam. 
Priyah samudrama viSa. 


Indu, pure, purifying dearest presence invoked 
by all, bless the sacred heart of all these people, the 
heart that is deep as the ocean of love and faith. 


दविद्युतत्या रुचा deta कृपा | 
सोमाः शुक्रा गवाशिरः ॥ २८ ॥ 
28. Davidyutatya ruca paristobhantya krpa. 
Somah sukra gavasirah. 
Pure, powerful and heavenly radiations of 


divinity flow with beauty, glory and shining sublimity 
of grace, blessing the mind and soul of the supplicants. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 65 173 


हिन्वानो हेत॒भिर्यत आ वाजं वाज्य॑क्रमीत्‌। 
सीद॑न्तो वनुषो! यथा ॥ २९॥ 

29. _Hinvano hetrbhiryata a vajam vajyakramit. 
Sidanto vanuso yatha. 
Just as a warrior spurred on by ambition and 
love of victory rushes to the field and wins the battle, 
and just as ardent yajakas sit on the vedi and win their 
object of yajna, so does the soul assisted by senses, mind 
and intelligential vision win the target of its meditation 
on Om, the presence of divinity. 
ऋधक्सोम स्वस्तये संजग्मानो fea: कविः | 
पव॑स्व सूर्यो दृशो ॥ Bo ॥ 

30. Rdhak soma svastaye samjagmano divah kavih. 
Pavasva suryo drse. 


O Soma, instant and gracious divinity, creative, 
omniscient and constant radiation of heavenly light, the 
very sun for the vision of humanity, pray flow on with 
the radiance and the bliss, purify and sanctify our mind 
and soul. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 65 


Pavamana Soma Devata, Bhrgu Varuni or Jamadagni 
Bhargava Rshi 


हिन्वन्ति area: स्वसारो जामयस्पतिम्‌ । 
महामिन्दुं महीयुवः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Hinvanti suramusrayah svasaro jamayaspatim. 
Mahamindum mahiyuvah. 


Just as lights of the dawn like loving sisters fore- 


174 RGVEDA 


run and herald and exalt the sun, so do the senses, mind 
and intelligence together in service of the great soul 
reveal the power and presence of the supreme lord of 
the universe, blissful father sustainer of existence. 


पव॑मान Saleen देवो देवेभ्यस्परि | 
विश्वा वसून्या विंश ॥ २॥ 

me Pavamana rucaruca devo devebhyaspari. 
Visva vasunya visa. 
May the self-refulgent lord supreme over all 
divinities of nature and humanity, pure and purifying, 
by his divine beauty and glory bring us all wealth, 
honour and excellence of the world and bless our heart 
and soul. 
आ प॑वमान सुष्टुतिं वृष्टं देवेभ्यो ga: | 
इषे प॑वस्व संयत॑म्‌॥ ३॥ 

3. A pavamana sustutim vrstin devebhyo duvah. 
Ise pavasva samyatam. 


O lord pure and purifying, come to accept our 
joint song of adoration and homage and bring us the 
shower of your kindness and grace, honour and 
excellence for the sustenance and advancement of the 
generous nobilities of humanity. 


वृषा ह्यसि भानुना द्युमन्तं त्वा हवामहे । 
पव॑मान स्वाध्यः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Vrsa hyasi bhanuna dyumantam tva havamahe. 
Pavamana svadhyah. 


O lord of purity, purifier and sanctifier of heart 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 65 175 


and soul, you are supremely generous and refulgent by 
your own light and glory. We, celebrants by our holiest 
thoughts and words, invoke and adore you for the light 
and wisdom of your divine glory and generosity. 


आ प॑वस्व सुवीर्यं मन्द॑मानः स्वायुध | 
इहो ष्विन्दवा ग॑हि ॥ ५॥ 


9, A pavasva suviryam mandamanah svayudha. 
Tho svindava gahi. 


O divine spirit of peace, purity and abundance, 
joyous wielder of noble arms, come to us and let pure, 
creative courage and virility flow in abundance for us. 


gare: परिषिच्यसे qe गभ॑स्त्योः | 
द्रुणा सधस्थमश्नुषे ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Yadadbhih parisicyase mrjyamano gabhastyoh. 
Druna sadhastham-asnuse. 
O soul of peace and purity, when you are 
honoured and anointed with the waters of divine 
sanctity, refined with the light of knowledge and 
tempered by yajnic fire, then by virtue of your own 
progress you attain to your real, innate and rightful 
position in society. 
प्र सोमाय व्यश्ववत्पव॑मानाय Tere | 
महे सहस्त्र॑चक्षसे ॥ ७॥ 

ds Pra somaya vyasvavat pavamanaya gayata. 
Mahe sahasracaksase. 


O celebrants, like people of real attainments, 
sing songs of adoration in honour of Soma, lord giver 


176 RGVEDA 


of peace and purity, honour and achievement, the lord 
that is great, who watches everything with a thousand 
eyes. 


यस्य वर्णी मधुश्चुतं हरि हिन्वन्त्यद्िभिः। 
इन्दुमिन्द्राय पीतये ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Yasya varnam madhuscutam harim hinvantya- 
dribhih. Indumindraya pitaye. 


Whose essential being and existential identity, 
honeyed sweet of infinite kindness, destroyer of want 
and suffering, devotees adore, exalt and move with holy 
songs and yajnic actions for the satisfaction and 
beatification of the soul. 


तस्य॑ ते ar! वयं विश्वा धनानि जिग्युषंः । 
सखित्वमा quien eu 

9. Tasya te vajino vayam visva dhanani jigyusah. 
Sakhitvama vrnimahe. 
Of you, we, seekers of progress and victories of 
peace and purity, choose to ask for all wealths, honours 
and excellence of the world and, above all, pray for 
friendship and spiritual affinity. 
aut पवस्व धार॑या मरुत्व ते च मत्सरः | 
विश्वा दर्धान ओज॑सा ॥ ९०॥ 

10. Vrsa pavasva dharaya marutvate ca matsarah. 
Visva dadhana ojasa. 


O lord of absolute abundance and creativity, 
sustainer of all worlds of existence by absolute power 
and grandeur, you are all bliss for the people of vibrancy, 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 65 177 


action and gratitude. Pray bring us showers of peace, 
purity and power for the good life. 


तं त्वां धर्तसमोण्यो ३: पव॑मान cad oi 
हिन्वे वाजेषु वाजिनम्‌ ।॥ ९९॥ 


11. Tamtva dhartaram-onyoh pavamana svardr-sam. 
Hinve vajesu vajinam. 


That lord sustainer of earth and heaven, pure 
and purifying sanctifier, watchful guardian and giver 
of bliss, absolute victor in the evolutionary battles of 
existence, we invoke, exalt and glorify for our good 
and advancement. 


अया चित्तो विपानया हरिः पवस्व धास्या। 
युजं वाजेषु चोदय ॥ 22 11 

12. Aya citto vipanaya harih pavasva dharaya. 
Yujam vajesu codaya. 
Invoked and moved by this earnest and vibrant 
adoration, pray bless us with this shower of purity, peace 
and bliss. You are the destroyer of want and suffering. 
Pray inspire, strengthen and fortify the friend, your 
instrument, in the battles of life. 
आ न॑ इन्दो महीमिषं पवस्व fasadsta: | 
अस्मभ्यं सोम गातुवित्‌ ॥ ९३ ॥ 

13. A na indo mahimisam pavasva visvadarsatah. 
Asmabhyam soma gatuvit. 


Indu, lord of peace, purity and bliss, light of the 
world for universal humanity, bring us showers of peace 
and purity, food and energy, power and prosperity, and 


178 RGVEDA 


knowledge of the world in great abundance. O Soma, 
you are the absolute master of all the ways of the world 
and unfailing guide for us. 


आ कलां अनूषतेन्दो धाराथिरोज॑सा। 
एन्द्रस्य पीतये विटा ॥ ९४ ॥ 

14. A kalasa anisatendo dharabhir-ojasa. 
Endrasya pitaye visa. 
Indu, lord of light, peace and purity, grateful 
minds and souls await and adore you in hope and 
expectation. Pray come and bless them with showers of 
joyous power, grandeur and spiritual might for 
fulfilment of the soul. 
यस्य॑ ते मद्यं रसं तीव्रं दुहन्त्यद्विभिः। 
स पवस्वाभिमातिहा ॥ ९५॥ 

15. Yasya te madyam rasam tivram duhantyadri-bhih. 
Sa pavasvabhimatiha. 


Whose exciting nectar, sharp and exalting in 
experience, devoted supplicants distil from meditation 
on life, that same Soma, lord of power and purity, 
destroyer of negativities, adversaries and enemies, we 
pray, may come, save and bless us with peace, purity 
and security. 


राजा मेधाभिरीयते पव॑मानो मनावधि | 
अन्तरिश्चेण यात॑वे ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Raja medhabhiriyate pavamano manavadhi. 
Antariksena yatave. 


Refulgent Soma, divine spirit of power and 


MANDAL - १ / SUKTA - 65 179 


peace, pure, purifying and vibrant, is attained through 
intelligential communion in meditation for reaching the 
higher stages of existence into the middle sphere 
between the earth and the highest regions of bliss. 


आ न॑ इन्दो शतण्विनं गवां पोषं caved 
वहा भग॑त्तिमूतयें ।। ९७॥ 


17. Ana indo Satagvinam gavam posam svasvyam. 
Vaha bhagattimitaye. 


Indu, lord of joy, beauty and prosperity, bring 
us a hundredfold wealth and pleasure of divine service 
and dedication, rising prosperity of cows and horses, 
enlightenment and advancement, progress and 
achievement, all for peace and security. 


आ न॑: सोम सहो जुवो रूपं न वर्चसे भर। 
सुष्वाणो देववीं तये ॥ ९८ ॥ 

18. Anah soma saho juvo rupam na varcase bhara. 
Susvano devavitaye. 

Soma, lord of vital creativity and lustrous 
vigour, and fluent power and progressive energy, bring 
us the courage of constancy, forbearance, vibrant vigour 
and enthusiasm, and an impressive personality for the 


sake of illuminative lustre of life so that we may follow 
the path of divinity while living here and after. 


अषौ सोम द्युमत्तमोऽ भि द्रोणानि रोरुवत्‌। 
सीद॑ञ्छ्येनो न योनिमा ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Arsa soma dyumattamo’bhi dronani roruvat. 
Sidanchyeno na yonima. 


180 RGVEDA 


Soma, spirit of divine power and peace of purity, 
most potent and most refulgent, come roaring at the 
speed and force of thunder and abide in the heart of the 
faithful celebrant like the eagle in its nest, purify and 
sanctify the soul. 


अप्सा इन्द्राय वायवे वरुणाय Wea: | 
सोमो अर्षति विष्णवे 1 २०॥ 


20. Apsa indraya vayave varunaya marudbhyah. 
Somo arsati visnave. 


Soma, spirit of the innate peace and power of 
divinity, by its own will and energy, radiates to the heart 
and soul of the devotee to vest it with the power of 
cosmic energy (Indra), the speed of winds (Vayu), 
pioneering spirit of the storm (Maruts), the depth of 
space (Varuna), and the love of omnipresent divinity 
(Vishnu). 


इषं तोकाय॑ नो दध॑दस्मभ्यं सोम विश्वतः | 
आ प॑वस्व स हस्तरिण॑म्‌॥ 22 ॥ 


21. Isam tokaya no dadhad-asmabhyam soma 
visvatah. A pavasva sahasrinam. 


O Soma, bearing a thousandfold gifts of food, 
energy, knowledge and will of initiative and assertion 
from all sides of the world, pray flow to bless us and 
our future generations with the power and peace of 
divinity. 


ये सोमासः परावति ये statafa सुन्विरे। 
ये वादः शर्यणाव॑ति॥ २२॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 65 181 


22. Ye somasah paravati ye arvavati sunvire. 
Ye vadah Saryanavati. 


Whatever gifts of power and peace for humanity 
are created in the farthest nature or in this world of 
existence or in that unknown transcendent source of all 
that is in existence, all that, O Soma, lord of supreme 
power and unfathomable peace, bear and bring for us 
and our future generations. 


य आजीकिषु कृत्व॑सु ये मध्ये पस्त्यानाम्‌। 
ये वा जनेषु पञ्चसु ।॥ २३ ॥ 
23. Ya arjikesu krtvasu ye madhye pastyanam. 


Ye va janesu pancasu. 


Whatever powers of peace and energy are 
created and distilled in active forces, in holy acts, in the 
homes or among all five peoples of humanity, we pray, 
may flow and sanctify us. 


ते नों वृष्टं दिवस्परि पव॑न्तामा सुवीर्यम्‌। 
सुवाना देवास इन्द॑वः ॥ २४॥ 
24. Te no vrstim divaspari pavantama suviryam. 
Suvana devasa indavah. 
May the divinities of nature and humanity, pure, 
vibrant and blissful, activated, seasoned and cultured 
anywhere, bring us showers of power, virility and 


creativity from the lights of heaven and energise and 
sanctify us. 


पव॑ते हर्यतो हरस्गणानो sae | 
हिन्वानो गोरधिं त्वचि ।॥ २५॥ 


182 RGVEDA 


25. Pavate haryato harir-grnano jamadagnina. 
Hinvano goradhi tvaci. 


Soma, lord of power, peace and bliss, saviour 
and sanctifier of heart and soul, destroyer of suffering, 
lover of all, adored and exalted by sages and scholars 
of vision and wisdom, flows and sanctifies life and, 
presiding over the body, energises and sanctifies the 
organs of perception, volition and decision. 


प्र Verret वयोजुवो हिन्वानासो न aaa: | 
श्रीणाना अप्सु ASH ॥ २६॥ 


26. Pra sukraso vayojuvo hinvanaso na saptayah. 
Srinana apsu mrnjata. 


Pure and powerful, vital and vitalising, 
stimulated and stimulating, energised and energising, 
seasoned and cleansing, sanctified and sanctifying 
somas, natural and human powers, reflect in the actions 
and achievements of humanity like the seven rays of 
light, and they shine and enlighten the world to move 
on with its daily rounds. 


तं त्वा सुतेष्वाभुवो हिन्विरे देवतातये | 
स प॑वस्वानयां Sar ॥ २७॥ 


27. Tam tva sutesvabhuvo hinvire devatdataye. 
Sa pavasvanaya ruca. 


That lord of soma power and peace, the 
celebrants adore, exalt and glorify in their yajnic actions 
in the service of humanity and divinity. O lord, be 
pleased to accept this charming song of adoration, come, 
purify and sanctify us. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 65 183 


आ ते दक्षं मयोभुवं afeuen चुणीमहे। 
पान्तमा पुंस स्पृह॑म्‌॥ २८ ॥ 


28. A te daksam mayobhuvam vahnimadya vrni- 
mahe. Pantama purusprham. 


Today here and now, we choose for ourselves 
and pray for your power, peace and bliss, light and fire 
which is universally loved, all protective, promotive and 
all sanctifying. 


आ मन्द्रमा वरेण्यमा विप्रमा म॑नीषि्णम्‌। 
पान्तमा Gees tl २९॥ 


29. A mandrama varenyama viprama manisinam. 
Pantama purusprham. 


We pray for your gift of peace, power and 
sanctity, delightfully adorable, worthy of choice, 
stimulating and energising, enlightening, protecting and 
promoting, universally loved and valued. We pray, let 
it flow and purify us. 


आ रयिमा Gaara सुक्रतो तनूष्वा । 
पान्तमा पुंरुस्पु॑म्‌॥ २०॥ 
30. A rayima sucetunama sukrato tanusva. 
Pantama purusprham. 
O lord of holy action, we pray bring us the 
world’s wealth of enlightenment, protective, promotive 


and valued universally, for our body, mind and soul and 
vest it in our future generations. 


184 RGVEDA 


Mandala 9/Sukta 66 


Pavamana Soma (1-18, 22-30), Pavamana Agni (19-21) 
Devate, Shatam Vaikhanasas Rshis 


पव॑स्व विश्वचर्षणेऽ भि विशवानि creat । 
सरा सखिभ्य ईड्य॑ः ॥ ९॥ 


1 Pavasva visvacarsane’ bhi visvani kavya. 
Sakha sakhibhya tdyah. 


Omniscient Soma, all watching wakeful 
guardian of humanity, adorable friend of friends as all 
poets and poetry of the world declare, flow, purify and 
sanctify our heart and soul. 


ताभ्यां विश्व॑स्य राजसि ये प॑वमान धामनी । 
प्रतीची सोम तस्थतुः ॥ २॥ 


ps Tabhyam visvasya rajasi ye pavamana dhamani. 
Pratict soma tasthatuh. 


Vibrant Soma, pure and purifying, by those two 
media of yours, omniscience of knowledge and 
omnipotence of action, you shine, illuminate and rule 
the world both of which too abide as eternal 
complementarities of nature and divine power. 


परि धामानि यानिं ते त्वं सोमासि favad: | 
पव॑मान ऋतुभिः कवे ॥ ३॥ 


a: Pari dhamani yani te tvam somasi visvatah. 
Pavamana rtubhih kave. 


O Soma, you are the light, power and peace of 
all regions of the world, your domain wherein and 
whereon you pervade, pure and purifying, and reflect 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 66 185 


and rule by the law and order of the time and seasons of 
nature. 
पव॑स्व जनयच्निषोऽ भि विश्वानि art । 
सखा सखिभ्य ऊतये ।॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Pavasva janayanniso’bhi visvani varya. 
Sakha sakhibhya utaye. 
Flow on, pure and purifying, friend of friends, 
and flow for their protection, creating food, energy and 
all cherished means of sustenance for the world. 
तव॑ शुक्रासो! अर्चयो दिवस्पृष्ठे वि d-aa 
पवित्रं सोम धामभिः na 

a, Tava sukraso arcayo divasprsthe vi tanvate. 
Pavitram soma dhamabhih. 


O Soma, the mighty sublime radiations of your 
glory extend over the top of heaven and on the earth, 
spreading the holy light by their beauty and lustre. 


तवेमे सप्त सिन्ध॑वः प्रशिषं सोम feed | 
तुभ्यं धावन्ति धेनवः ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Taveme sapta sindhavah prasisam soma sisrate. 


Tubhyam dhavanti dhenavah. 


These seven seas, these seven modes of Prakrti, 
all flow in obedience to your order of law. All thoughts, 
all words, all stars and planets creative and moving in 
the flux of existence move in honour and homage to 
you. 


प्र सोम याहि धास्या सुत इन्द्राय मत्सरः | 
दर्धानो अचिति श्रव॑ः ॥ ७॥ 


186 RGVEDA 


fin Pra soma yahi dharaya suta indraya matsarah. 
Dadhano aksiti Sravah. 


O Soma, peace and joy of existence created for 
humanity, flow forth in constant stream, bearing 
imperishable food, energy, fame and excellence for 
fulfilment of the mind and soul. 


समु त्वा धीभिरंस्वरन्िन्वतीः सप्त Sra: 1 
विप्र॑माजा विवस्व॑तः॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Samu tva dhibhir-asvaran hinvatih sapta jama- 
yah. Vipramaja vivasvatah. 


O Soma, spirit of peace, power and bliss, seven 
streams of Prakrti, seven metres of divine poetry, seven 
notes of music, all in their functions and vitality in 
unison, glorify you, vibrant spirit of existence, in the 
dynamics of the light of life on the vedi of sacred fire. 


मृजन्ति त्वा समग्रुवोऽ व्ये जीरावधि wafer | 
रेभो यदज्यसे aA ॥। ९ ॥ 


तः 11114717 tva samagruvo’vye jiravadhi svani. 
Rebho yadajyase vane. 


When the mind is transparent, consciousness 
flows in self-concentration, and the presence of divinity 
vibrates vocal and voluble, advanced yogis with seven 
sense-prana priests exalt you in higher language of the 
Veda. 


पव॑मानस्य ते कवे वाजिन्त्सगी असृक्षत । 
अर्वन्तो न श्रवस्यवः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Pavamanasya te kave vajintsarga asrksata. 
Arvanto na Sravasyavah. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 66 187 


O lord ever flowing in constancy, omniscient 
poetic creator, omnipotent absolute victor and ruler, 
streams of creations flow like waves of energy in search 
of celebrative fulfilment. 


अच्छा कोशं मधुशचु तमसं गरं aN अव्यये | 
अवावशन्त धीतय॑ः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Accha kosam madhuSscutam-asrgram vare 
avyaye. Avavasanta dhitayah. 


The honey sweet nectar of soma ecstasy created 
and vibrating in the presence of the supreme 
imperishable eternal spirit, the yogi’s thoughts and 
words exalt in celebration. 


अच्छ। समुद्रमिन्दवोऽ स्तं गावो Tata: | 
अग्मंत्ृतस्य योनिमा 22 

12. Accha samudram-indavo’stam gavo na dhena- 
vah. Agmannrtasya yonima. 


Just as cows retire into their stall, and words of 
language retire into the ocean of absolute silence, so do 
the mental fluctuations of the yogi recede and return 
into the origin of their flow, into divinity. 


UW ut इन्दो महे रण strat अर्षन्ति सिन्ध॑वः। 
यद्रोधिर्वासयिष्यसें 123 1 

13. Prana indo mahe rana apo arsanti sindhavah. 
Yadgobhir-vasayisyase. 


O spirit of Soma energy and existential flow, 
Indu, in this great battle field of life, thoughts, energies 
and actions flow, rivers and seas flow, when you energise 


188 RGVEDA 


and vibrate with the dynamics of Prakrti. 


अस्य॑ ते सख्ये वयसियंश्चन्तस्त्वोत॑यः। 
इन्दो सखित्वमुश्मसि ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Asya te sakhye vayam-iyaksantas-tvotayah. 
Indo sakhitvam-usamasi. 


O spirit of love and peace, beauty and grace, 
Indu, so gracious as you are, we offer yajna in honour 
of your friendship under your protection, and we pray 
we may enjoy your friendship and we may exalt and 
glorify that friendship. 


आ प॑वस्व गविं्टये महे सोम नृचक्ष॑से। 
एन्द्रस्य जठरे विशा ॥ ९५॥ 
15. A pavasva gavistaye mahe soma nrcaksase. 
Endrasya jathare visa. 
O Soma, spirit of divine purity, come for 
cleansing and intensifying the perceptions, reason and 
imagination of humanity, for their enlightenment of high 


order, and assimilated and internalised, energise their 
heart and soul. 


Tet आसि सोम ज्येष्ठं उग्राणामिन्द्‌ ओलिं्ठः। 
युध्वा सञ्छशूवंज्िगेथ i ९६ ॥ 

16. Mahan asi soma jyestha ugranam-inda ojisthah. 
Yudhva_ san-chasvaj-jigetha. 


O Soma, you are great, first, greatest and most 
lustrous of the mighty, and being a fighter, you are 
always the winner. 


॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 66 189 
य उग्रेभ्य॑श्चिदोजी याञ्चरें भ्यजश्चिच्छरंतरः। 
भूरिदाभ्य॑श्चिन्मंहीयान्‌॥ ९७॥ 


Ya ugrebhyas-cidojiyan-churebhyas-cicchurata- 
rah. Bhuridabhyas-cin-mamhiyan. 


You are mightier than the mighty, braver than 


the brave, more generous than the generous, whoever 
they be. 


18. 


त्वं सोम सूर एष॑स्तोकस्य॑ साता तनूनाम्‌ । 
वृणीमहे सख्याय वृणीमहे युज्याय ॥ ९८ ॥ 


Tvam soma sura esastokasya sata tanunam. 
Vrnimahe sakhyaya vrnimahe yujyaya. 


O brave and generous Soma, you are the giver 


of food, energy, honour and excellence, you are the giver 
of children and grand children. We pray for your favour 
of friendship, we cherish you for companionship. 


19, 


अग्र आयूंषि पवस आ सुवोजं मिषं च नः। 
आरे बाधस्व दुच्छुनाम्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


Agna adyumsi pavasa क suvorjamisam ca nah. 
Are badhasva ducchunam. 


Agni, heat and energy of life divine, give us 


good health and long age with purity, create and bring 
us food, energy and excellence, and throw off and keep 
away all evils and negativities from us. 


20. 


अभितऋषिः पव॑मानः पाञ्च॑जन्यः पुरोहितः | 
तमीमहे महागयम्‌ ॥ २०॥ 


Agnirrsih pavamanah pancajanyah purohitah. 
Tamimahe mahagayam. 


190 RGVEDA 


Agni is the light of life and fire of passion, pure 
and purifying energy ever radiative, universal inspirer 
of all people on earth and energiser of all five faculties, 
adorable leader of entire humanity and guiding spirit of 
the corporate life of all human communities together. 
We adore, serve and pray for the favour of such generous 
father of the household of humanity. 


अग्ने पवस्व स्वपां अस्मे वर्चः सुवीर्यभ्‌। 
दधद्रयिं मयि पोष॑म्‌।॥ २९॥ 

21. Agne pavasva svapa asme varcah suviryam. 
Dadhadrayim mayi posam. 


Agni, pray radiate and purify us. Lord of holy 
action, bless us with holy lustre, noble courage and 
virility. Bear and bring us wealth, honour and excellence 
with promotive health and nourishment. 


पव॑मानो अति स्तरिधोऽभ्यं्घति सुष्टुतिम्‌। 
सूरो न विश्वदर्शतः ॥ २२॥ 
22. Pavamano ati sridho’bhyarsati sustutim. 
Suro na visvadarsatah. 
Soma is pure, purifying, radiating, it goes 
forward, eliminating violence and negativities, and 
blesses our songs of adoration. Self-refulgent and all 


watching, it enlightens the world like the sun with its 
refulgence. 


स मर्मृजान आयुभिः प्रय॑स्वान्प्रय॑से fea: | 
इन्दुरत्यो विचक्चणः ॥ २३ ॥ 


23. Samarmrjana ayubhih prayasvan prayase hitah. 
Induratyo vicaksanah. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 66 191 


Soma is invoked, adored and exalted by 
humanity, by all living beings indeed. Cosmic high priest 
offering libations into the creative evolution, generous 
giver, it is invoked and worshipped for the gifts of life 
for peace and progress. Refulgent and blissful, it comes 
and blesses the supplicant, for it watches all, responds, 
and reveals the mysteries of existence. 


पव॑मान ऋतं लृहच्छु क्रं ज्योतिरजीजनत्‌। 
कृष्णा तमांसि AEA २४ ॥ 


24. Pavamana rtam brhac-chukram jyotir-ajijanat. 
Krsna tamamsi janghanat. 


Pure, purifying and self-dynamic, it brings into 
existential manifestation the law and the mighty nature’s 
model of the cosmos and the refulgent radiations of light, 
dispelling and replacing the darkness and negations of 
existence. 


पव॑मानस्य जङ्घ्न॑तो हरे श्चन्द्रा अंसूक्षत। 
जीरा अजिरशोचिषः ॥ २५॥ 


25. Pavamanasya janghnato harescandra asrksata. 
Jira ajirasocisah. 

Beauteous manifestations and brilliant 
radiations of eternal light and power of lord creator, 
destroyer of want and suffering, dispeller of darkness 
and negation, ever active and constantly flowing, pure 
and purifying, come into existence and flow according 
to divine plan and the cosmic model. 


पव॑मानो र थीत॑मः शुभ्रेभिः शुभ्रशस्तमः। 
हरिश्चन्द्रो मरुद्र॑णः ॥ २६॥ 


192 RGVEDA 


26. Pavamano rathitamah subhrebhih subhrasasta- 
mah. Hariscandro marudganah. 


Pure and purifying, supreme master of the 
cosmic chariot and its controller, most refulgent with 
its light and powers, destroyer of want and suffering, 
commander and controller of all cosmic powers and 
forces in action, such is Soma. 


पव॑मानो व्य॑श्नवद्रश्मिभि॑रवाजसात॑मः। 
दधंत्स्तोत्रे सुवीर्यम्‌ ॥ २७ ॥ 


27. Pavamano vyasnavad-rasmibhir-vajasatamah. 
Dadhat stotre suviryam. 


Pure and purifying, omnipresent with its 
radiations of self- refulgence, omnipotent giver of 
strength, power and advancement, inspirer of the 
celebrants and celebrations with divine bliss and energy, 
such is Soma. 


प्र सुवान इन्दुरक्षाः पवित्रमत्यव्यय॑म्‌। 
पुनान इन्दुरिन्द्रमा ॥ २८ ॥ 
28. Pra suvana induraksah pavitram-atyavyayam. 


Punana indur-indrama. 


Creative, creator and energiser, peaceable 
inspirer and self-refulgent Soma absolutely pervades 
the holy imperishable world of existence and, purifying 
and sanctifying, all blissful, radiates to the heart and 
soul of the devotee. 


एष सोमो अधिं त्वचि गवां क्रीट्त्यद्िभिः। 
इन्द्रं मदाय जोहुवत्‌॥ २९ ॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 67 193 


29. Esa somo adhi tvaci gavam krilatyadribhih. 
Indram madaya johuvat. 


This Soma, omnipresent spirit of absolute bliss, 
plays in and on top of the universe with the stars, planets 
and clouds of its creation and invites and inspires the 
soul to participate in the play for joy. 


यस्य॑ ते aca: पव॑मानाभंतं दिवः। 
तेन॑ नो We जीवसे ।॥ २० ॥ 


30. Yasya te dyumnavat payah pavamanabhrtam 
divah. Tena no mrla jivase. 


O lord of light and glory, pure, purifying and 
radiating with joy, the nectar of light, power and purity 
that is yours is distilled in showers of the bliss of heaven. 
Pray bless us and sanctify us with that for the joy of 
living for the ultimate fulfilment. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 67 
Devatah: Pavamana Soma (1-9, 13-22, 28-30), Pavamana 
Soma or Pusha (10-12), Agni (23-24), Agni or Savita (25), 
Agni and / or Savita (26), Agni or Vishvedevah (27), 
Pavamani adhyetr-stuti (31-32); Rshis: Bharadwaja (1-3), 
Kashyapa Maricha (4-6), Gotama Rahugana (7-9), Atri 
Bhauma (10-12), Vishvamitra (13-15), Jamadagni (16-18), 
Vasishtha (19-21), Pavitra and / or Vasishtha (22-32) 


त्वं सोमासि धारयुर्मन्द्र ओजिष्ठो अध्वरे | 
पवस्व मंहयद्रयिः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Tvam somasi dharayur-mandra ojistho adhvare. 
Pavasva mamhayadrayih. 


194 RGVEDA 


O Soma, you are the spirit and constant stream 
of love, life and beauty of the life and flux of existence, 
sustaining integrative power, joyous and most vigorous 
in the cosmic yajna of love free from violence, hate and 
destruction. Flow on, O sustaining stream, pure, 
purifying and sanctifying life, giving showers of wealth, 
honour and excellence of life in bliss. 


त्वं सुतो Fares दधन्वान्म॑त्सरिन्तंमः। 
इन्द्राय सूरिरन्धंसा ॥ २॥ 


2. Tvam suto nrmadano dadhanvan matsarin-tamah. 
Indraya surirandhasa. 


You, self-existent spirit, distilled and realised 
in meditative yajna, are the giver of joy to humanity, 
most ecstatic sustaining power of affirmation, creative, 
brave and life-giving inspiration for the honour and 
dignity of the soul for humanity. 


त्वं सुष्वाणो अद्रिभिरभ्यर्ष awed 
द्युमन्तं शुष्ममुत्तमम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 
3: Tvam susvano adribhir-abhyarsa kanikradat. 


Dyumantam Susmam-uttamam. 


You, stirred by the brave celebrants in yajna and 
meditation, arise and sanctify loud and bold, bringing 
us showers of bliss, highest and most vigorous strength 
and power for living a life of purity and happy 
fulfilment. 


इन्दुर्हिन्वानो अर्षति तिरो वाराण्यव्यया | 
हरिर्वाज॑मचिक्रदत्‌॥। ४ ॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 67 195 


4. Indur-hinvano arsati tiro varanyavyaya. 
Harir-vajam-acikradat. 


Invoked, exalted and inspiring, divine Soma 
manifests and vibrates, and across all obstructions gives 
cherished and imperishable gifts. The spirit that 
eliminates all want and suffering exhorts us to action 
and victory. 


इन्दो व्यव्यमर्षसि वि श्रवांसि वि सौभ॑गा । 
वि areata गोम॑तः ॥ ५॥ 

Indo vyavyam-arsasi vi $Sravamsi vi saubhaga. 
Vi vajant-soma gomatah. 

Indu, lord of peace, beauty and glory, Soma, you 
bring and bless us with all foods, energy, honour and 
fame, all good fortune and victories of the wealth of 
lands and cows, literature and culture of imperishable 
value. 

आ न॑ इन्दो शतण्विनं रयिं गोम॑न्तपण्विनंम्‌। 
ant सोम सहस्तरि्णम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. A na indo Satagvinam rayim gomantamaSsvi-nam. 
Bhara soma sahasrinam. 


Indu, Soma, lord of love, beauty, peace and 
glory, bear and bring us wealth, honour and excellence 
of a hundred and a thousand kinds, of lands and cows, 
horses, advancement and victory, above all settlement, 
peace and happiness. 


पव॑मानास इन्दंवस्तिरः पवित्रमाशवः | 
इन्द्रं यामेभिराशत ॥ ७॥ 


196 RGVEDA 
in Pavamanasa indavas-tirah pavitram-asavah. 
Indram yamebhir-dSata. 


Pure and purifying, instant and vibrant, gifts of 
Soma, by their own potential of divinity, move and bless 
the pure heart and soul of the devotee. 
ककुहः सोम्यो ta इन्दुरिन्द्राय पूर्व्यः | 
आयुः प॑वत आयवे ।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Kakuhah somyo rasa indurindraya purvyah. 
Ayuh pavata ayave. 


High, exhilarating and living nectar of eternal 
Soma bliss ever vibrant in nature, flows to the dedicated 
heart of the celebrant for his honour and excellence in 
life. 
हिन्वन्ति सूरमुस्रयः पव॑मानं napa 
अभि गिरा सम॑स्वरन्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Hinvanti suramusrayah pavamanam madhuscu- 
tam. Abhi gira samasvaran. 


As morning lights of the dawn exhort and exalt 
the sun, so do brilliant sages invoke and exalt the honey 
sweet vibrant and sanctifying soma bliss of divinity 
while they sing and adore the divinity with their songs 
of celebration. 


अविता नों अजाश्वः पूषा याम॑नियामनि । 
आ भक्षत्कन्यासु नः॥ १०॥ 


10. = Avita no ajasvah pusa yamaniyamani. 
A bhaksat kanyasu nah. 


May the divine protector and promoter, lord of 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 67 197 


health and nourishment, Pusha of eternal presence and 
progress join and bless us at every step on every path of 
life in the pursuit of all our cherished goals, aims and 
objects of living. 


अयं सोम॑: कपर्दिने घृतं न प॑वते Tel 
आ भक्षत्कन्यासु A: UV 


11. Ayam somah kapardine ghrtam na pavate madhu. 
A bhaksat kanyasu nah. 


May this honey sweet soma ecstasy of divinity 
flow and bless the veteran scholar as well as the fresh 
graduate as ghrta flows to the vedi in yajna, and inspire 
us too to join the scholars with absolute dedication and 
commitment in our cherished pursuits of knowledge, 
research and advancement. 


अयं त॑ आघृणे सुतो aed न प॑वते शुचिं । 
आ भक्षत्कन्यासु नः॥ १२॥ 


12. Ayam ta aghrne suto ghrtam na pavate Suci. 
A bhaksat kanyasu nah. 


O lord of light and fire of passion and peace, 
this soma ecstasy of your love, passion and peace of 
life, pure, purifying and inspiring, flows abundant like 
ghrta into the vedi. May this passion, light and peace 
inspire us and join us in our cherished pursuits of life 
with complete commitment and dedication. 


वाचो जन्तुः कवीनां पव॑स्व सोम धार॑या। 
देवेषुं रत्नधा असि 23.01 


13. 4८ jantuh kavinam pavasva soma dharaya. 
Devesu ratnadha asi. 


198 RGVEDA 


Soma, you are the creator, originator and inspirer 
of the voice of poets. Flow free and abundant in streams 
and showers of revelation for the poets. You are the 
sole treasure and harbinger of the jewels of vision into 
the heart and soul of the poets of divinity. 


आ कलशोषु धावति श्येनो ad वि गाहते । 
अभि द्रोणा कनिक्रदत्‌ ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. A kalasesu dhavati 5€ा10 varma vi gahate. 
Abhi drona kanikradat. 


Soma, spirit of light and passion fire, dives into 
the heart and imagination of the creative souls and, like 
the divine bird of flight and freedom, the eagle, breaks 
through the seal of mystery, speaking loud and bold into 
the poetic consciousness to reveal the secrets of 
existence. 


परि प्र सोम ते रसोऽ it कलशे a: | 
श्येनो न तक्तो अर्षति ।॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Pari pra soma te raso’sarji kalase sutah. 
Syeno na takto arsati. 


O Soma, spirit of light and passion of 
imagination, the ecstatic joy of your creativity distilled 
and treasured in the poetic soul flows free like the 
tempestuous eagle bird traversing space and creates 
songs of divine adoration for life’s mystery. 


पव॑स्व सोम मन्दयन्निन्द्राय मधुमत्तमः ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Pavasva soma mandayann-indraya madhu- 
mattamah. 


O Soma, creative spirit, highest honey sweet of 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 67 199 


divine ecstasy, flow abundant, pure and purifying, 
energising and rejoicing for Indra, the divine soul. 
sTau-eadlaa वाजयन्तो रथाइव ॥ ९७॥ 
17. Asrgran devavitaye vajayanto ratha iva. 
Flowing and creating, Soma streams rush 
forward like victor chariots in the service of divinity. 
ते areal मदिन्त॑माः शुक्रा वायुम॑सूक्षत॥ ९८ ॥ 
18. Te sutaso madintamah sukra vayuam-asrksata. 
Your creative spirits of imagination, powerful 
and most ecstatic, give birth to the vibrant poet creator, 
the karma yogi of imagination. 
ग्राव्णां तुन्नो अभिष्टुतः पवित्रं सोम गच्छसि । 
दधंत्स्तोत्रे सुवीर्यम्‌ ॥ ९९ ॥ 


19.  Gravna tunno abhistutah pavitram soma ga- 
cchasi. Dadhat stotre suviryam. 


Invoked and adored by the celebrant, O Soma, 
you move and arise in the pure heart of the devotee 
bearing creative vision for the celebrant and vesting 
vigour and power in the song. 


एष तुन्नो अभिष्टुतः ufaauta गाहते | 
रक्षोहा वारमव्ययम्‌ il २०॥ 

20. Esa tunno abhistutah pavitramati gahate. 
Raksoha varam-avyayam. 


This Soma, thus invoked, stirred and adored, 
arises and vibrates in the pure heart of the celebrant 
and, dispelling negativities, confusions and darkness 


200 RGVEDA 


of illusion, energises its favourite and imperishable spirit 
of humanity. 


यदन्ति यच्च दूरके भयं विन्दति मायिह। 
पव॑मान वि तज्न॑हि।॥ २९॥ 


21. Yadanti yacca durake bhayam vindati mamiha. 
Pavamana vi tajjahi. 


O Soma, pure and purifying spirit of divinity, 
whatever fear there be that is far distant or that which is 
close at hand and assails me here, pray dispel and destroy 
the same. 


पव॑मानः सो अद्य न॑: पवित्रेण विच॑र्षणिः 1 
यः पोता स पुनातु नः॥ २२॥ 


22. Pavamanah so adya nah pavitrena vicarsanih. 
Yah pota sa pundatu nah. 


The Soma that is pure and purifies us now with 
its sanctity and power, that all watching guardian and 
universal purifier may, we pray, purify and sanctify us 
right now. 


ad पवित्र॑मर्चष्यग्रे वित॑तमन्तरा । 
ब्रह्य तेन॑ पुनीहि नः ॥ २३॥ 


23. Yat te pavitram-arcisyagne vitatama-ntara. 
Brahma tena punthi nah. 


Agni, lord of light, omniscient Spirit of the 
universe, whatever power and purity there is pervasive 
in the rays and radiation of light, with that same light, 
O lord infinite, illuminate and sanctify us and energise 
our song of adoration. 


MANDAL - १ / SUKTA - 67 201 


यत्ते पवित्र॑मर्चिवदगने तेन॑ पुनीहि a: 
ब्रह्मसवैः पुनीहि नः॥ २४॥ 


24. Yat te pavitram-arcivad-agne tena punthi nah. 
Brahmasavaih punthi nah. 


Agni, lord omniscient and self-refulgent, 
whatever power and purity there is in you and your 
radiations such as the sun and other stars, with that, 
pray, purify and sanctify us. Purify and illuminate us 
with the radiations of your grace. 


उभाभ्यां देव सवितः पवित्रेण सवेन॑ च। 
मां पुनीहि विर्वत॑: ॥ २५॥ 


25. Ubhabhyam deva savitah pavitrena savena ca. 
Mam punthi visvatah. 


O Agni, Savita, self-refulgent lord of light and 
creative energy, by both your purifying radiations and 
the creative living vitality your radiations bear, purify, 
sanctify, energise and vitalise me all round, all ways. 


firs दैव सवितर्वर्षिष्छेः सोम धाम॑भिः। 
अग्ने दक्षैः पुनीहि a: २६॥ 


26. Tribhistvam deva savitar-varsisthaih soma 
dhamabhih. Agne daksaih punthi nah. 


O Savita, creator, Soma, energiser, and Agni, 
illuminator, energise, vitalise and illuminate us with your 
highest all three powers and potentials of light, purity 
and vitality. Bless us in the gross, subtle and causal 
bodies. 


202 RGVEDA 


पुनन्तु मां देवजनाः पुनन्तु वस॑वो धिया । 
विश्वे देवाः पुनीत मा जात॑वेदः पुनीहि at २७॥ 


27. Punantu mam devajanah punantu vasavo dhiya. 
Visve devah punita ma jatavedah punthi ma. 


May the brilliant generous sages and scholars 
purify me. May the Vasus, givers of peace and 
settlement, sanctify me with knowledge and wisdom. 
May all divinities of nature and humanity vitalise me. 
O Jataveda, omniscient Agni, pray purify and sanctify 
me. 


प्र प्यायस्व प्र स्य॑न्दस्व सोम विश्वेभिरंशुभिः | 
देवेभ्यं उत्तमं हविः ॥ २८ ॥ 


28. Pra pyayasva pra syandasva soma visvebhir- 
amsubhih. Devebhya uttamam havih. 


O Soma, spirit of life and fulfilment, flow 
abundant, flow exuberant with all the shoots and sprouts 
of life and with the best yajnic offerings for the 
divinities. Make up our wants and deficiencies. 


उपं प्रियं पनिंप्रतं युर्वानमाहुती वृध॑म्‌। 
अग॑न्म बिभ्र॑तो नम॑ः ॥ २९॥ 


29. (74 priyam panipnatam yuvanamahutivrdham. 
Aganma bibhrato namah. 


May we, bearing yajnic homage, reach Soma, 
dear, admirably vocal and expressive, youthful creator 
and promoter of nature’s and humanity’s yajnic offerings 
into the divine yajnic evolution of the cosmos. 


30. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 67 203 
sora परशुर्ननाश तमा प॑वस्व देव सोम। 
आखुं चिदेव देव सोम ॥ ३०॥ 


Aldyyasya parasurnandsa tama pavasva deva 
soma. Akhum cideva deva soma. 


O Soma, brilliant lord of life and vitality, destroy 


the axe of the assailant. Destroy the weapon of the thief. 
Save that which only turns the soil for food. O power 
divine, flow, purify us, save us. 


4५ 


यः पावमानीरध्येत्यषिंभथिः संभृतं ca 
सर्व स पूतमश्नाति स्वदितं मातरिश्वना ॥ ३९॥ 


Yah pavamanir-adhyetyrsibhih sambhrtam 
rasam. Sarvam sa putamasnati svaditam 
matarisvana. 


Whoever studies the sanctifying Rks, nectar 


preserved by the sages, he tastes the food seasoned and 
sanctified by the life breath of divinity. 


a2. 


पावमानीर्यो अध्येत्युषिंथिः deat रसं॑म्‌। 

तस्मै सर॑स्वती दुहे क्षीरं सर्पिर्मधूदकम्‌ ॥ ३२२॥ 
Pavamaniryo adhyetyrsibhih sambhrtam rasam. 
Tasmai sarasvati duhe ksiram sarpir-madhuda- 
kam. 


Whoever studies the Rks, sanctifying nectar 


preserved by the sages, for him, mother Sarasvati, 
omniscient divinity, herself distils and offers the milk, 
butter, honey and the nectar essence of life. 


204 RGVEDA 


Mandala 9/Sukta 68 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Vatsapri Bhalandana Rshi 


प्रदेवमच्छा Heard इन्दवोऽ सिंष्यदन्त गाव आ न ara: | 
बर्हिषदो! वचनावन्त ऊध॑भिः परिस्रुतमुस्रिया निर्णिजं 
धिरे॥ ९॥ 


I; Pra devamaccha madhumanta indavo’ sisyad- 
anta gava a na dhenavah. Barhirsado vacanav- 
anta udhabhih parisrutamusriya nirnijam dhire. 


Seekers of the light and soma sweetness of 
divinity, themselves noble and refined with honey 
sweets of culture, manners and holy language, approach 
the refulgent and generous divine lord like calves going 
to mother cows. Sitting on the holy grass of yajna at 
dawn, eloquent of tongue and clear of understanding, 
they receive and treasure the nectar stream of soma, 
peace and bliss of divinity, as calves receive milk 
streaming from the udders or as dawns receive radiations 
of light from the sun over the night’s darkness. 


स रोरुवदभि पूर्वौ अचिक्रददुपारुहः श्रथय॑न्त्स्वादते हरिः 1 
तिरः पवित्रं परियन्नुरु wat नि शयीणि दधते देव आ 
RAN २॥ 


2. Sa roruvad-abhi purva acikradad-uparuhah 
Srathayant-svadate harih. Tirah pavitram 
pariyannuru jrayo ni Saryani dadhate deva a 
varam. 


He, eternal preceptor, refulgent dispeller of want 
and darkness, instant, transcendent, omniscient and 
eloquent master of the eternal voice, feels delighted with 
the rising seekers and, accepting and inspiring them, 


MANDAL - १ / SUKTA - 68 205 


removes all superfluities and impediments, reveals and 
releases the soma of higher joy of knowledge and thus 
grants them the sacred boon they desire. 


वियोममे यम्यां संयती मद॑ः साकंवृधा पय॑सा fa-aatetar | 
मही अपारे रज॑सी विवेविंददभथिव्रजन्रक्चितं पाज आ 
eeu 


2 Vi yo mame yamya samyati madah sakamvrdha 
payasa pinvadaksita. Mahi apare rajasi vive- 
vidad-abhivrajann-aksitam paja a dade. 


The lord grants that soma joy of divinity which, 
going over and pervading the great and boundless 
heaven and earth, energises, vitalises and expands the 
inviolable twin sisters growing together in glory, with 
the milky spirit of divinity, and which, thus going 
forward unobstructed, holds the imperishable power and 
bliss of divinity. 


स मातरा विचर॑न्वाजयंन्नपः प्र मेधिरः caerat पिन्वते पदम्‌। 
अंशु्यविन पिपिशे यतो नृभिः सं जामिभिर्नसते रक्षते 
शिर॑ः ॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Sa matara vicaran vajayann-apah pra medhi-rah 
svadhaya pinvate padam. Amsur-yavena pipise 
yato nrbhih sam jamibhir-nasate raksate Sirah. 


The lord grants that power and bliss of soma 
which vibrates with motherly heaven and earth, 
energising the cosmic waters and the dynamics of nature 
and humanity, which partakes of the omniscience of 
divinity, flows and swells the holy spirit of the yajnic 
meditative soul and which, invoked and served by noble 
humans of kindred nature with meditation inputs, grows 


206 RGVEDA 


from shoots to flowers and unites with, preserves and 
promotes the highest faculties of humanity. 


सं दक्षेण मन॑सा जायते afeaskaes गर्भो निहितो यमा 
परः। यूर्ना ह सन्ता प्रथमं वि जज्ञतुर्गुहा हितं जनिम 
नेममुद्य॑तम्‌॥ ५ ॥ 


3. Sam daksena manasa jayate kavir-rtasya garbho 
nihito yama parah. Yuna ha santa prathamam vi 
jajnatur-guha hitam janima nemamudyatam. 


The creative soul, Soma, is born along with mind 
and noble intelligence, the seed and seat of divine law 
and wisdom hidden somewhere far deep by the laws of 
nature. Being together, they, mind and intelligence, are 
first physically born as in any other creature, the other, 
higher and enlightened self, is born, rather reborn, as it 
is raised through purity and elevation of the mind from 
the depth of its hiding cave. 


मन्द्रस्य रूपं विविदुर्मनीषिणः श्येनो यदन्धो अभरत्परा- 
वत॑ः। तं म॑र्जयन्त सुवृधं नदीष्वा उशन्त॑ मंशुं परियन्तं - 
मूम्मिय॑म्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Mandrasya rupam vividur-manisinah Syeno 
yadandho abharat paravatah. Tam marjayanta 
suvrdham nadisvan uSantam-amsum pariyan- 
tam-rgmiyam. 


The yogis of elevated, enlightened and 
concentrated mind feel and know the presence of the 
blissful soma spirit of existence which the vibrant 
visionary soul perceives, distils and actually realises as 
food for fulfilment far off and everywhere. The sages 
adore and worship that very exalting spirit flowing in 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 68 207 


streams of existence which is passionate and loving, 
energising, all comprehensive and adorable, sung and 
celebrated in hymns of the Veda. 


त्वां मुंजन्ति दश योष॑णः सुतं सोम ऋषिं भिर्म तिभिवर्धीति- 
भिरर्हितम्‌। अव्यो वारेभिरुत देवहू तिथिर्न भिर्यतो वाजमा 
द॑र्षि सातये ।॥ ७॥ 


५. Tvam mrjanti dasa yosanah sutam soma rsibhir- 
matibhir-dhitibhir-hitam. Avyo varebhiruta 
devahutibhir-nrbhir-yato vajama darsi sataye. 


O Soma, Spirit of the bliss of existence, ten 
youthful senses and vibrant pranas of the soul adore 
and exalt you, sung and celebrated by the sages of 
knowledge, thought and meditation, served by the best 
of men with best of homage and divine presentations, 
and realised and treasured by the seers. O lord of 
universal protection and progress, give us a vision of 
your divine power and presence for our ultimate victory 
and spiritual fulfilment. 


परिप्रयन्तं वय्यं सुषंसदं सोमं मनीषा अभ्य॑नूषत स्तुभः | 
यो धार॑या मधुरम ऊर्मिणा fea safe वाचं रयिषाव्छ- 
मर्त्यः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Pariprayantam vayyam susamsadam somam 
manisa abhyanusata stubhah. Yo dharaya 
madhuman urmina diva iyarti vacam rayisala- 
martyah. 


Joyous celebrants with sincerity of mind and 
soul exalt Soma, universally vibrant Spirit, lovely and 
adorable, holy and companionable who, immortal 
treasurehold of the wealth and honey sweets of life, 


208 RGVEDA 


gives us streams and showers of the divine voice of 
omniscience from the heights of heaven. 


अयं दिव इयर्ति विश्वमा रजः सोम॑ः पुनानः कलशेषु 
tafe | अद्धिर्गोभिर्मज्यते अद्रिभिः सुतः पुनान इन्दुर्वरिवो 
विदप्प्ियम्‌॥ ९॥ 


9. Ayam diva iyarti visvama rajah somah punanah 
kalasesu sidati. Adbhir-gobhir-mrjyate adribhih 
sutah punana indurvarivo vidat priyam. 


This Soma, lord of peace and power, moves all 
the particles of nature and forces of power from the 
centre of light and, pure and purifying, sits and pervades 
in all forms of existence. By the adamantine and 
generous powers of nature and humanity, it is exalted 
with the dynamics of energy, will, acts and voices of 
intelligence, and the holy spirit, thus distilled and 
realised, pure and purifying, brings us the best and 
dearest wealth, honour and excellence of immortal 
value. 


एवा न॑ः सोम परिषिच्यमानो वयो दधंच्ित्रत॑मं पवस्व | 
अद्वेषे द्यार्वापृथिवी gay देवां धत्त रयिमस्मे सुवीर॑म्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. Eva nah soma parisicyamano vayo dadhacci- 
tratamam pavasva. Advese dyavaprthivi huvema 
deva dhatta rayimasme suviram. 


Thus adored, exalted and served, O Soma, flow 
with vibrant presence, bringing us the most wonderful 
food, health and strength. We invoke the earth and 
heaven free from jealousy, contradiction and enmity, 
and pray may the divinities of nature and humanity bear 
and bring us wealth, honour and excellence worthy of 


MANDAL - १ / SUKTA - 69 209 


the brave. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 69 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Hiranyastupa Angirasa Rshi 


इषुर्न धन्वन्प्रतिं धीयते मतिर्वत्सो न aided सर्ज्यध॑नि | 
उरुधारेव दुहे अग्र॑ आयत्यस्य व्रतेष्वपि सोम इष्यते 2 

ie Isurna dhanvan prati dhiyate matirvatso na 
maturupa sarjyudhani. Urudhdareva duhe agra 
ayatyasya vratesvapi soma isyate. 


Like the arrow fixed on the bow, the enlightened 
mind is directed to the divine mother’s treasure of milk 
for the baby. Then like the mother cow coming home 
with milk streaming forth for the calf, the coming life 
at hand is replete with joyous possibilities of fulfilment. 
Thus, under the laws of the lord’s dispensation, nectar 
soma is created, loved and realised for the joy and 
fulfilment of the soul. 


sat मतिः qead सिच्यते wel मन्द्राजनी चोदते 
अन्तरासनि । पव॑मानः सन्तनिः प्र्॑चतामिव मधुमान्द्रप्सः 
परि वार॑मर्षति।॥ २॥ 


2. Upo matih prcyate sicyate madhu mandrajani 
codate antarasani. Pavamanah samtanih pra- 
ghnatamiva madhuman drapsah pari varama- 
rsati. 


When the mind is joined in concentration with 
divinity, honey is released and pours forth, divine ecstasy 
stirs in the heart within, and the continuous stream of 
soma, overflowing with joy like the uninterrupted 
ecstasy of the yogis of perfect renunciation, showers 


210 RGVEDA 
upon the blessed soul. 


अव्ये वधूयुः प॑वते UR त्वचि storie नसीरदितेतऋतं ae | 
हरिरक्रान्यजतः संयतो मदो! नृम्णा शिशानो महिषो न 
शोभते ॥ ३ ॥ 


2; Avye vadhuyuh pavate pari tvaci Srathnite naptir- 
aditerrtam yate. Harirakran yajatah samyato 


^ ° ^ ~ 


The stream of soma joy flows in the protected 
heart of the dedicated celebrant, attenuates the extrovert 
natural tendencies of the mind and augments the inner 
concentration of the higher mind for the man of natural 
truth and divine law. And Hari, divine lord controller 
of agitation and dispeller of darkness, intensifies the 
controlled flow of the yogi’s joy in communion and, 
deepening and directing it on the fixed target, shines 
like a victor with divine strength and glory. 


sen मिंमाति प्रति यन्ति धेनवो! cacd edited यन्ति 
निष्कृतम्‌ । अत्यक्रमीदर्जुनं वार॑मव्ययमत्कं न निक्तं परि 
सोमो अव्यत su 


4. Uksa mimati prati yanti dhenavo devasya devi- 
rupa yanti niskrtam. Atyakramidarjunam varam- 
avyayamatkam na niktam pari somo avyata. 


The generous virile soul overflowing with soma 
joy vibrates with Infinity, the senses having returned 
inward like cows to the stall. The enlightened mind and 
thoughts of the holy soul unite with the hallowed centre 
of the spirit. The soul breaks through its existential 
cover, returns to its original imperishable purity, and 
Soma protects it as a pilgrim cleansed and redeemed. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 69 211 


अमरक्तन estar वास॑सा हरिरमर्त्यो निर्णिजानः oR व्यत। 
दिवस्पृष्ठं बर्हणा निर्णिजे कृतोपस्तरंणं चम्बो्नभस्मय॑म्‌॥ ५ ॥ 


Amrktena rusata vasasa harir-amartyo nirnija- 
nah pari vyata. Divasprstham barhana nirnije 
krtopastaranam camvor-nabhasmayam. 


The saviour, destroyer of suffering and darkness, 
cleansing and sanctifying existence with imperishable 
light of his glory, pervades, transcends and beatifies the 
top of heaven and the middle regions of vapour between 
earth and heaven, vesting them all with his splendour. 


सूर्यस्येव रश्मयो द्रावयिलवो मत्सरासः wad: साकमीरते । 
तन्तुं ततं परि atte आशवो नेन्द्रदूते प॑वते धाम किं 
चन॥ ६॥ 


6. Suryasyeva rasmayo dravayitnavo matsarasah 
prasupah sakamtrate. Tantum tatam pari sargasa 
asavo nendradrte pavate dhama kim cana. 


The dynamics of the lord’s creation instantly in 
motion, energising the sleeping existences, joyous and 
joyously moving everything to ecstatic being, all 
together move across the web of life conceived and 
created by the lord omnipotent, Indra. Not without Indra 
does any particle, any wave, any world, move pure and 
sacred as it is. 


सिन्धोरिव प्रवणे निम्न आशवो वृष॑च्युता मदासो 
गातुमाशत । शं नो निवेशो द्विपदे चतुंष्पदेऽ स्मे वाजाः सोम 
तिष्ठन्तु कृष्टयः ॥ ७॥ 

४ Sindhoriva pravane nimna aSavo vrsacyuta 


madaso gdtumdsata. Sar no nivese dvipade 
catuspade ’sme vajah soma tisthantu krstayah. 


212 RGVEDA 


Floods of river waters showered from the clouds 
flow fast in their happy course down to the sea and mix 
with the ocean. Like these, may our people, joyous with 
showers of soma, fast and progressive, flow and proceed 
like water courses to the divine Indra. O Soma, lord of 
peace and joy, let there be peace and joy in our 
homesteads for humans and animals both. May our 
people and our powers and progress be firm and constant 
on the forward paths of higher achievement. 


आ न॑: पवस्व वसुं मद्धिरंण्यवदश््वावद्रोमद्यवंमत्सुवीर्यम्‌। 
यूयं हि सोम पितरो मम स्थन॑ दिवो मृर्धानः प्रस्थिता 
वयस्कृतं: ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. A nah pavasva vasumaddhiranyavadasva- 
dadgomadyavamat suviryam. Yuyam hi soma 
pitaro mama sthana divo murdhanah prasthita 
vaya-skrtah. 


O Soma, lord of peace, progress and joy, bring 
us, purify and let flow, the wealth of peace and honour 
replete and overflowing with settlement and security, 
golden glory, progressive achievement, lands, cows and 
culture graces, food and good health, and noble courage, 
strength and forbearance. You alone are our father and 
mother, you alone would stay so constant, light of 
heaven, top of excellence, stable as earth, and giver of 
food, health and sustenance for a long full age. 


एते सोमाः पव॑मानास इन्द्रं रथाइव प्र य॑युः सातिमच्छ। 
सुताः पवित्रमति यन्त्यव्यं हित्वी वव्रिं हरितो वृष्टिमच्छ॑।। ९ ॥ 
9. Ete somah pavamanasa indram ratha iva pra 


yayuh satimaccha. Sutah pavitramati yantya- 
vyam_ hitvi vavrim harito vrstimaccha. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 70 213 


These soma joys of life, pure and purifying, like 
divine radiations of victory, flow to the karma-yogi, man 
of holy action and enthusiasm. Distilled and 
concentrated, they flow to the sacred heart, dispel ill 
health and infirmity, and, ever fresh and inspiring, they 
bring showers of divine bliss. 


इन्दविन्द्राय बृहते प॑वस्व सुमृव्टीको अनवद्यो ferret: | 
ant चन्द्राणि गृणते वसूनि देवै्द्यीवापृथिवी प्राव॑तं 
नः॥ ९०॥ 


10. Indavindraya brhate pavasva sumrliko ana-vadyo 
risadah. Bhara candrani grnate vasuni devai- 
rdyavaprthivi pravatam nah. 


O lord of peace, beauty and joy, giver of 
happiness and well being, adorable divinity, destroyer 
of violence, enemies and impediments, flow for the great 
Indra, for the glory of the karma-yogi. Bring the beauties 
of wealth, settlement and security, honour and 
excellence of life for the celebrant. O heaven and earth, 
come along with the divinities of nature and humanity 
and protect and promote us with happiness and well 
being. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 70 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Renu Vaishvamitra Rshi 


Brew सप्त धेनवो ees सत्यामाशिरं पूर्व्ये व्योमनि। 
चत्वार्यन्या भुव॑नानि निर्णिजे चारूणि चक्रे यदु तैर- 
वर्धत neu ति 

0 Trirasmai sapta dhenavo duduhre satyama-siram 
purvye vyomani. Catvaryanya bhuvanani nirnije 
caruni cakre yadrtairavardhata. 


214 RGVEDA 


Thrice seven cows, creative powers of natural 
evolution, generate the milky strain of vitality added to 
the evolving reality in the service of the creator Soma 
in the cosmic yajna in absolute time and space, Soma 
who also created four other beautiful orders of existence 
for the glory and sanctity of existence which grows by 
the laws of cosmic dynamics. 


(The seven cows may be interpreted as the seven 
evolutes of Prakrti: mahan, ahankara and five subtle 
elements of ether or akasha, energy or vayu, fire or agni, 
water or apah, and earth or prthivi. Three are orders of 
sattva or thought, rajas or motion, and tamas or matter. 
This makes the thrice seven, the four other beautiful 
orders of existence may be interpreted as mana (mind), 
buddhi (discriminative intelligence), chitta (memory) 
and ahankara (I-sense or existential personality). 
Another interpretation could be the four Vedas, 
knowledge, the corresponding order of existence in 
terms of awareness and expression. 


स भिक्षमाणो sradea चारुण उभे द्यावा काव्येना वि 
रंश्रथे । तेजिंछा अपो मंहना oR व्यत्‌ यदी देवस्य श्रव॑सा 
सदो! विदुः ॥ २॥ 


00 Sa bhiksamano amrtasya caruna ubhe dyava 
kavyena vi Sasrathe. Tejistha apo mamhana pari 
vyata yadi devasya Sravasa sado viduh. 


He, loving, sharing and pervading the immortal 
beauty of existence, orders and adorns both heaven and 
earth with his art, intelligence and poetic sublimity, also 
vesting the vapours of the middle regions with his might 
and splendour. Those who know the reality of the lord’s 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 70 215 


creation alongwith his power, love and generosity really 
know and share the bliss. 


ते Shea सन्तु केतवोऽ म्रंत्यवोऽ दाभ्यासो जनुषीं उभे BTA | 
येभिंनुम्णा च॑ देव्यां च पुनत आदिद्राजानं मनना अगृ- 
भणत ॥ ३ ॥ 


Di Te asya santu ketavo’mrtyavo’dabhyaso janusi 
ubhe anu. Yebhir-nrmna ca devya punata ववा - 
drajanam manana agrbhnata. 


May those radiations of the light and power of 
this divine Soma, spirit of bliss, free from mortality, 
deception or unreality, by which the lord strengthens, 
purifies and sanctifies acts and virtues both human and 
natural, be in accord with life, human as well as of other 
forms, and may humanity receive and internalise that 
divine spirit of love, peace and refulgence with all their 
thought, thoughtful action and meditation. 


स मृज्यर्मानो दशभिः सुकर्म भिः प्र deanre मातृषु प्रमे 
सचा । व्रतानि पानो अमृत॑स्य चारुण उभे नृचक्षा अनु 
पश्यते विशौ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Sa mrjyamano dasabhih sukarmabhih pra 
madhyamasu matrsu prame saca. Vratani pano 
amrtasya caruna ubhe nrcaksa anu pasyate visau. 


He, blissful and watchful guardian of humanity 
both pious and impious, exalted by ten efficient senses 
and pranas and by ten holy observances of Dharma, who 
is pervasive in the midst of human faculties of perception 
and volition, awareness and understanding to watch and 
warn us, thereby strengthening and promoting the holy 
and immortal dharmic discipline of humanity, He 


216 RGVEDA 


watches at first hand what people do in thought, word 
and deed. 


स मर्मृजान इद्धियाय arta ओभे अन्ता रोद॑सी हर्षते 
हितः । वृषा शुष्मेण बाधते वि दुर्मतीरादेदिंशानः शर्यहेव 
शुरुधः ॥ ५ ॥ 


a: Sa marmrjana indriyaya dhayasa obhe anta 
rodasi harsate hitah. Vrsa susmena badhate vi 
durmatir-ddedisanah saryaheva Surudhah. 


He, adorable and exalted, pervades and abides 
in both heaven and earth and in the middle regions, 
happy, blissful and generous with showers of joy for 
humanity for their honour and exaltation, to help them 
to wield their potential efficiently. With divine power, 
he warns men of negative understanding, even 
commanding them like a warrior who wards off the evil 
and finally destroys the forces of violence and 
destruction. 


PAI न ददुशान उस्रियो नान॑ददेति मरुतामिव स्वनः | 
जानन्न dad यत्स्वं प्रश॑स्तये कमवृणीत सुक्रतुं: ॥। & ॥ 


6. Sa matara na dadrsana usriyo nanadadeti 
marutamiva svanah. Janannrtam prathamam yat 
svarnaram prasastaye kamavrnita sukratuh. 


As mother cows watch and guard the calves, so 
does Soma, lord of light and power of life, vibrant and 
resonant like roaring winds, pervade, watch and vitalise 
heaven and earth, mother givers of life and sustenance. 
And the man of holy action, knowing the cosmic law of 
divinity and the prime paradisal agent of the good of 
humanity, should love and worship that Soma for his 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 70 १17 
self-fulfilment. 


रुवति भीमो वुंषभस्तं विष्यया es शिशानो हरिणी 
विचक्चषणः। आ योनिं सोपः gad नि षीदति गव्ययी 
त्वग्भ॑वति निर्णिगव्ययीं ।॥ ७ ॥ 


fe Ruvati bhimo vrsabhastavisyaya Srnge sisano 
harini vicaksanah. A yonim somah sukrtam ni 
sidati gavyayi tvagbhavati nirnigavyayl. 


Mighty, virile and generous all-watching soma 
spirit of divinity, sharpening its top powers of perfection 
of good and elimination of evil, settles in the heart centre 
of the man of holy action, vibrates and resounds, and 
then the man’s perceptive and discriminative 
intelligence becomes definitive, protective and creative, 
inviolable. 


शुचिः पुनानस्तन्व॑मरेपसमव्ये हरिन्यधाविष्ट सान॑वि iat 
मित्राय वरूणाय वायवे त्रिधातु मधुं क्रियते सुकर्म भिः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sucih pundnas-tanvam-arepasamavye harir- 
nyadhavista sanavi. Justo mitraya varunaya 
vayave tridhatu madhu kriyate sukarmabhih. 


Pure, purifying and sanctifying the holy man in 
body, the protective and gracious Soma spirit of divinity 
is enshrined on top of the holy man’s inviolable being, 
loved and adored for the sake of the spirit of friendship, 
veneration for judgement and vibrant enthusiasm for 
life, and then honey sweets of triple powers for body, 
mind and spirit are created by men of holy action. 


पव॑स्व सोम देववीतये वृषेन्द्रस्य हार्दि' सोमधानमा विंश । 


पुरा at arene itera पारय ्षेत्रविद्दि दिश आदा 
पिपृच्छते॥ ९॥ 


218 RGVEDA 


9, Pavasva soma devavitaye vrsendrasya hardi 
somadhanama visa. Pura no badhadduritati 
paraya ksetraviddhi disa aha viprechate. 


O Soma spirit of life and divinity, virile and 
generous, pure and purifying, favourite of divine hearts, 
come for the service of the divine Lord and join the 
soma yajna and the soma yajis. Take us across the evil 
before its onslaught. After all, he alone can guide the 
traveller asking for directions who knows the area on 
earth and the field of life. 


हितो न सिंरभि वाज॑मर्षेनद्र स्येन्दो जठर मा प॑वस्व | नावा 
न सिन्धुमति uff विद्वाञ्छूरो न युध्यन्नव नो निदः 
A ९०॥ 


10. Hito na saptirabhi vajam-arsendrasyendo jatha- 
rama pavasva. Nava na sindhumati parsi vidvan- 
churo na yudhyannava no nidah spah. 


Like a war horse directed to the field of battle, 
come Indu, Soma spirit of peace, power and joyous 
action, flow, enter and purify the spirit of Indra, man of 
action and the social order. Like the mariner crossing 
the sea by boat, advance, O scholar and warrior, fighting 
on. Protect us, destroy the scandal mongers and take us 
across the sea of life. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 71 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Rshabha Vaishvamitra Rshi 
आ दक्षिणा grad शुष्म्या ३ सदं वेतिं Fat Tara: पाति 
जागुंविः । हरिरोपशं hora नभस्पयं उपस्तिरे चम्वो इ्ब्रहां 
निर्णिजे ॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 71 219 


im A daksina srjyate Susmyasadam veti druho 
raksasah pati jagrvih. Hariropasam krnute 
nabhaspaya upastire camvorbrahma nirnije. 


The gift is given liberally, the mighty, Soma, 
comes to the hall and presides, the wakeful protects 
against the evil and the jealous, and the omnipotent 
Soma, lord of peace and plenty, creates water vapours 
as a pillar and cover between the green earth and heaven 
of light and reveals the Vedas to sanctify and glorify 
existence. 


प्र कष्टिहेवं शूष एति teacaa) वर्णा नि रिणीते अस्य 
तम्‌। जहाति वव्रिं पितुरेति निष्कृतमुं पुतं कृणुते निर्णिजं 
तर्ना ॥ २॥ 


2. Pra krstiheva susa eti roruvadasuryam varnam 
ni rinite asya tam. Jahati vavrim pitureti niskrta- 
mupaprutam krnute nirnijam tana. 


The mighty hero of peace, power and plenty, 
Soma, goes forward roaring like a warrior, loud and 
bold, revealing, manifesting and displaying that vibrant, 
assertive and tempestuous character of his which dispels 
and destroys darkness and evil, realises and maintains 
the purest sacred spirit of his ancestral tradition in action 
and attains the perfect, unsullied and absolute fulfilment 
of his earthly existence. 


अद्रिभिः सुतः प॑वते गभ॑स्त्योर्वंषायते नभ॑सा वेप॑ते Ae । 
स मोदते vata साध॑ते गिरा नेनिक्ते अप्सु यज॑ते परी- 
मणि ॥ ३॥ 

2 Adribhih sutah pavate gabhastyor-vrsayate 


nabhasa vepate mati. Sa modate nasate sadhate 
gira nenikte apsu yajate parimani. 


220 RGVEDA 


The soma spirit of life vibrates and sanctifies, 
distilled and condensed by clouds, realised by sages, 
shining in sun-rays and reflecting in meditative minds 
of the yogis. Virile and generous, it waxes in strength, 
showers with the cloud and inspires all with intelligence. 
It rejoices, reaches all, makes everything possible, and 
with the divine voice joins humanity, cleanses and 
sanctifies, and blesses all in yajna and in their yajnic 
actions. 


परि द्युक्षं सह॑सः udarge मध्व॑: सिञ्चन्ति get 
watery आ यस्मिन्गाव॑ः सुहुताद ऊध॑नि मूर्धञ्छ्ीणन्त्यं - 
frat वरीमभिः॥ ४॥ 


4. Pari dyuksam sahasah parvatavrdham madhvah 
sincanti harmyasya saksanim. A yasmin gavah 
suhutada udhani murdhan-chrinantyagriyam 
varimabhih. 


Honey showers of peace, patience and fortitude 
rain on the master of homely fire-side, lover of light 
and dedicated performer of soma yajna, in whose life 
and family senses, mind and memory, fed on positive 
and yajnic perceptual and conceptual food of 
experience, retain and sanctify high moral and spiritual 
values of prime importance with the highest reflections 
of divinity. 
समी रथं न भुरिजोरहेषत दश स्वसारो अदितेरुपस्थ आ। 
fered ज्रयति गोर॑पीच्यं पदं यद॑स्य मतुथा अजीज- 
नन्‌॥ ५॥ 

5. Sami ratham na bhurijorahesata dasa svasaro 
aditerupastha a. Jigadupa jrayati gorapicyam 
padam yadasya matutha ajijanan. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 71 221 


Just as ten fingers of both hands control and 
direct the chariot’s course so, if the ten faculties of 
perception and volition and the ten pranas collected 
together in meditation were to raise the yogi’s 
intelligence and awareness and he were to rise as reborn 
and reach the lap of mother Infinity, he would attain to 
the top of the blissful stage of existence which all his 
faculties in unison would generate for him. 


श्येनो न योनिं सद॑नं धिया कृतं हिर ण्यय॑मासदं देव एष॑ति। 
ए रिणन्ति बर्हिषिं प्रियं गिराऽश्वो न देवां अप्येति 
यज्ञियं: ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Syeno na yonim sadanam dhiya (01470 hiranya- 
yamasadam deva esati. E rinanti barhisi priyam 
gira’svo na devan apyeti yajniyah. 


As the eagle bird comes to rest in its nest, so 
does the light of the soul rise and shine in the golden 
cave of the heart, the seat of divinity, prepared by the 
light of higher intelligence and awareness. There on the 
seat of sanctity the celebrants adore the dear Soul with 
holy song where the divine Spirit, loving and adorable, 
blesses the divine soul of the yogi and his transparent 
faculties and rules as an emperor over the dominion. 


परा व्य॑क्तो अरुषो fea: कविर्वृषां frost अंनविष्ट गा 
अभि। सहस्रणीतिर्यतिः परायती रेभो न पूर्वीरुषसो वि 
राजति ॥ ७॥ ति 

1 Para vyakto aruso divah kavirvrsa triprstho 
anavista ga abhih. Sahasranitiryatih parayati 
rebho na purvirusaso vi rajati. 


The divine Soma Spirit of peace and power self- 


222 RGVEDA 


refulgent beyond the lights of heaven, omniscient 
creator, omnificent giver, visionary and watchful over 
the three orders of time and space, delights in the songs 
of adoration as a committed listener. It is omnipotent 
guide over a thousand ways, immanent and 
transcendent, and rules and illuminates the eternal dawns 
of light and vision like the sun. 


त्वेषं रूपं कुणुते वर्णो अस्य स यत्राशयत्समुंता सेधति 
स्रिधः | अप्सा याति स्वधया दैव्यं जनं सं सुष्टुती नसंतेसं 
गोअंग्रया।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tvesam rupam krnute varno asya sa yatrasayat 
samrta sedhati sridhah. Apsa yati svadhaya 
daivyam janam sam sustuti nasate sam go-agraya. 


Its form assumes a lustrous character of blazing 
refulgence, and wherever it reflects, shines and abides, 
there in the battles of human life and existence it destroys 
negativities and inner conflicts. Commanding the 
dynamic powers of life with its innate potential it goes 
to the pious celebrant and abides there in the heart 
adored with the highest words of exaltation. 


sad यूथा प॑रियन्न॑रावीदधि त्विषीरधित सूर्य॑स्य । दिव्यः 
सुं पर्णोऽ व॑ चक्षत at सोमः परि क्रतुना पश्यते जाः ॥ ९ ॥ 


8 Ukseva yutha pariyannaravidadhi tvistradhita 
suryasya. Divayah suparno’va caksata ksam 
somah pari kratuna pasyate jah. 


Just as cosmic energy comprehends and controls 
all systems of the universe and with its thunderous 
dynamics vests the sun with light, so does Soma, 
supreme spirit of creativity, peace and joy, the light of 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 72 223 


life and cosmic intelligence, watches the earth and nature 
and, with its holy creativity, controls and enlightens all 
systems and species it has created. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 72 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Harimanta Angirasa Rshi 


हरिं मृजन्त्यरुषो न aera सं धेनुभिः Hest सोमो! अज्यते | 
उद्वाच॑मीरयंति हिन्वते मती पुरुष्टुतस्य afd चित्परि- 
faa: ॥ ९॥ 


1. Harim mrjantyaruso na yujyate sam dhenubhih 
kalase somo ajyate. Udvacamirayati hinvate mati 
Purustutasya kati cit paripriyah. 


Devout celebrants love Soma divine like the 
warmth of fire, admire it like beauty of the dawn, and 
exalt it like light of the sun. You join the bliss of this 
divinity with all your senses, mind, intelligence and 
awareness. And then you would realise that Soma 
vibrates in the heart as bliss and rolls as waves of the 
sea. It inspires men to burst forth in song, energises 
thoughts and intellect, and sharpens the vision and 
imagination. Indeed there are no bounds to the precious 
gifts of Soma, infinite are they, universally adored and 
exalted as it is. 


साकं व॑दन्ति बहवो! मनीषिण इन्द्र॑स्य सोमं जठरे यदादुहुः | 
यदीं मृजन्ति सुग॑भस्तयो नरः सनीव्ठाभिर्दशभिः काम्यं 
मधु ॥ २॥ 

2. Sakam vadanti bahavo manisina indrasya somam 


jathare yadaduhuh. Yadim mrjanti sugabhastayo 
narah sanilabhir-dasabhih kam-yam madhu. 


224 RGVEDA 


When intelligent celebrants experience the 
Soma ecstasy in the heart core of personality, when 
brilliant people, leading lights of high mind and soul, 
with all ten senses and pranas collected, controlled and 
exalted with Soma, realise the bliss they cherish, they 
all celebrate the divine presence and burst forth in song. 


अरममाणो अत्येति गा अभि सूर्यस्य प्रियं दुहितुस्तिरो 
रव॑म्‌। अन्वस्मै जोष॑मभरद्विनंगृसः सं दवयीभिः cag hu: 
क्षेति जामिभिः ॥ ३॥ 


Aramamano atyeti ga abhi suryasya priyam duhi- 
tustiro ravam. Anvasmai josamabhara-dvinam- 
grsah sam dvayibhih svasrbhih kseti jamibhih. 


Bearing love and enthusiasm for this Soma, the 
devotee abides with both sister senses of perception and 
volition, but indifferent to sense experience and 
pleasure, he moves on to the sweet message of the dawn, 
daughter of the sun, and goes still beyond to bliss of the 
absolute divinity. 


न॒धुंतो अद्रिषुतो बर्हिषि प्रियः पतिर्गवां प्रदिव इन्दुं cht: । 
पुर॑न्धिवान्मनुषो यज्ञसाधनः शुचिर्धिया प॑वते सोम॑ इन्द्र 
ते॥ ४॥ 


4. Nrdhiuto adrisuto barhisi priyah patirgavam 
pradiva indur-rtviyah. Purandhivan manuso 
yajnasadhanah sucirdhiya pavate soma indra te. 


O soul, master of senses, mind and intelligence, 
the soma joy of existence flows free for you everywhere. 
Exercised in practice by holy men, distilled and realised 
in the heart and on the holy grass of yajna, darling of 
the soul, ruler of sense and mind, it masters, controls 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 72 225 


and governs the stars and planets. It is refulgent, 
heavenly and illuminative, and blissful across the 
seasons, time and space. It holds and sustains all systems 
of nature and humanity, it is the harbinger of success 
and fulfilment for us in all our yajnic corporate acts, 
and it is pure and immaculate beyond possibility of sin, 
evil and pollution. 


नृबाहभ्यां चोदितो धार॑या सुतोऽनुष्वधं प॑वते सोमं इन्द्र 
ते। आप्राः क्रतून्त्समंजैरध्वरे मतीर्वेर्न द्ुषच्यम्बो ई रासं - 
दब्धिः ॥ ५॥ 


5. Nrbahubhyam codito dharaya suto’nusvadham 
pavate soma indra te. Aprah kratuntsamajai- 
radhavare matirverna drusac-camvorasadadd- 
harih. 


Indra, O soul, the soma joy of divinity flows 
free for you, impelled by human arms of karma, 
showered in streams with resonant hymns. Move on to 
holy actions in yajna, and Soma, lord of peace and 
power, pervading in heaven and earth and the middle 
regions like cosmic energy and the dynamics of cause 
and effect, would fulfill your desires, intentions and 
resolutions of mind. 


अंशं दहन्ति errata कविं कवयोऽ पसो मनीषिणः 1 
समी mat मतयो' यन्ति dad ऋतस्य योना सद॑ने 
पुनर्भुवः eu 

6. Amsum duhanti stanayantam-aksitam kavim 
kavayo’paso manisinah. Sami gavo matayo yanti 
samyata rtasya yona sadane punarbhu-vah. 


All perceptions, volitions, thoughts and feelings, 


226 RGVEDA 


collected together into the mind through repeated 
practice, absorb into the heart centre of the original seat 
of meditative meet of the soul with divinity, and there 
in awareness wise men of holy action and creative vision 
receive and experience soma showers of joy, vital, 
voluble, imperishable, creative and blissful. 


नाभां पृथिव्या धरुणो महो दिवो ३ऽ पामूर्मौ सिन्धुंष्वन्त- 
रुचितः | इन्द्र॑स्य वजो, वृषभो विभूवसुः सोमो हृदे प॑वते 
चार मत्सरः ॥ ७॥ 


vin Nabha prthivya dharuno maho divo’pamurmau 
sindhusvantaruksitah. Indrasya vajro vrsabho 
vibhuvasuh somo hrde pavate caru matsarah. 


Centre-hold of the earth, wielder of the mighty 
heaven of light, showers of living energy on the waves 
of the sea, adamantine force of the thunderbolt of Indra, 
virile and generous, treasure-hold of the wealth of the 
universe, Soma, ecstatic joy of creative divinity, flows 
in the holy heart and blesses it with purity. 


स तू प॑वस्व परि पार्थिवं रज॑ः स्तोत्रे शिक्षन्नाधून्वते च॑ 
सुक्रतो । मा नो निरभाग्वसुंनः सादनस्पृशो रयिं fers बहुलं 
व॑सीमटहि॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sa tu pavasva pari parthivam rajah stotre Siksa- 
nnadhunvate ca sukrato. Ma no nirbhagva-sunah 
sadanasprso rayim pisangam bahulam vasimahi. 


O lord of holy action and yajnic dynamics of 
the universe, flow and purify everything of the globe 
and the skies, giving me, your enthusiastic celebrant, 
the vision and wisdom for the good life. Deprive us not 
of the peace, power and wealth of the home and family. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 73 227 


Bless us that we may live in peace and enjoy peace and 
homely wealth of golden plenty and variety. 


आ तू न॑ इन्दो शतदात्वश्व्यं सहस्रदातु पशुमद्धिर॑ण्यवत्‌ | 
उप॑ मास्व बृहती रेवतीरिषोऽ fal स्तोत्रस्य॑ पवमान नो 
गहि॥ ९॥ 


9. A ti na indo gatadatvasvyam sahasradatu pasu- 
maddhiranyavat. Upa masva_ brhati revatiriso’ 
dhi stotrasya pavamana no gahi. 


O lord of light and bliss of peace, pure and all 
purifying, giver of a hundred-and-thousandfold wealth 
of advancement and achievement, creator and ordainer 
of all human, animal and golden wealth of the beauty 
of the world, come to bless our yajna, listen to our songs 
of adoration, and bless us with vast expansive wealth 
of food and energy, knowledge and culture alongwith a 
sense of values of those divine gifts for our good. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 73 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Pavitra Angirasa Rshi 


wad दरप्सस्य धम॑तः सम॑स्वरन्नृतस्य योना Gated 
नाभ॑यः | त्रन्त्स मूर्ध्नो असुरश्चक्र आरभ सत्यस्य नावः 
सुकृत॑म-पीपरन्‌॥ ९ ॥ 


0 Srakve drapsasya dhamatah samasvarannrtasya 
yona samaranta nabhayah. Trintsa murdhno 
asurascakra arabhe satyasya navah sukrtamapt- 
paran. 


Streams of the waves and particles of exuberant 
soma of the creator singing in unison flow into forms 
in the cosmic home of existence, and the centre-holds 


228 RGVEDA 


of the forms of systems and sub-systems flow back into 
the vedi of the cosmic yajna, completing the cycle. The 
highest and omnipotent lord of cosmic vitality, to begin 
this yajna, brought into manifestation three modes of 
Prakrti, sattva, rajas and tamas, and the emergence of 
living forms of species, boat-like carriers-on, finally 
complete the holy creative process. 


सम्यक्सम्यञ्चों महिषा steed सिन्धो.रूमवधि वेना 
अंवीविपन्‌। मधोधरराभिर्जनयंन्तो अर्कपित्परियामिन्द्रस्य 
तन्व॑मवीवृधन्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


१.७ Samyak samyanco mahisa ahesata sindhoru- 
rmavadhi vena avivipan. Madhor-dharabhir- 
janayanto arkamit priyam-indrasya tanvam- 
avivrdhan. 


Mighty men, sages, scholars and leaders, wise, 
ambitious and good intentioned, holily all together 
stirring on top of the oceanic waves of existence, keep 
it moving fast and faster and, creating beautiful things, 
doing good work in honour of the lord creator, advance 
this dear world of the Almighty with streams of the 
honey sweets of soma. 


पवित्रवन्तः परि वाच॑मासते पितैषां wet अभि र॑क्षति व्रतम्‌। 
महः समुद्रं वरुणस्तिरो द॑धे धीरा इच्छेकुर्धरूणेष्वार- 
भ॑म्‌॥ ३॥ 

2 Pavitravantah pari vacam-asate pitaisam pratno 


abhi raksati vratam. Mahah samudram varu- 
nastiro dadhe dhira icchekurdharunesvarabham. 


Men of soma purity of mind and character, they 
stand by the holy voice of divinity and the dynamics of 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 73 229 


nature. The eternal father and ruler over all protects and 
promotes their discipline of Dharma. Just as the all 
enveloping space alone can cover the mighty ocean and 
the cosmic vapours, similarly men of stable mind only 
can keep original human commitment in matters of 
cosmic law. 


सहस्त्र॑धारेऽ व ते सम॑स्वरब्दिवो नाके Helter staged: । 
अस्य स्पशो न नि पिंषन्ति भूर्णयः पदेप॑दे पाशिनं: सन्ति 
सेत॑वः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Sahasradhare’va te samasvaran divo 114८ 
madhujihva asascatah. Asya spaso na ni misanti 
bhurnayah padepade pasinah santi setavah. 


In this world of a thousand streams of soma joy 
and divine generosity, the soma souls in humanity sing 
and swim in action, sweet of tongue, mind and will, 
joining the paradisal vision of heavenly light. The instant 
and watchful eyes of the dynamics of divinity, all 
enveloping and all beholding, are ever awake without a 
wink for the moment. O lord, at every step the binding 
bonds are there, and there are saviour bridges as well. 


पितुर्मातुरध्या ये समस्व॑रन्चा शोच॑न्तः संदर्हन्तो अव्रतान्‌ | 
इन्द्रद्विष्टामप धमन्ति मायया त्वचमसिंक्नीं भूम॑नो 
दिवस्परि ॥ ५॥ 


a, Piturmaturadhya ye samasvarannrca socantah 
samdahanto avratan. Indradvistamapa dha-manti 
mayaya tvacamasiknim bhumano divas-pari. 


Like the rays of sunlight radiating from above 
to mother earth in unison, shining with their brilliance, 
illuminating and purifying, and burning off those 


230 RGVEDA 


pollutants which act against natural law, the soma souls 
of humanity acting in unison around father and mother 
in holy tradition, shining and sanctifying life with divine 
hymns, reducing and eliminating powers of negative 
character and habit against natural law and human 
values, they drive off and eliminate the defilers and 
violators of cosmic law, and, with the knowledge and 
power of the light of great heaven, they remove the veil 
of the darkness of ignorance. 


प्रलान्मानादध्या ये समस्व॑रज्छ्ल्ोकयन्त्रासो रभसस्य 
मन्त॑वः। अपानक्षासो बधिरा अहासत ऋतस्य पन्थां न 
त॑रन्ति दुष्कृतः ।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Pratnanmanadadhya ye samasvaran-chlokaya- 
ntraso rabhasasya mantavah. Apanaksaso badhi- 
ra ahasata rtasya pantham na taranti duskrtah. 


Soma souls that act in unison with faith in eternal 
values, who are self-controlled by the divine Word and 
follow the spirit of lord Almighty pursue the path of 
universal law and reach the divine destination. But men 
of negative disposition see not what they see and hear 
not what they hear, abandon the path of truth and fail to 
reach the divine destination of life. 


स॒हस्र॑धारे वितं ते पवित्र आ वाचं पुनन्ति कवयो मनीषिणः 1 
Gare एषामिषिरासो! sige: स्पशः स्वञ्च॑ः सुदृशो! नृच- 
क्ष॑सः॥ ७॥ 


vin Sahasradhare vitate pavitra ठ vacam punanti 
kavayo manisinah. Rudrasa esam-isiraso adru- 
hah spasah svancah sudrso nrcaksasah. 


In this expansive world of a thousand streams 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 73 231 


of purity flowing on and on, men of noble thought and 
poetic vision create, speak and sanctify their word. Men 
of judgement and rectitude, they discriminate between 
right and wrong and the natural consequences thereof. 
They are dynamic, free from jealousy, penetrative 
observers, worthy of reverence, holy visionaries and 
constant watchers of humanity 


mare गोपा न दभाय सुक्रतुस्त्री ष पवित्रां हृद्य न्तरा 
द॑धे । विद्धान्त्स विश्वा भुव॑नाभि प॑श्यत्यवाजुंष्टान्विध्यति 
कर्ते अव्रतान्‌ ॥ i 


8. Rtasya gopa na dabhaya sukratustri sa pavitra 
hrdyantara dadhe. Vidvantsa visva bhuvanabhi 
pasyat-yavajustan vidhyati karte avratan. 


The man of universal truth, guardian of law, is 
undaunted, he is not for fear, nor for deceit. Pure at 
heart and holy of action, he maintains that strength and 
purity in his threefold conduct in thought, word and 
deed. Man of knowledge, vision and practical wisdom, 
he overwatches the entire regions of the world, brings 
to book the sceptics and the uncommitted, and fixes the 
saboteurs and the violators of law. 


ऋतस्य तन्तुर्विततः पवित्र आ जिह्ाया अग्रे वरुणस्य 
मायया । धीराख्चित्तत्समिनंक्चन्त आशताऽत्रा कर्तमव 
पदात्यप्रभुः ॥ ९॥ 

Rtasya tanturvitatah pavitra a jihvayad agre 
varunasya mayaya. Dhirascit tat saminaksanta 
asata’tra kartamava padatyaprabhuh. 


The web of Truth and Law is vast and universal. 
It extends enshrined in the pure at heart and speaks at 


232 RGVEDA 


the tip of the tongue by virtue of the wondrous power 
of Varuna, lord of love and justice, choice and 
discrimination. The brave, settled at heart and mind, 
receive it and follow it to self-fulfilment. The sceptics, 
dissenting and denying, fall from grace into negation 
and utter frustration. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 74 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Kakshivan Dairghatamasa Rshi 


शिशुर्न जातोऽ व॑ चक्रदद्वने स्व र्यदवाज्य॑रुषः सिषासति । 
दिवो रेत॑सा सचते पयोवृधा तमीमहे सुमती शर्म स॒प्रथ॑: ॥ ९॥ 


Le Sisurna jato’va cakradadvane svaryadvajya- 
rusah sisasati. Divo retasad sacate payovrdha 
tamimahe sumati Sarma saprathah. 


When in this vernal wood of existence, man 
clamours like a new born baby for sustenance, then that 
mighty refulgent heavenly giver of light and bliss waxes 
with love and desire overflowing with the milk of grace 
and blesses him with the living energy of heavenly 
divinity. To that divine lord of light and peace we pray 
with songs of holiness for life’s well being and spiritual 
freedom. 


दिवो a: स्कम्भो धरुणः स्वातत आपूर्णो अंशुः afta 
विश्वतः । सेमे मही रोद॑सी यक्षदावृतां समीचीने दाधार 
समिषंः कविः ॥ २॥ 

0. Divo yah skambho dharunah svatata apurno 


amsuh paryeti visvatah. Seme mahi rodasi 
yaksadavrta samicine dadhara samisah kavih. 


We pray to that centre-hold of heaven, 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 74 233 


foundation of existence, boundless holy presence all 
pervasive and perfect, covering all space all round who 
holds both these worlds of earth and heaven with the 
middle regions together and sustains them like a 
yajamana. He is the omniscient visionary, poetic creator 
and giver of food and energy for sustenance and 
knowledge for enlightenment. 


महि प्सर : Gd सोम्यं मधूर्वी गव्यूंतिरदि तेत्ऋतं यते 1ST 
यो वृष्टैरित उस्रियो तृषाऽपां नेता य sashes: ॥ २ ॥ 


Bf Mahi psarah sukrtam somyam madhurvi gavyutir- 
aditer-rtam yate. Ise yo vrsterita usriyo vrsa’pam 
neta ya ita utir-rgmiyah. 


Of mighty form is he, generous, adorable, 
exceedingly refulgent controller of universal dynamics, 
shelter home of life who rules over the rains of living 
waters on earth. The honey sweets of soma homage well 
expressed and distilled are for him, yajamana of the 
yajnic wide paths of rectitude of mother earth and nature. 


आत्मन्वन्न भो दुह्यते घृतं पय॑ ऋतस्य Ta वि tera 
समीचीनाः सुदानवः प्रीणन्ति तं नरो हितमव मेहन्ति 
Wa: us 


4. Atmanvannabho duhyate ghrtam paya rtasya 
nabhir-amrtam vi jayate. Samicinah sudanavah 
prinanti tam naro hitamava mehanti peravah. 


Living energising showers of soma ghrta and 
waters are received from space. The centre-hold of 
eternal truth and spirit of immortality here constantly 
manifests in the flow of existence. Joint integrated 
generous powers of nature serve that divinity and 
leading lights of humanity too offer service in abundance 


234 RGVEDA 
to the munificent power. 


अरावीदंशुः सच॑मान ऊर्मिणा देवाव्यं ade पिन्वति 
raat दर्धाति गर्भमदितेरुपस्थ आ येन॑ तोकं च तनयं 
च धाम॑हे॥ ५॥ 


5: Aravidamsuh sacamana urmina devavyam 
manuse pinvati tvacam. Dadhati garbham- 
aditerupastha a yena tokam ca tanayam ca 
dhamahe. 


The soma spirit of divine vitality, one in love 
with life, vitalises and strengthens the holy earth and 
body health of humanity with the waves of its joy and 
love desire. It vests the womb of earth with seed and 
fertility by virtue of which we beget our children and 
grand children. 


सहस््र॑धारेऽ व ता stavadeddta सन्तु रज॑सि प्र॒जाव॑तीः । 
चतस्त्रो नाभो निहिता अवो feat हविर्भरन्त्यमृतं 
घृतशचुतं: ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sahasradhare’va ta asascatastrtiye santu rajasi 
prajavatih. Catasro nabho nihita avo divo 
havirbharantyamrtam ghrtascutah. 


Those creative vitalities in the sun of a thousand 
streams of light and life be there above in the third region 
of light in space and come down to earth. Four treasure 
casks of Dharma, artha, kama and moksha abide well 
guarded in the region of light and, overflowing with 
ghrta, living water and divine sanctity, bring down the 
spirit and message of full life on earth for the joy of 
human life, imperishable and immortal. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 74 235 


श्वेतं रूपं कुणुते aferstafa सोमो मी ढवां असुरो वेद 
भूम॑नः । धिया शमी! सचते सेमभि प्रवदिवस्कव॑न्धमवं 
दर्षदुद्विणम ॥ ७॥ 


१९ Svetam riupam krnute yat sisasati somo midhvan 
asuro veda bhumanah. Dhiya sami sacate 
semabhi pravad-divaskabandham-ava darsadu- 
drinam. 


Whenever man desires, Soma, life of life on 
earth and virile controller of solar energy that pervades 
vast natural resources, forms shining clouds of vapour, 
parjanya, then, with its intelligential dynamics, joins 
with the vapour powers, and, going forward from light 
to the cloud, breaks the flood of water vapours into rain. 
(Like the clouds of rain showers of water, also, come 
the rain showers of knowledge and wisdom for 
humanity). 


अधं श्वेतं कलशं गोभिरक्तं कार्ष्मन्ना वाज्य॑क्रमीत्सस- 
arm ist हिन्विरे मन॑सा देवयन्तः wetted शतहिमाय 
गोनाम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Adha Svetam kalasam gobhir-aktam karsmanna 
vajyakramit sasavan. A hinvire manasa deva- 
yantah kaksivate Satahimaya gonam. 


Just as a well trained race horse shoots to the 
victory line, so does Soma, lord of light, life and peace, 
proceed to the pure heart of the devotee, a transparent 
receiver refined and consecrated by the holy voice of 
divinity. To him do celebrants of divinity with sincere 
mind enthusiastically pray to bless the scholars, the 
teacher and the disciple, with a hundred years of 
enlightened life of knowledge and wisdom. 


236 RGVEDA 


sie: सोम पपृचानस्य॑ ते रसोऽ व्यो वारं वि प॑वमान 
धावति। स मृज्यमानः कविभिव॑मदिन्तम स्वदस्वेन्द्राय 
पवमान पीतये eu 


9. Adbhih soma paprcanasya te raso ’vyo varam vi 
pavamana dhavati. Sa mrjyamanah kavibhir- 
madintama svadasvendraya pavamana pitaye. 


O Soma, lord of light and bliss, pure and 
purifying, lover of life with showers of living 
consecrating nectar, the immortal bliss of your presence 
flows to the chosen soul of humanity. As such, celebrated 
and exalted by poets, O Spirit immaculate most ecstatic, 
pray flow and be sweet and gracious for the delight and 
fulfilment of Indra, virile soul of pious humanity. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 75 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Kavi Bhargava Rshi 


अभि प्रियाणिं पवते चनोहितो नामानि यहयो अधि येषु 
add lon सूर्य॑स्य बृहतो बृहन्नधि रथं विष्व॑ञ्चमरुहद्धि- 
चक्चणः॥ ९॥ 


ks Abhi priyani pavate canohito namani yahvo adhi 
yesu vardhate. A suryasya brhato brhanna-dhi 
ratham visvancam-aruhad-vicaksanah. 


Soma, spirit of life and joy of existence, mighty, 
infinite, omnipresent, pervades and vitalises all dear 
beautiful systems of waters and light, expansive and 
exalted therein. Greater than the great, all watching, it 
rides the grand chariot of the sun which comprehends 
and illuminates the whole world. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 75 237 


ऋतस्य जिह्वा प॑वते मधुं प्रियं वक्ता पतिर्धियो अस्या 
अदाभ्यः । दधाति पुत्रः पित्रोर॑पीच्यं १ नामं तृतीयमधि रोचने 
दिवः॥ २॥ 


2. Rtasya jihva pavate madhu priyam vakta 
patirdhiyo asya adabhyah. Dadhati putrah 
pitrorapicyam nama trttyamadhi rocane divah. 


The flame of yajna as the voice of eternal truth 
rises and expresses the dear delicious beauty and glory 
of Soma, spirit of universal light and bliss. The speaker 
and protector of the acts of yajna and Soma truth of life 
is fearless, undaunted. Just as progeny is the continuance 
and illumination of the honour and reverence of parents, 
so is yajna the progeny and illuminative soma of Soma 
refulgent in the third and highest region of the light of 
existence. 


अवं द्युतानः कलश अचिक्रदन्नृभिर्येमानः कोशा आ 
हिरण्यये । अभीमृतस्य दोहनां अनूषताऽधिं त्रिपृष्ठ उषसो 
वि राजति॥ ३॥ 


3 Ava dyutanah kalasan acikradan-nrbhiryema-nah 
८05८ a hiranyaye. Abhimrtasya dohana 
anusata’dhi triprstha usaso vi rajati. 


Evoked and concentrated in the golden cave of 
the heart by veteran yogis, leading them to a vision of 
divinity, illuminating the sacred hearts, it vibrates and 
speaks loud and bold in the spirit. Those who distil the 
eternal truth of existence in their yajnic communion with 
divinity celebrate and exalt it in song as it abides over 
three regions of earth, heaven and the skies and shines 
over the glory of dawns. 


238 RGVEDA 


अद्रिभिः सुतो मतिभिश्चनोंहितः प्ररोचयत्रोद॑सी मातरा 
शुचिः । रोमाण्यव्या समया वि धावति मधोधरा पिन्व॑माना 
दिवेदिवे ॥  ॥ 


4. Adribhih suto matibhiscanohitah prarocayan 
rodasi matara sucih. Romanyavya samaya vi 
dhavati madhordhara pinvamana divedive. 


Distilled in essence and presence in the heart, 
realised in bliss by veteran wise, pure, immaculate and 
brilliant, illuminating mother earth and mother heavens 
of life and existence, Soma radiates, blessing sacred 
hearts in communion and augmenting systemic unions 
of existence all round flowing in streams of honey joy. 


परि सोम प्र ध॑न्वा स्वस्तये नृभिः पुनानो अभि वासया- 
Praia ते vet आहनसो विहायसस्तेथिरिन्द्रं चोदय 
दात॑वे FEL ५॥ 


2. Pari soma pra dhanva svastaye nrbhih punano 
abhi vasayasiram. Ye te mada ahanaso vihayas- 
astebhir-indram codaya datave magham. 


O Soma spirit of joy and victory of existence, 
radiate and come for the happiness and all round well- 
being of life. Pure and purifying, exalted by the veteran 
wise, come and sanctify the beauty of life. With all those 
joyous gifts of yours which are mighty universal and 
radiant in the dynamics of existence, pray inspire Indra, 
the ruling soul, to create the honour, wealth and 
excellence of life and bless us with the highest bliss. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 76 239 


Mandala 9/Sukta 76 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Kavi Bhargava Rshi 


धर्ता दिवः प॑वते कृत्व्यो रसो दश्चो देवानामनुमाद्यो नृभिः | 
हरिः सृजानो अत्यो न सत्वभिर्वृथा पाजांसि कृणुते 
नदीष्वा ॥ ९॥ 


iP Dharta divah pavate krtvyo raso dakso devana- 
manumadyo nrbhih. Harih srjano atyo na 
satvabhir-vrtha pajamsi krnute nadisva. 


Soma, joyous spirit of the universe, sustainer 
of the regions of light, constant doer, eternal delight 
and bliss of divinities, perfect omnipotent power, sole 
worthy of worship by humanity vibrates omnipresent, 
purifies and sanctifies the life of existence. Destroyer 
of want and suffering, ever creative, with its own powers 
spontaneously, like energy itself creates movement and 
growth in the channels of existence. 


शूरो न ध॑त्त आयुधा गभ॑स्त्योः vay: सिषासत्रथिरो 
गविष्टिषु । इन्द्र॑स्य शुष्प॑मीरय॑न्नपस्यु भिरिन्दुर्हिन्वानो अज्यते 
मनी-षिभिः।॥ २॥ 


2. Suro na dhatta Gyudha gabhastyoh svah sisasan 
rathiro gavistisu. Indrasya Susmam-trayannapa- 
syubhir-indur-hinvano ajyate manisibhih. 


Wielding the powers and instrumentalities of 
nature, like a warrior and victor in immanent will and 
omniscience, keen to share the joy of existence with 
humanity in paths of daily business, commanding the 
chariot of the universe in micro and macro systems of 
its dynamics, inspiring and elevating the soul’s potential, 


240 RGVEDA 


itself stimulated and energised into manifestation by 
thinkers and men of yajnic action in meditation, the spirit 
of universal light and glory is aroused to raise and bless 
humanity. 


इन्द्र॑स्य सोम पव॑मान ऊर्मिणा तविष्यमाणो जठरेष्वा विंश । 
Wut: पिन्व विद्युदभ्रेव रोद॑सी धिया न वाजाँ उप॑ मासि 
शश्व॑तः U3 U 


3: Indrasya soma pavamana urmind tavisyamano 
jatharesva visa. Pra nah pinva vidyudabhreva 
rodasi dhiya na vajan upa masi Sasvatah. 


Soma, vigorous spirit of joyous power and 
generosity, pure, purifying and constantly flowing, 
brilliant, blazing and advancing in strength, come by 
the stream and waves of energy and enter in the heart 
core of the soul. As thunder, lightning and clouds of 
rain shower and augment heaven and earth, pray 
strengthen us, and with divine intelligence, as it were, 
extend our food, energies, progress and victories for all 
time. You are the creator, you are the maker, you are the 
giver. 


विश्व॑स्य राजां पवते स्वर्दूं ऋतस्य॑ धीतिमरंषिषाव्॑वीव- 
शत्‌। यः सूर्यस्यासिरेण सृज्यते पिता म॑तीनामसंमष्ट - 
hires: US 
4. Visvasya raja pavate svardrsa rtasya dhitim- 
rsisal-avivaSat. Yah suryasyasirena mrjyate pita 
matinamasam-astakavyah. 
Soma is refulgent ruler of the world. It flows 


pure, purifying those who see the light divine. Loving, 
commanding, and illuminating the dynamics of nature 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 77 241 


unto waves and particles, seer of the seers as it is, exalted 
by sun beams, father generator and giver of knowledge, 
it transcends the vision and word of the wise and poet’s 
poetry. 


वृषेव यूथा परि कोरछामर्षस्यपामुपस्थे वृषभः कनिंक्रदत्‌। 
स इन्द्राय पवसे मत्सरिन्त॑मो यथा जेषाम समिथे 
त्वोत॑यः WG 


Vrseva yutha pari kosam-arsasyapamupasthe 
vrsabhah kanikradat. Sa indraya pavase matsa- 
rintamo yatha jesama samithe tvotayah. 


As a generous chief rules over multitudes so, O 
Soma, mighty virile spirit of divinity, thundering in the 
depth of clouds of vapour, you overflow the clouds. 
Thus, O most joyous and blissful spirit of the universe, 
you flow for the soul. Pray bless us so that under your 
natural protections of grace we may win in the struggles 
of life. 
Mandala 9/Sukta 77 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Kavi Bhargava Rshi 
एष प्र कोशो मधुमां अचिक्रददिन्द्रस्य वजो agar वपुष्टरः | 
अभीमृतस्य सुदुघा घृतश्चुतो वाश्रा अर्षन्ति पय॑सेव 
a: ॥ ९॥ 
1. Esa pra koSe madhuman acikradad-indrasya 


vajro vapuso vapustarah. Abhimrtasya sudugha 
ghrtascuto vasra arsanti payaseva dhenavah. 


This soma, blissful spirit of the universe, full of 
honey sweets of joy, vibrates and reveals itself aloud in 
the ananda-maya kosha at the heart’s core of the soul, 


242 RGVEDA 


potent as thunderbolt of Indra, beauty, power and bliss 
incarnate, more beautiful and vigorous than beauty and 
power itself. All voices of speech replete with the spirit 
of truth and divinity, generous and overflowing with 
liquidity of meaning and spirit of divinity and divine 
law flow from it, about it and to it like milch cows 
overflowing with milk for the calf. 


स पूर्व्यः प॑वते यं दिवस्परि श्येनो म॑थायदिंषितस्तिरो रज॑ः | 
स मध्व आ युवते वेविजान इत्कृ शानोरस्तुर्मनसाहं 
बिभ्युषा ॥ २॥ 


2: Sa purvyah pavate yam divas-pari Syeno matha- 
yad-isitas-tiro rajah. Sa madhva a yuvate vevi- 
jana it krsanor-asturmanas@aha bibhyusa. 


That eternal joy, which the brilliant light of 
divinity moved in the heart core distils from heaven 
through the middle regions of human fluctuations of 
existence, vibrates omnipresent and purifies all who 
care. That same joy full of honey sweets, vibrating with 
power and bliss joins with the weaker humanity stricken 
with fear and anxiety and may, we pray, inspire the 
devotee with new strength and vigour. 


ते नः पूवस उप॑रास इन्द॑वो महे वाजाय धन्वन्तु गोम॑ते | 
ईश्चेण्यासो अह्यो न चार॑वो ब्र्मब्रह्म ये जुंजुषुर्ह - 
विर्हविः।॥ ३॥ 

ot Te nah purvasa uparasa indavo mahe vajaya 


dhanvantu gomate. Iksenyaso ahyo na caravo 
brahmabrahma ye jujusur-havirhavih. 


May those ancients of vision and the later ones 
present and future blest with light and power, inspire 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 77 243 


us to win new prizes of great advancement and victory 
rich in wealth and advancement. May they, thinkers and 
seekers, generous and sublime like clouds of rain 
showers, who meditate on the essence of vast existence 
and offer the essence of sacred oblations of yajnic 
fragrances with love and faith, inspire us. 


अयं नो विदवान्व॑नवद्वनुष्यत इन्दुः सत्राचा मन॑सा पुरुष्टुतः | 
इनस्य यः सद॑ने गर्भमादधे गवामुरुब्जमभ्यर्षति व्रजम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ayam no vidvan vanavadvanusyata induh satraca 
manasa purustutah. Inasya yah sadane garbha- 
maddadhe gavam-urubjam-abhyarsati vrajam. 


This our sagely scholar, brilliant and generous, 
widely admired and adored, loving the loving and 
dispelling the violent with a disciplined and 
concentrated mind, who has received the eternal seed 
of knowledge in the presence of the glorious lord of 
divinity, proceeds to the highest abundant origin of the 
mind and senses and moves further forward. 


चक्रिर्दिवः प॑वते कृत्व्यो Tal महाँ अद॑ब्धो वरुणो हुरुग्यते | 
असावि मित्रो वृजनेषु यज्ञियोऽत्यो न यूथे वुंषयुः 
कर्निंक्रदत्‌॥ ५॥ 


Cakrirdivah pavate krtvyo raso mahan adabdho 
varuno hurugyate. Asavi mitro vrjanesu yajniyo 
*tyo na yuthe vrsayuh kanikradat. 


The creator of the universe flows omnipresent, 
purifies, sanctifies and blesses. Constant doer adorable, 
delight of the celebrants, great, undauntable, lord of 
judgement and choice, abandons men of crooked nature 
and behaviour and fulfils the mission of the holy. Friend 


244 RGVEDA 


on all paths of life, companionable, giver of fulfilment, 
He vibrates in the multitude of existence and roars like 
thunder in the depth of clouds. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 78 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Kavi Bhargava Rshi 


प्रराजा वाचं जनयन्नसिष्यददपो वसानो अभि गा इयक्षति। 
गृभ्णाति रिप्रमविरस्य तान्वा शुद्धो देवानामुप याति 
निष्कृतम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


ll, Pra raja vacam janayann-asisyadad-apo vasano 
abhi ga iyaksati. Grbhndati ripram-avira-sya tanva 
suddho devanamupa yati niskrtam. 


Soma, creative ruling spirit of the universe, self 
moved with will and desire, producing the cosmic sound 
of speech, releasing the flow of cosmic energies, pleased 
and pervasive, proceeds to the yajnic formation of stars 
and planets. The kind protective sun fertilises the 
manifestive earthly forms with its own living energy 
and the immaculate soul proceeds to nature’s womb of 
divinities for their manifestation and self-realisation. 


इन्द्राय सोम oft षिच्यसे न॒भिर्नृचक्षां ऊर्मिः कविरज्यसे 
aa । पूवीर्हि a era: सन्ति यात॑वे सहस्रमश्वा हस्यश्च- 
मूषदः। ।२॥ ` 

De Indraya soma pari sicyase nrbhir-nrcaksa urmih 
kavir-ajyase vane. Purvirhi te srutayah santi 
ydtave sahasram-asva harayascamusadah. 


Soma, spirit of universal joy, is poured from one 
form into another for the sake of Indra, the soul. The 
all-watching, all-knowing creative, all rolling pervasive 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 78 245 


spiritual cosmic flow is loved and worshipped in the 
beautiful world of divinity. O lord, eternal and universal 
are the holy dynamics of your creation for humanity to 
pursue and follow, infinite your moving forces, 
advancing, arresting and absorbing in the yajnic world. 


समुद्िया अप्सरसो मनीषिणमासीना अन्तर भि AAT | 
ता ई हिन्वन्ति हर्म्यस्य सक्षणि याचन्ते सुम्नं पव॑मानम्िं- 
तम्‌॥ ३॥ 


2. Samudriya apsaraso manisinam-asina antara-bhi 
somam-aksaran. Ta im hinvanti harmyasya 
saksanim yacante sumnam pavamanamaksitam. 


Vibrations of divine presence flowing in space 
and enshrined in the heart radiate to the enlightened 
soul at peace. They inspire and move this resident 
companion soul of the beautiful mind and body so that 
the devotees pray for imperishable peace and bliss of 
the pure and purifying divinity. 


गोजिन्नः सोमो' रथजिष्दिःरण्यजित्स्वर्जिंद्‌न्नित्प॑वते 
सहस््रजित्‌। यं देवासंश्चक्रिरे पीतये मद्‌ स्वादि द्रप्सम॑रूणं 
darya ४॥ 


4. Gojinnah somo rathajidd-hiranyayjit svarjid-abjit 
pavate sahasrajit. Yam devasas-cakrire pitaye 
madam  svadistham  drapsam-arunam 
mayobhuvam. 


Soma, universal spirit of peace and bliss, is the 
creator master controller and giver of earthly and divine 
wealth and enlightenment, movement and progress, 
golden graces of beauty and excellence, happiness and 
fulfilment and fluid assets, it purifies us and wins us a 


246 RGVEDA 


thousand victories of existence. This spirit of universal 
joy, exciting, most delightful, streaming forth, 
enlightening, giver of peace and fulfilment, the divines 
reveal to us for our enlightenment and well being. 


एतानिं सोम पव॑मानो अस्मयुः सत्यानि कृण्वन्द्रविंणान्य- 
घसि i जहि senha दूरके च य उर्वी गव्युंतिमभ॑यं च 
नस्कृधि ॥ ५॥ 


5. Etani soma pavamano asmayuh satyani krnvan 
dravinanyarsasi. Jahi Satrum-antike durake ca ya 
urvim gavyutimabhayam ca naskrdhi. 


O Soma, our well wisher, pure and purifying, 
these are the real and true acts of kindness and grace, 
doing which you vibrate for our prosperity, honour and 
excellence everywhere. Pray destroy our negativities 
and enemities far as well as near, and open for us the 
paths of progress wide, straight and free from fear. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 79 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Kavi Bhargava Rshi 


अचोदसो नो धन्वन्त्विन्दवः प्र सुवानासो gefeag ata: | 
वि च asta इषो अरातयो ऽ af न॑शन्त सनिषन्त नो 
धिय॑ः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Acodaso no dhanvantvindavah pra suvanaso 
brhaddivesu harayah. Vi ca nasan na iso 
aratayo’ryo nasanta sanisanta no dhiyah. 


May the bright and blissful soma streams of 
divinity, self-moved and self-inspired, life-giving, 
gracious dispellers of darkness and suffering, inspire 
us to move forward in the vast yajnas of celestial 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 79 247 


proportions. Let the enemies of our food and energy 
perish. Let the saboteurs be destroyed. Let our hopes 
and plans be realised and fulfilled. 


प्र णो धन्वन्त्विन्दवो मदच्युतो धना वा येभिरर्वतो 
जुनीमसि। तिरो मर्त॑स्य कस्य॑ चित्परिह्तिं वयं धनानि 
विश्वधा भरेमहि॥ २॥ 


ps Pra no dhanvantvindavo madacyuto dhana va 
yebhir-arvato junimasi. Tiro martasya kasya cit 
parihvrtim vayam dhanani visvadha bharemahi. 


May the bright and blissful Soma streams of 
divine honey joy inspire us, by which we, warriors of 
advancement and progress, may win and acquire wealth 
and, warding off the crookedness of any human power 
whatever it be, we may always achieve wealth of 
universal value. 


उत स्वस्या अरात्या आरिर्हिष उतान्यस्या अरात्या वृको हि 
षः। धन्वन्न तृष्णा सम॑रीत at अभि सोम॑ जहि प॑वमान 
दुराध्यः ॥ ३॥ 


> Uta svasya aratya arirhi sa utanyasya aratya 
vrko hi sah. Dhanvan na trsna samarita tan abhi 
soma jahi pavamana duradhyah. 


He is the enemy of one’s own adversity, and of 
another’s adversity too, he is the enemy, a very 
thunderbolt, against adversity and enmity. Deal with 
adversity and enmity the way you deal with thirst in the 
desert, driving it off any way, O Soma, pure, purifying 
and dynamic spirit, dispel the negative will and 
understanding of the obstinates and the malignants. 


248 RGVEDA 


fafa a art परमो य आददे पुंथिव्यास्ते weg: सान॑वि 
fard: | अद्र॑यस्त्वा बप्सति गोरधि carer tg त्वा हस्तैर्वु- 
दुहुर्मनीषिणः॥ ४॥ 


4. Divi te nabha paramo ya adade prthivyaste 
ruruhuh sanavi ksipah. Adrayastva bapsati gora- 
dhi tvacyapsu tva hastair-duduhurmant-sinah. 


The supreme power and bliss of yours, which 
captivates and holds, abides in the centre of the regions 
of light. The inspirations for the light arise here on top 
of the earth. The veteran wise exalt you in the vedi on 
the floor of the earth, and thinkers and seekers distil the 
bliss in their actions as they milk the cow with their 
hands for milk. 


एवा त॑ इन्दो सुभ्वं सुपेशसं रसं तुञ्जन्ति प्रथमा अंभिचध्रियंः। 
निदंनिदं पवमान नि तारिष आविस्ते शुष्मो भवतु प्रियो 
मदः ॥ ५॥ 


= Eva ta indo subhvam supesasam rasam tunjanti 
prathama abhisriyah. Nidamnidam pavamana ni 
tarisa aviste Susmo bhavatu priyo madah. 


O Soma, bright and blissful divine spirit of 
existence, pure and purifying power, thus do veteran 
devotees of noble dedicated mind distil the gracious, 
delicious and inspiring bliss of divine joy. Pray dispel 
the malice of all malignant minds so that your dear 
delightful power and bliss shines pure and bright every 
where in every living being. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 80 249 


Mandala 9/Sukta 80 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Vasu Bharadvaja Rshi 


सोम॑स्य ant पवते नृचश्च॑स wads देवान्ह॑वते fares | 
वृहस्पते रवथेना fa दिद्युते समुद्रासो न सव॑नानि 
विव्यचुः ॥ ९॥ 


I. Somasya dhara pavate nrcaksasa rtena devan 
havate divaspari. Brhaspate ravathena vi didyute 
samudraso na savanani vivyacuh. 


The stream of soma, light and bliss of divinity, 
flows free. It purifies, sanctifies, embraces and 
enlightens all humanity and arouses the divinities with 
the yajnic call of divine law. It vibrates and shines with 
the voice of omniscient lord transcendent, Brhaspati, 
and, like the vaulting oceans and expansive space, the 
generative vibrations of divinity extend beyond the 
lights of heaven. 


यं wat वाजिन्नघ्न्या steertuasaled योनिमा Veta 
द्युमान्‌ । मघोनामायुः प्रतिरन्महि श्रव इन्द्राय सोम पवसे 
तृषा मद॑: ॥ २॥ 


Yam tva vajinn-aghnya abhyanusata’yohatam 
yonima rohasi dyuman. Maghonamayuh pra-tiran 
mahi Srva indraya soma pavase vrsa madah. 


You, O vibrant lord of omnipotence, whom all 
inviolable forces of nature and communities of humanity 
adore and exalt, rise in all your glory and manifest in 
the golden heart cave of the soul. O lord of infinite joy, 
you promote the health and age of the men of piety and 
prosperity. Bless Indra, the ruling soul with honour and 
high renown and shower boundless bliss upon humanity. 


250 RGVEDA 
The ceaseless flow goes on. 


एन््र॑स्य कुक्षा प॑वते मदिन्त॑म ऊर्जं वसानः श्रव॑से Gage । 
wae स विश्वा भुव॑नाभि पप्रथे क्रीव्छन्हरिरत्य॑ः स्यन्दते 
satus ॥ 


2; Endrasya kuksa pavate madintama urjam vasa- 
nah sravase sumangalah. Pratyan sa visva bhu- 
vanabhi paprathe krilan hariratyah syandate 
vrsa. 


The stream of Soma divinity most joyous and 
exhilarating, radiating energy, auspicious harbinger of 
good fortune, honour and excellence, purifies and 
vibrates in the heart and soul of man. All pervasive, 
Soma generates and extends all regions of the universe, 
playful, beatific saviour, infinite mover, and it continues 
to flow in boundless omnipresence, a fact of direct 
observation and experience for the wise. 


तं cat देवेभ्यो मधुमत्तमं नर॑: सहस्त्र॑धारं दुहते दश क्षिप॑ः । 
नृभिः सोम प्रच्युतो ग्राव॑भिः सुतो विश्वान्देवाँ आ प॑वस्वा 
सहस्रजित्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Tam tva devebhyo madhumattamam narah 
sahasradharam duhate dasa ksipah. Nrbhih soma 
pracyuto gravabhih suto visvan devan a pavasva 
sahasrajit. 


Men of vision and wisdom blest with ten senses 
of intense perception, thought and imagination 
experience the most beatific presence in infinite showers 
of bliss for the devotees from the divinities. O Soma, 
lord of bliss, winner, master and controller of infinite 
gifts and powers, vibrant presence, distilled by the 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 81 251 


veteran wise by experience with meditative mind and 
senses, pray come and bless the holy celebrants with 
fulfilment. 


तं त्वा हस्तिनो मधुंमन्तमद्रिभिर्दुहन्त्यप्सु वुंषभं दश fara: | 
इन्द्रं सोम मादयन्दैव्यं जनं सिन्धोरिवोर्मिः पव॑मानो 
अर्षसि ॥ ५॥ 


Tam tva hastino madhumantam-adribhir-du- 
hantyapsu vrsabham dasa ksipah. Indram soma 
madayan daivyam janam sindhorivormih pava- 
mano arsasi. 


Such as you are, Soma, sweetest presence of 
bliss, infinitely generous, men of mighty arm for action 
and ten senses of intense perception, will and 
imagination experience your presence and realise the 
message in their actions, manners and behaviour. O spirit 
of light and bliss, pure and purifying, like waves of the 
sea you roll on giving delight and beatitude to the ruling 
soul and general humanity blest with love of divinity. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 81 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Vasu Bharadvaja Rshi 


प्र सोम॑स्य पवमानस्योर्मय इन्द्र॑स्य यन्ति जठरं सुपेशसः | 
दध्ना यदीमुन्नीता यशसा गवां दानाय शूरं मुदमंन्दिषुः 
सुताः ॥ ९॥ 

ie Pra somasya pavamanasyormaya indrasya yanti 


jJatharam supesasah. Dadhna yadimunnita yasasa 
gavam danaya suramudamandisuh sutah. 


Charming vibrations of the presence and power 
of pure and purifying Soma, supreme spirit of light and 


252 RGVEDA 


peace, radiate to the heart core of Indra, lover of 
knowledge and light of divinity, when, seasoned and 
supplemented with experiences of senses and mind 
elevated through higher states of inversion and 
concentration in Dharma and Dhyana, they exhilarate 
the brave soul with strength and excellence and exhort 
it to divine love and total self-surrender. 


अच्छा fe सोम॑ः woot असिंष्यददत्यो न atoal 
रघुवर्तनिर्वृषां | अथां देवानामुभयस्य जन्म॑नो विद्वा अंश्नो- 
त्यमुत॑ं इतश्च यत्‌॥ २॥ 


2. Accha hi somah kalasan asisyadadatyo na volha 
raghuvartanirvrsa. Atha devanam-ubhayasya 
jJanmano vidvan asnotyamuta itasca yat. 


Soma, lord of radiant peace and power, generous 
and omnipotent reaches and vibrates in all forms of 
existence and in the heart core versatile movement at 
the fastest. It knows and vibrates among the divinities 
simultaneously in their present life as well as in the past 
and future and reaches from here to there and there to 
here at the same time (since it is omnipresent and 
presently comprehends both time and space, and, as 
Yajurveda says, it moves and yet it does not move). 


(So versatile is the yogi also by attainment blest 
by Soma.) 
आ न॑ः ara पव॑मानः किरा वस्विन्दो vel मघवा राध॑सो 
महः । शिक्षा वयोधो ada सु चेतुना मानो गय॑मारे 
अस्मत्रा सिचः ॥ ३॥ 
2. A nah soma pavamanah kira vasvindo bhava 


maghava radhaso mahah. Siksa vayodho vasave 
su cetund ma no gayamare asmat para sicah. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 81 253 


O Soma, pure and purifying lord of peace and 
glory, bring us peace and prosperity of the world, and 
be the harbinger of great honour and excellence and 
high potential for success and progress. Wielder, 
controller and giver of health and age and wealth of the 
world, give us insight into ways of noble wealth and 
excellence, and never deprive us of our hearth and home 
and our peace and prosperity. 


आ न॑ः पूषा पव॑मानः सुरातयो! मित्रो गच्छन्तु वरुणः 
सजोष॑सः। बृहस्पतिर्परुतो वायुरश्विना त्वष्टा सविता 
सुयमा सर॑स्वती ॥  ॥ 


4. A nah pusad pavamanah surdatayo mitro ga- 
cchantu varunah sajosasah. Brhaspatirma-ruto 
vayurasvina tvasta savita suyama sarasvati. 


May the generous divinities of holy abundance 
both in nature and humanity come and grace us with 
their gifts : Pusha, giver of good health and long age, 
Pavamana, fluent powers of purity and purification, 
Mitra, powers of love and friendship, Varuna, powers 
of judgement, discrimination, freedom and discipline, 
Brhaspati, powers of environment and space, knowledge 
and communication, Maruts, vibrant defence forces, 
Vayu, dynamic leaders and pioneers, Ashvins, 
complementary powers of social system with knowledge 
of theory and practice, Tvashta, designers and makers 
of things and systems, Savita, creators, generators, 
givers of light and inspiration, Suyama, powers of law 
and discipline, Sarasvati, mother giver of knowledge 
and living tradition. May all these come and bless with 
the spirit of love. 


254 RGVEDA 


उभे द्यावापृथिवी विश्वमिन्वे अर्यमा देवो अदितिर्विधाता । 
भगो नृशंस॑ उर्व4न्तरिश्चं विश्वे देवाः पव॑मानं जुषन्त ॥ ५ ॥ 


Ds Ubhe dyavaprthivi visvaminve aryama devo 
aditirvidhata. Bhago nrsamsa urvantariksam 
visve devah pavamanam jusanta. 


May both heaven and earth, home of the world, 
Aryama, just and refulgent ruler and leader, Aditi, 
mother Infinity, Vidhata, lord sustainer and law giver, 
Bhaga, powers of prosperity and excellence and all 
divinities of nature and humanity, love, honour and serve 
Soma, vast as space, adored and worshipped by 
humanity. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 82 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Vasu Bharadvaja Rshi 


असावि सोमो अरुषो वृषा हरी waa दस्मो aif mam 
अं चिक्रदत्‌। पुनानो वारं पर्येत्यव्ययं श्येनो न योनि 
घृतव॑न्तमासद॑म्‌॥ ९॥ 


ie Asavi somo aruso vrsa hari rajeva dasmo abhi 
ga acikradat. Punadno varam paryetyavyayam 
Syeno na yonim ghrtavantam-asadam. 


Soma, self-refulgent supreme creative spirit of 
the universe, virile and generous, dispeller of darkness 
and deprivation, regal and gracious like a ruler, self- 
moves, vibrating to the generation of stars and planets. 
Itself pure, purifying and sanctifying, it moves to 
manifest in the heart of imperishable Prakrti as it chooses 
and, like the sun that warms and fertilises, it enlivens 
the generative centre of life as its own womb of 
manifestive existence. Thus does Soma create and 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 82 255 
generate the universe. 


कविर्वेधस्या पर्येषि माहिनमत्यो न मृष्टो अभि वाज॑मर्षसि | 
अपसेधंन्दुरिता सोम yea घृतं वसानः परि यासि 
निर्णिजम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2 Kavirvedhasya paryesi mahinamatyo na mrsto 
abhi vajamarsasi. Apasedhan durita soma mrlaya 
ghrtam vasanah pari yasi nirnijam. 


Soma, omniscient visionary and poetic creator, 
with the desire to enlighten, you radiate to great minds 
and move to dynamic yajnas of humanity like 
accelerated energy to its target of achievement. O lord 
of light and peace, be kind, dispelling all evil to nullity. 
Wearing the grace of beauty and purity of yajnic love 
and sweetness, you move and embrace humanity for 
fulfilment. 


usted: पिता महिषस्य पर्णिनो नाभा पृथिव्या गिरिषु क्षयं 
दधे। स्वसार आपो अभि गा उतासंरन्त्सं ग्राव॑भिर्नसते 
वीते teat 3 u 


a Parjanyah pita mahisasya parnino nabha pr- 
thivya girisu ksayam dadhe. Svasara apo abhi ga 
utasarantsam gravabhir-nasate vite adhvare. 


Father and sustainer of all great and small, birds 
and trees, serious realists and flying dreamers, centre 
hold of the earth and showers of rain, you abide in the 
mighty clouds and over the mountains. Your waves and 
vibrations flow and radiate, flow as sister streams and 
radiate to the stars and planets, and in holy yajna you 
vibrate with the music of soma stones and the chant of 
high priests. 


256 RGVEDA 


जायेव पत्यावधि शेवं मंहसे user गभं शृणुहि ब्रवीमि 
ते। अन्तर्वाणीषु प्र च॑रा सु जीवसेऋनिन्द्यो वृजने सोम 
जागृहि॥ ४॥ 


4. Jayeva patyavadhi Seva mamhase pajraya garbha 
srnuhi bravimi te. Antarvanisu pra cara su jivase 
*nindyo vrjane soma jagrhi. 


O Soma, blessed man, child of the earth and 
solid reality of existence, listen, I say: As a wife feels 
elevated in love and service for her husband, you too 
love and serve life and the lord of life within the laws 
and values of the voice divine for the fulfilment of your 
self in action. Live free from calumny and scandal and 
keep awake in the paths of life. 


यथा पूर्वेभ्यः शतसा अमूध्रः सहस्रसाः पर्यया वाज॑मिन्दो । 
एवा प॑वस्व सुविताय नव्य॑से तवं व्रतमन्वाप॑ः सचन्ते ॥ ५ ॥ 


श Yatha purvebhyah satasa amrdhrah sahasrasah 
paryaya vajamindo. Eva pavasva suvitaya 
navyase tava vratamanvapah sacante. 


O Soma, Spirit of peace, prosperity and bliss 
vibrating in the dynamics of existence, free from 
violence, unviolated and inviolable, as you ever blest 
the ancients of all time with hundredfold, thousandfold 
food, energy, safeguards and victories of progress, same 
way, we pray, bring us peace, progress and well being 
for the new generations. All our people and all our 
actions honour and obey the law and discipline 
enshrined in the voice divine. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 83 257 


Mandala 9/Sukta 83 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Pavitra Angirasa Rshi 


पवित्रं ते वित॑तं ब्रह्मणस्पते प्रभुगरत्रणि पर्ये षि faved: । 
अतप्ततनूर्न तदामो अश्नुते शृतास इद हन्तस्तत्समाशत ॥ ९ ॥ 


if Pavitram te vitatam brahmanaspate prabhur- 
gatrani paryesi visvatah. Ataptatanurna tadamo 
asnute $rtasa idvahantastat samasata. 


Vast and expansive is your holy creation of 
existence and the voice divine, O Brhaspati, lord of 
expansive universe. You are the master and supreme 
controller who pervade and transcend its parts from the 
particle to the whole. The immature man who has not 
passed through the crucibles of discipline cannot reach 
to that presence, but the mature and seasoned ones who 
still maintain the ordeal of fire and abide by the presence 
attain to it and the divine joy. 


तपोष्पवित्रं वित॑तं feacae शोचन्तो अस्य तन्तवो 
व्यस्थिरन्‌ । अवन्त्यस्य पवीतारमाशवो दिवस्यृष्ठमधिं 
तिष्टन्ति चेत॑सा ॥ २॥ 


2. Tapospavitram vitatam divaspade socanto asya 
tantavo vyasthiran. Avantyasya pavitaram-asavo 
divasprstham-adhi tisthanti cetasa. 


The holy light of the cosmic sun extends and 
lights the regions of heaven where the rays shine and 
blaze, radiate all round and abide in constancy. Those 
instant radiations in heavenly state protect the devotee 
of holy commitment. Indeed the devotees abide there 
on top of the state of heavenly light with their mind 
stabilised in peace and joy. 


258 RGVEDA 


अरूरुचदुषसः Ue sar बिभर्ति भुव॑नानि वाजयुः । 
मायाविनो ममिरे अस्य माययां नृचक्षसः पितरो गर्भमा 
दधुः ॥३॥ 


Arurucadusasah prsniragriya uksa bibharti 
bhuvanani vajayuh. Mayavino mamire asya 
mayaya nrcaksasah pitaro garbhama dadhuh. 


Lighting up the dawns, stars and planets in 
space, the sun, prime and abundant source of light, 
warmth of life and waters of sustenance, giver of food 
and energy sustains the regions of the world. By the 
light, power and causal effects of it on other objects in 
existence such as planets and satellites, scholars of 
science do their astronomical calculations, and parental, 
kind and studious scholars studying humanity and 
divinity realise the nature and character of Soma, the 
original seed of life and source of energy for the world 
of existence. 


गन्धर्व इत्था पदमस्य रक्षति पातिं देवानां जनिमान्यद्भुतः | 
गृभ्णाति रिपुं निधया निधापतिः सुकृत्तमा मधुनो भक्च- 
मात ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Gandharva ittha padamasya raksati pati deva- 
nam janimanyadbhutah. Grbhnati ripum nidha- 
ya nidhapatih sukrttama madhuno bhaksama- 
Sata. 


The true, eternal and marvellous sustainer of the 
universe wields and sustains its state of existence and 
sustains and promotes the evolution of divine refulgent 
stars and planets as well as the birth cycles of brilliant 
and generous people. Omnipotent power, it seizes the 
adverse forces and subdues them into systemic 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 84 259 


conformity. Devotees and yogis of holy action make it 
an object of experience in meditation and enjoy the 
honey sweets of its presence as spiritual food for 
elevation to the divinity. 


हविर्हविष्मो महि सदय दैव्यं नभो वसानः aR यास्यध्वरम्‌। 
राजा पवित्ररथो वाजमारुहः सहस्त्र॑भृषटिर्जयसि श्रवो 
बृहत्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


Havirhavismo mahi sadma daivyam nabho 
vasanah pari yasyadhvaram. Raja pavitraratho 
vajamaruhah sahasrabhrstir-jayasi Sravo brhat. 


Soma, lord of light and bliss, you are the prime 
yajamana of universal yajna. Holding the holy materials, 
wearing divine space as refulgent cloak, you move to 
the great hall of creative yajna free from negativity and 
violence. Supreme ruler, riding the divine chariot, rising 
to omnipotence, wielding a thousand arms, you are the 
supreme victor of infinite glory. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 84 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Prajapati Vachya Rshi 


पव॑स्व देवमादनो विचर्षणिरप्सा इन्द्राय वरुणाय ara | 
कृधी at अद्य वरिवः स्वस्तिमङुरुक्चितौ गृणीहि दैव्यं 
WAT ९॥ 

iP Pavasva devamadano vicarsanirapsa indraya 
varunaya vayave. Krdhi no adya varivah svasti- 
mad-uruksitau grnihi daivyam janam. 


O lord inspirer of divines with joy, all watcher 
of the universal flow of karmic evolution, flow on with 
gifts of purity for Indra, ruling powers, Varuna, powers 


260 RGVEDA 


of judgement and knowledge, and Vayu, vibrant leaders 
and pioneers. Bless us now with wealth and excellence 
for well being, and in this great house of the world, 
pray, accept this noble humanity and raise it to be worthy 
of divine praise and grace. 


आ यस्तस्थौ भुवनान्यमर्त्यो fasat सोमः परि arate ter । 
कृण्वन्त्संचृतं विचृत॑मभिष्टय इन्दु: सिषक्त्युषसं न 
सूर्यः ॥ २॥ 


2. A yastasthau bhuvananyamartyo visvani somah 
pari tanyarsati. Krnvant-samcrtam vicrtam- 
abhistaya induh sisaktyusasam na suryah. 


Flow, purify and consecrate all, O Soma, 
immortal and eternal light, life and joy of existence, 
who pervade constant in all regions of the universe and 
vibrate therein, over, above and beyond, who, making 
one single unity into infinite variety (specifics in 
generalities, tensions in balance, centrifugals in 
centripetal motion, all differences and contrarieties 
moving in complementarity within the dynamics of a 
single, central, unmoved mind, all re-attaining to the 
same unity) for the common good and self-fulfilment 
of all, abide, the One in union with all like the sun with 
the dawns, illuminating all. 


आ यो mf: सृज्यत ओष॑धीष्वा देवानां सुम्न इषयन्नु- 
utara: | आ विद्युतां पवते धार॑या सुत इन्द्रं सोमो! माद- 
यन्दैव्यं जन॑म्‌ ॥ ३॥ ति 

De A yo gobhih srjyata osadhisva devanam sumna 
isayannupavasuh. A vidyuta pavate dharaya suta 
indram somo madayan daivyam janam. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 84 261 


Soma who, abiding by all, wishing to create the 
beauty of variety for the good and self-fulfilment of all 
divine creations, creates the sap of life in herbs and trees 
with solar radiations, flows on with streams of energy, 
and when the presence is distilled and realised in the 
consciousness, Soma consecrates the soul of the karma- 
yogi and vibrates to the delight of divine humanity. 


एष स्य सोम॑: पवते सहस््रजिरद्टिन्वानो वाच॑मिषिरा- 
मुं षर्बुध॑म्‌। इन्दुः समु द्रमुदिंयतिं वायुभिरेन्द्रस्य हार्दिं 
कल्वशषु सीदति ॥ ४॥ 


4. Esa sya somah pavate sahasrajidd-hinvano 
vacam-isiram-usarbudham. Induh samudramu- 
diyarti vayubhirendrasya hardi kalasesu sidati. 


Thus this Soma flows, constant, victor of a 
thousand victories, energising and accelerating the 
sound of Aum, the Big Bang of creative manifestation 
in continuous motion that wakes and awakens at the 
dawn. Light, life and joy of existence, it rises to the 
oceans of space with the waves of cosmic energy and, 
being the joy of the soul’s heart core, it abides in all 
forms of life in existence (some know and care, others 
don’t, but it is there everywhere, all time). 


अभि त्यं गावः पय॑सा पयोवृधं सोमं श्रीणन्ति मतिभिः 
स्वर्विद॑म्‌। धनंजयः प॑वते कृत्व्यो रसो विप्र॑ः कविः काव्यैना 
स्वर्चना: WG 


5. Abhi tyam gavah payasa payovrdham somam 
Srinanti matibhih svarvidam. Dhananjayah 
pavate krtvyo raso viprah kavih kavyena svar- 
canah. 


262 RGVEDA 


That divine Spirit of life and inspiration, joyous 
and omniscient, abounding in the life-giving energy of 
the universe, all senses and mind with higher 
intelligence and elevated thoughts join, perceive and 
present to the enlightened soul with the thrill of its 
radiance. Master giver of all wealth and excellence of 
life, the Spirit flows, vibrates and beatifies, all doer, all 
joy, all intelligent, all creative, and sublime as splendour 
of heaven by the beauty of poetic creation. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 85 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Vena Bhargava Rshi 


इन्द्राय सोम सुषु तः परि स्रवा्ऋूमामींवा भवतु Tatar सह | 
मा ते रस॑स्य मत्सत द्वयाविनो द्रविणस्वन्त इह खस्त्वि- 
न्द॑वः॥ ९॥ 


॥ Indraya soma susutah pari srava’pamiva bha- 
vatu raksasa saha. Ma te rasasya matsata 
dvayavino dravinasvanta tha santvindavah. 


O Soma, divine joy of life, distilled and realised 
in meditation, flow for the delight of the soul. Let 
adversities and ailments be far off, give us freedom from 
negativities, contradictions, adversities and violence. 
Double dealers would not have the joy of that experience 
and freedom. May all streams of Soma be abundant in 
wealth, honour and excellence. 


अस्मान्त्स॑मर्ये प॑वमान चोदय cal देवानामसि fe प्रियो 


मद॑: । जहि शत्र भ्या भ॑न्दनायतः पिबेन्द्र सोम॒मव॑ नो मधो 
जहि॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 85 263 


2. Asmant-samarye pavamana codaya dakso 
devanamasi hi priyo madah. Jahi satrunrabhya 
bhandanayatah pibendra somamava no mrdho 
Jahi. 

O lord pure and purifying, dynamic power of 
life, inspire and strengthen us in the yajnic battle of 
life. You are the perfect power among the divines for 
the divines, dear inspiration, exhilaration and joy. 
Eliminate the contradictions. Accept the Soma homage 
of the celebrant, throw out the adversaries for our sake. 


अद॑ब्ध इन्दो पवसे मदिन्त॑म आत्मेन्द्रस्य भवसि धासि- 
रुत्तमः। अभि cata बहवो मनीषिणो राजानमस्य 
भुव॑नस्य निंसते ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Ababdha indo pavase madintama atmendrasya 
bhavasi dhasiruttamah. Abhi svaranti bahavo 
manisino rajanamasya bhuvanasya nimsate. 


Indu, Spirit of universal love, peace and power, 
inviolable, awful and imperishable, pure and purifying, 
most joyous you flow in the dynamics of existence, 
being the soul of energy and highest wielder of power 
and sustenance for life. All wise men of serious thought 
celebrate you in song as the refulgent ruler of this world 
and pay homage in reverence. 


स॒हस्र॑णीथः शतर्धारो अद्ध त इन्द्रायेन्दुः पवते काम्यं Ae | 
जयन्क्षेत्रमभ्यंर्षा जयन्नप उरुं नो गातुं hoy सोम मीद्वः ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Sahasranithah satadharo abdhuta indrayenduh 


pavate kamyam madhu. Jayan ksetramabhyarsa 
jJayannapa urum no gatum krnu soma midhvah. 


264 RGVEDA 


Marvellous lord of a thousand powers and 
possibilities, Soma, spirit of cosmic beauty and joy, 
flows in a thousand streams of cosmic dynamics for the 
human soul and brings us the honey sweets of human 
choice. Flow on forward, O Soma, winning fields of 
life’s battles for us, winning fields of karmic dynamics, 
broaden our paths of activity and possibility, O lord 
generous and omnipotent. 


कर्निंक्रदत्क्लशो गोभिरज्यसे व्यश्व्ययं समया वार॑मर्षसि। 
ममृज्यमानो अत्यो न सानसिरिन्द्रस्य सोम जठरे 
ada: We 


5. Kanikradat kalase gobhirajyase vyavyayam 
samaya varamarsasi. Marmrjyamano atyo na 
sanasir-indrasya soma jathare samaksarah. 


O Soma, you vibrate voluble in the heart core 
of the soul. Your presence is conducted through 
vibrations of perception by the senses and mind and, 
alongwith the vibrations, you reach the imperishable 
soul. Adored and exalted there, the blissful presence 
like waves of divine energy continues to radiate and 
shine in the heart core of the soul as shower of ananda, 
ecstasy of divine bliss. 


स्वादुः प॑वस्व दिव्याय जन्म॑ने स्वा दुरिन्द्राय सुहवीतुनाम्ने | 
स्वादुर्मित्राय वरुणाय वायवे बृहस्पतये मधुमां अर्दा- 
BUS Il 

6. Svaduh pavasva divyaya janmane svadurindraya 


suhavitunamne. Svadurmitraya varunaya va-yave 
brhaspataye madhuman adabhyah. 


O Soma, delicious ecstasy of divine presence, 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 85 265 


continue to flow for the soul reborn into divine self- 
realisation, delicious for the karma yogi of high status 
who can invoke your presence at will. Flow to the 
ecstasy of the soul of universal love, for the soul of 
discriminative intelligence and awareness, for the 
vibrant potent soul, for the soul attained to the presence 
of Infinity. Flow delicious as honey, bring freedom from 
fear, admit no distraction, no obstruction at all. 


अत्यं मृजन्ति Hest aot fara: प्र विप्राणां मतयो वाच॑ 
ईरते । पव॑माना अभ्यर्षन्ति सुष्टुतिमेन्द्रं विशन्ति मदिरास 
इन्द॑वः ॥ ७॥ 


7. Atyam mrjanti kalase dasa ksipah pra vipranam 
matayo vaca traye. Pavamana abhyarsanti sustu- 
timendram visanti madirasa indavah. 


Ten faculties of the soul, senses, mind and 
pranas, receive, intensify and exalt the vibrations of 
divinity in the heart core of the soul. With these, the 
perceptions and vibrations, the understanding and 
awareness of realised souls spontaneously burst into 
song. The vibrations of divinity radiate and continue to 
radiate to the celebrant soul, and they enter, settle and 
integrate with the soul. 


पव॑मानो अभ्य॑षां सुवीर्यमुर्वीं गव्यूतिं महि ore सप्रथ॑ः। 
माकिनों अस्य परिषूतिरीशतेन्दो wala त्वया धनं- 
धनम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Pavamano abhyarsa suviryamurvim gavyutim 
mahi Sarma saprathah. Makirno asya parisu- 
tirtsatendo jayema tvaya dhanamdhanam. 


O Soma, pure, purifying and dynamic presence 


266 RGVEDA 


of peace and inspiring power, bring us holy strength 
and generosity, wide paths of possibility and progress, 
great expansive home of peace and joy. Let no violence 
and oppression of this world rule over us. Let us by 
your grace win the wealth of ultimate value. 


अधि द्याम॑स्थाद्‌ वृषभो विंचक्षणोऽ रूरुचद्धि दिवो रोचना 
कविः। राजा पवित्रमत्येति रोरुवदहिवः पीयूषं दुहते 
नृचक्च॑सः॥ ९ ॥ 


0. Adhi dyamasthadvrsabho vicaksano’rurucadvi 
divo rocana kavih. Raja pavitramatyeti roruvad- 
divah piyusam duhate nrcaksasah. 


Self-refulgent light of heavens, omniscient, all 
watching Soma, omnipotent and omnificent, illuminates 
the heavens, pervades and rules over the space and the 
highest heaven. Shining, blazing, rising and resounding, 
it vibrates and goes to the heart core of the sacred soul 
and over, and enlightened souls of humanity distil the 
nectar of it there from the heavens. 


दिवो नाके मधुजिह्वा असश्चतो वेना दुंहन्त्युश्चणं गिरिष्ठाम्‌ | 
अप्सु द्रप्सं वावृधानं समुद्र आ सिन्धोरूर्मा मधुमन्तं पवित्र 
आ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Divo nake madhujihva asascato vena duhantyu- 
ksanam giristham. Apsu drapsam vavrdhanam 
samudra asindhorurma madhumantam pavitra a. 


Dedicated celebrants of Soma, sweet of tongue, 
having risen above material attachments, distil the honey 
sweet nectar, ecstatic essence of fluent elixir exuberant 
in the clouds, resounding in the holy Word, abounding 
in the waves of the seas in the oceans of space. They 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 85 267 


distil it and enshrine it in their sacred heart, established 
in the light of heaven. 


नाक सु पर्णमुपपसिवांसं गिरो वेनानामकृपन्त पूर्वीः । 
शिशुं रिहन्ति मतयः पनिप्रतं हिरण्ययं शकुनं क्षाम॑णि 
स्थाम्‌॥ VV 


11. Nake suparnam-upapaptivamsam giro vena- 
namakrpanta purvih. Sisum rihanti matayah 
panipna-tam hiranyayam sakunam ksamani 
stham. 


Universal voices of the dedicated celebrants of 
old reach and adore the Soma spirit radiant and 
resounding in the heaven of freedom and showering on 
earth. The thoughts and prayers of the wise too reach 
and celebrate with love the adorable subtle presence of 
Soma, eloquent, golden great, omnipotent, pervasive 
on earth and settled in universal peace. 


ऊर्ध्वो गन्धर्वो अधि नाके अस्थाद्विरवां रूपा प्र॑तिचश्चाणो 
अस्य । भानुः शक्रेण शोचिषा व्य॑द्यौत्प्रारूरुचद्रोद॑सी मातरा 
शुचिः ॥ ९२॥ 

12. Urdhvo gandharvo adhi nake asthad visva rupa 
praticaksano asya. Bhanuh sukrena socisa vya- 
dyaut prarurucad rodasi matara Ssucih. 


High over the regions of light, freedom and bliss 
abides the sustainer of earth and space in motion, 
illuminating and revealing all manifestive forms of 
existence. Thus the sun shines pure and radiant with 
the power of divine splendour illuminating both mother 
earth and mother heaven and the middle regions. 


268 RGVEDA 


Mandala 9/Sukta 86 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Rshis: Akrshtah Mashah (1- 
10), Sikata Nvavari (11-20), Prshnayah Ajah (21-30), 
Akrshtah Mashah and Sikata Nivavari and Prshnaya 
Ajah (31-40), Atri Bhaumah (41-45), Grtsamada 
Shaunaka (46-48) 


प्र तं आशवः पवमान धीजवो मदां अर्षन्ति रघुजाइव 
त्मना । दिव्याः सुपर्णा मधुमन्त इन्द॑वो मदिन्त॑मासः परि 
कोणमासते।॥ ९॥ 


ly Pra ta asavah pavamana dhijavo mada arsanti 
raghuja iva tmana. Divyah suparnad madhum-anta 
indavo madintamasah pari kosamasate. 


O pure and purifying Soma, peace and power 
of divinity, the ecstatic vibrations of your bliss, instantly 
radiant and inspiring for the mind, flow spontaneously 
like rays of light at the speed of thought. The divine, 
flying, honey sweet effusions of bliss, most exhilarating, 
overwhelm the mind and settle in the heart core of the 
soul. 


Wa मदासो मदिरास sisratsaeara रथ्यासो यथा पृथ॑क्‌ । 
धेनुर्न वत्सं पय॑साभि वचिणमिन्द्र मिन्द॑वो मधुमन्त 
ऊर्मयः ॥ २॥ 


00 Pra (८ madaso madirasa asavo ’srksata rathyaso 
yatha prthak. Dhenurna vatsam payasabhi 
vajrinam-indramindavo madhumanta urmayah. 


O Soma, spirit of peace, power and pleasure of 
divinity, the vibrations of your joy, ecstatic and instant, 
rise and flow, beautiful and pleasing, separate but in 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 269 


successive showers like drops in a ceaseless chain and, 
as the mother cow’s milk flows for the calf, the delicious 
and shining waves of honey sweets flow for the soul 
wielding the spiritual power of thunder. 


अत्यो न हियानो अभि वाजमर्ष स्वर्वित्कोशं feat 
अद्विमातरम्‌। वृषा पवित्रे अधि सानो अव्यये सोम॑ः पुनान 
इदधियाय धायसे 3 ॥ 


3. Atyo na hiyano abhi vajamarsa svarvit kosSam divo 
adrimataram. Vrsda pavitre adhi sano avyaye 
somah punana indriyaya dhayase. 


Inspired and energised like a shot fired for the 
target of battle, O soma spirit of omniscience, flow to 
the victorious soul of the celebrant like liquid energy 
showering from the sun to the cloud in formation in the 
sky. O generous vibrant presence, pure and purifying 
on top of the sanctified and imperishable soul, flow on 
for the sustenance of its honour and excellence. 


प्र त॒ आश्विनीः पवमान धीजवो दिव्या अंसूग्रन्पय॑सा 
धरीमणि । प्रान्तऋष॑यः स्थाविरीरसूक्चत ये त्वां मृजन्त्युषि- 
षाण वेधसं: ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Pra ta asvinth pavamana dhijuvo divya asrgran 
payasa dharimani. Prantar-rsayah sthavirtr- 
asrksata ye tva mrjantyrsisana vedhasah. 


O pure and purifying Soma, your divine showers 
of joy streaming fast at the speed of thought flow on 
with the milk of grace into the heart cave of the soul, 
they are the showers of fulfilment in the heart core of 
the soul within, which the wise sages, realised souls of 
knowledge, create and exalt in the heart. 


270 RGVEDA 


विश्वा धार्मानि विश्वचक्ष ऋभ्व॑सः प्रभोस्त सतः परि यन्ति 
wed: व्यानशिः प॑वसे सोम धर्मधथिः पतिर्विश्वस्य 
भुव॑नस्य राजसि ॥ ५॥ 


a: Visva dhamani visvacaksa rbhvasah prabhoste 
satah pariyanti ketavah. Vyanasih pavase soma 
dharmabhih patirvisvasya bhuvanasya rajasi. 


O Soma, all seeing lord of existence, the mighty 
radiations of your power reach and prevail over all 
regions of the world. All pervasive, you flow and vibrate 
with the virtues of your own nature, power and function 
and, O sovereign sustainer of the entire universe, you 
shine and rule supreme. 


उभयतः पव॑मानस्य र्‌ श्मयो geared सतः परिं यन्ति acta: | 
यदी पवित्रे अधिं मृज्यते हरिः सत्ता नि योनां कलशेषु 
Arata ६॥ 


6. Ubhayatah pavamanasya rasmayo dhruvasya 
satah pari yanti ketavah. Yadi pavitre adhi 
mrjyate harih satta ni yona kalasesu sidati. 


The rays of the light of Soma, lord existent, 
immovable, pure and purifying, pervading over both 
earth and the skies, radiate all round. When it is felt and 
adored, exalted in the pure heart, then the sanctifier 
presence settles and abides in the sacred hearts of the 
celebrants, the real seat of its own love and choice. 


यज्ञस्य॑ केतुः प॑वते स्वध्वरः सोमो देवानामुप याति 
निष्कृतम्‌ । सहस्रधार : परि कोश॑मर्षति वृषा पवित्रमत्येति 
Weal ७॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 271 


de Yajnasya ketuh pavate svadhvarah somo deva- 
namupa yati niskrtam. Sahasradharah pari 
kosamarsati vrsa pavitram-atyeti roruvat. 


Soma is the mark and summit of yajna, ultimate 
master and prime yajamana of cosmic yajna free from 
hate and violence and, in love, it radiates to the pure 
and sanctified heart of the holy celebrants. It moves and 
manifests in the heart core of the soul in a thousand 
streams of shower and, generous and potent, it 
transcends all existential purity and power as absolute 
bliss. 


राजां समुद्रं नद्यो ३ वि गांहतेऽ पामूर्मि संचते सिन्धुषु Fare: | 
अध्य॑स्थात्सानु पव॑मानो अव्ययं नाभां पृथिव्या धरुणो महो 
दिवः॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Raja samudram nadyo vi gahate ’pamurmim 
sacate sindhusu Sritah. Adhyasthat sanu pava- 
mano avyayam nabha prthivya dharuno maho 
divah. 


Shining and ruling it plunges and rolls in the 
oceans of space and plays with the currents of winds. It 
joins the waves of floods of water and waxes with the 
seas. Pure, purifying and flowing, it rises on top of 
imperishable existence. It is the centre-hold of the 
universe and mighty foundation of the heavens of light. 


feat न सानु स्तनय॑न्रचिक्रदद्‌ diva यस्य॑ पृथिवी च 
धर्म fa: | इन्द्र॑स्य सख्यं प॑वते विवेविंदत्सोम॑ः पुनानः 
MON सीदति i ९॥ 

ध Divo na sanu stanayann-acikradad dyauSca yasya 


prthivi ca dharmabhih. Indrasya sakhyam pavate 
vivevidat somah punanah kalasesu sidati. 


272 RGVEDA 


Roaring as thunder on top of the regions of light, 
holding heaven and earth by its universal laws of nature, 
thus having the company of Indra, its own essential 
nature power, Soma flows pure and purifying and 
pervades in all forms of existence. 


ज्योतिर्यज्ञस्य पवते मधुं प्रियं पिता देवानां जनिता विभूव॑सुः 1 
दर्धाति ta स्वधयोरपीच्यं मदिन्तमो मत्सर इदधियो 
Ta: ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Jyotiryajnasya pavate madhu priyam pita deva- 
nam janita vibhuvasuh. Dadhdati ratnam svadha- 
yorapicyam madintamo matsara indriyo rasah. 


Light of human and cosmic yajna, Soma vibrates 
pure, purifying and omnipresent, dearest most delicious 
honeyed spirit of life, creator and sustainer of divinities 
and master of infinite wealth and power. It holds and 
commands the jewel wealth of its own power and 
potential hidden in earth and heaven and vibrates in the 
mysteries of nature and humanity — divinity most 
joyous, ecstatic, glorious, pure bliss that it is. 


अभिक्रन्दन्कलशं वाज्यर्षति पतिर्दिवः शतधारो विच- 
aur: | हरिर्मित्रस्य सद॑नेषु सीदति admis विभिः 
सिन्धुभिर्वृषा i ९९॥ 


11. Abhikrandan kalasam vajyarsati patirdivah 
satadharo vicaksanah. Harirmitrasya sadanesu 
sidati marmrjano'vibhih sindhubhirvrsa. 


Roaring, the omnipotent pervades in the 
universe and flows with a thousand streams, all watching 
sustainer of the light of existence. Beatific, glorious, 
dispeller of darkness and sufferance, it abides in the 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 273 


homes of love and friendship, cleansing, purifying and 
consecrating with its protective favours and showers of 
grace, infinitely potent and generous since it is. 


अग्रे सिन्धूनां पव॑मानो अर्षत्यग्रे वाचो अंगियो गोषु 
गच्छति। अग्रे वाज॑स्य भजते महाधनं स्वायुधः सोतृभिः 
पूयते seat १२॥ 


12. Agre sindhunam pavamano arsatyagre vaco 
agriyo gosu gacchati. Agre vajasya bhajate 
mahadhanam svayudhah sotrbhih puyate vrsa. 


Soma, prime spirit of the world in existence, 
pure and purifying, moves as the first cause of flowing 
waters, first cause of the flow of thought and speech, 
and it moves as the prime cause of the motions of stars 
and planets. First, before the start of evolution, it takes 
on the great warlike dynamics of the creative 
evolutionary flow of existence. The same omnipotent 
generous power, mighty of arms, is adorned and exalted 
in yajna by celebrants on the vedi designed by the lord 
and structured by his Shakti, Prakrti. 


अयं मतवाञ्छकुनो यथ fedts व्ये were पव॑मान 
ऊर्मिणा । तव क्रत्वा रोद॑सी अन्तरा कवे शुचिर्धिया प॑वते 
सोम॑ इन्द्र ते ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Ayam matavanchakuno yatha hito ’vye sasara 
pavamana urmina. Tava kratva rodasi antara 
kave Sucirdhiya pavate soma indra te. 


This omniscient Soma, spirit of light and divine 
joy, like a bird of good omen just in front, flows pure 
and purifying for you with waves of joy in this protected 
world. O poetic soul of humanity, Indra, it vibrates over 


274 RGVEDA 


earth and the firmament for you and feels happy and 
exalted by your thought and action in service and 
adoration of divinity. 


द्रापिं वसानो यजतो दिविस्पृरमन्तरिशक्चप्रा भुव॑नेष्वर्पितः। 
स्व॑र्जज्ञानो नभ॑साभ्य॑क्रमीत्प्रलमस्य पितरमा faar- 
सति ॥ १४॥ 


14. Drapim vasano yajato divisprsamantariksapra 
bhuvanesvarpitah. Svarjajnano nabhasabhya- 
kramit pratnamasya pitarama vivasati. 


The spirit of divine joy wearing the aura of 
divinity, touching the heights of heaven, adorable in 
yajna, vibrating in the skies and pervading all regions 
of the world, creating the bliss of paradise, rises and 
floats with the clouds where it shines and glorifies its 
eternal generator, self-refulgent Soma. 


सो अस्य fast महि शर्म॑ यच्छति यो अस्य धामं प्रथमं 
व्यानो | पदं यद॑स्य परमे व्योमन्यतो विश्वा अभि सं 
याति dad: ॥ ९५॥ 


15. So वडव vise mahi Sarma yacchati yo asya dhama 
prathamam vyanase. Padam yadasya parame 
vyoman yato visva abhi sam yati sam-yatah. 


Whoever the self-controlled and dedicated 
seeker that surrenders and attains to the original and 
essential presence and abode of Soma, the abode that is 
in the highest heavens above the worldly turmoil or in 
the deepest core of the self, the lord grants him great 
peace and joy on this attainment, and the celebrant faces 
all situations of life with equanimity of mind. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 275 


प्रो अंयासीदिन्दुरिन्द्र॑स्य निष्कृतं सखा सख्युर्न प्र मिनाति 
airy मर्य'इव युवतिभिः समर्षति सोम॑ः कलो 
शतयाम्ना पथा ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Pro ayasid-indur-indrasya niskrtam sakha 
sakhyurna pra minati samgiram. Marya iva 
yuvatibhih samarsati somah kalase satayamna 
patha. 


Indu, Soma, light of life and divine ecstasy, goes 
forward to the sacred heart of the devotee and, like a 
friend of friends, destroys contradictions, confirms 
complementarities and advances human growth. Thus, 
just as youthful mortals go with their lady love, join 
and protect them, and live a full life with vows kept 
within the bounds of discretion and the law, so does 
Soma in the sacred heart inspire the loved soul as a 
friend in covenant by a hundred paths of human 
possibilities of growth and advancement within the 
bounds of Dharma. The Lord does not break the promise 
ever. 


प्रवो feral मन्द्रयुवो विपन्युवः पनस्युवः संवसनेष्वक्रमुः | 
सोमं मनीषा अभ्यनूषत स्तुभोऽ भि धेनवः पय॑सेमशि- 
श्रयुः ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Pra vo dhiyo mandrayuvo vipanyuvah pana- 
syuvah samvasanesvakramuh. Somam manisa 
abhyanusata stubho ’bhi dhenavah payasema- 
sisrayuh. 

O joyous devotees, celebrants and seekers of 
divinity, let all your thoughts, actions and prayers 
converge and concentrate on the omnipresence of Soma, 


276 RGVEDA 


on the universal vedi of Soma yajna. With mental 
reflections and spiritual meditation, your self wrapped 
in the beauty and bliss of Soma, adore the divinity. Let 
all your voices of adoration and songs of prayer be for 
the master with love and total surrender as cows with 
milk serve their master. 


आ न॑ः सोम संयतं पिप्युषीमिषमिन्दो पव॑स्व पव॑मानो 
अस्तरिध॑म्‌। या नो दोहं ते त्रिरहन्नसश्चुषी क्षुमद्वाज॑वन्मधु- 
मत्सुवीर्यम्‌॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. A nah soma samyatam pipyusim-isam-indo 
pavasva pavamano asridham. Ya no dohate 
trirahann-asascust ksumad-vajavan-madhumat 
suviryam. 


O Soma, lord of light, Indu, spirit of beauty and 
bliss, pure and purifying divinity, bless us with 
controlled and well directed ever increasing food and 
energy, knowledge and culture of imperishable character 
and value which may for all time past, present and future 
without error, violence, violation or obstruction bring 
us and continue to bring for us honour, dignity and 
heroic courage and forbearance full of energy, 
excellence and sweetness. 


वृषा मतीनां प॑वते विचक्षणः सोमो até: प्रतरीतोषसों 
fea: | क्राणा सिन्धुंनां कलशे अवीवशदिन्द्र॑स्य हाया - 
विशन्म॑नी-षिभिः।॥ ९९॥ 

19. ~त matinam pavate vicaksanah somo ahnah 
prataritosaso divah. Krana sindhunam kalasan 
avivasad-indrasya hardyavisan manisibhih. 


Generous inspirer of the intelligent and 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 277 


meditative souls, Soma pervades, flows and purifies. 
Omniscient and all watching, it is the illuminator of the 
day, the dawn and the sun. Maker of floods, rivers, 
oceans and the seas, it vibrates in all forms of existence. 
It loves the sacred heart and with love it enters and 
blesses the heart core of the pious and powerful soul of 
humanity. Such is Soma celebrated by the sages and 
wise scholars. 


मनीषिभिः पवते ged: कविनुभिरर्यतः परि कोश! अचि- 
क्रदत्‌। त्रितस्य नाम॑ जनयन्मधु क्षरदिन्द्र॑स्य वायोः सख्याय 
mda २०॥ 


20. Manisibhih pavate purvyah kavir-nrbhir-yatah 
pari kosan acikradat. Tritasya nama janayan 
madhu ksaradindrasya vayoh sakhyaya kartave. 


Eternal, all-watchful, poetic creator celebrated 
by sages and meditated by pious people pervades, 
energises and holds to the centre all forms of existence 
from the cell and particle upto the expansive universe, 
creating from Prakrti and its three modes of sattva, rajas 
and tamas all forms and names of things, letting streams 
of honey sweets flow, and releasing the joint, 
cooperative and friendly activity of Indra and Vayu, 
energy and its flow at the cosmic level, and the soul 
and mind at the human level. 


अयं पुनान उषसो fa रोचयदयं सिन्धुभ्यो अभवदु 
लोककृत्‌। अयं त्रिः सप्त दुदुहान आशिरं सोमो हृदे प॑वते 
चार मत्सरः ॥ २९॥ 

21. Ayam punana usaso vi rocayad-ayam sindhu- 


bhyo abhavadu lokakrt. Ayam trih sapta dudu- 
hana asiram somo hrde pavate caru matsarah. 


278 RGVEDA 


This Soma, illuminating the dawns, became the 
maker of the worlds from the oceanic flood of particles 
of Prakrti, the one material cause of the universe. 
Creating the milk of nourishment and sustenance of life 
from thrice seven orders of Prakrti, Mother Nature, its 
own shakti, that is, three modes of sattva, rajas and tamas 
(mind, motion and matter), two generalities of Mahat 
and Ahankara (tangible nature from the intangible, and 
identity from the tangible) and five specificities of basic 
elements (Akasha, Vayu, Agni, Apah and Prthivi), it 
flows pure, purifying, beatific and ecstatic in the heart 
core of the soul. 


पव॑स्व सोम दिव्येषु धाम॑सु स॒जान इन्दो कलशे पवित्र 
आ। Giese जठरे कनिंक्रदत्रृभिर्यतः सूर्यमारोहयो 
fafa २२॥ 


22. Pavasva soma divyesu dhamasu srjana indo 
kalase pavitra a. Sidann-indrasya jathare kani- 
kradan-nrbhir-yatah suryam-arohayo divi. 


Flow on, O Soma, spirit of life in the divine 
worlds of existence, creating and ecstatic. Vibrate, O 
light and lustre of life, in the heart core of the sacred 
soul. Abiding in the heart core of the soul, vibrant loud 
and bold, energising and illuminating, meditated and 
realised by devout people, rise to the sun in the highest 
regions of the universe where you illuminate the sun, 
the dawns and the days. 


अद्रिभिः सुतः प॑वसे पवित्र ओं इन्दविन्द्रस्य ज॒ठरे ष्वा- 
fast त्वं नृचक्षा अभवो विचश्चण सोम॑ गोत्रमद्धि- 
रोभ्योऽ-वृणोरपं।॥ 23 ॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 279 


23. Adribhih sutah pavase pavitra an indavindrasya 
jJatharesvavisan. Tvam nrcaksa abhavo vicaksa- 
na soma gotram-angirobhyo'vrnorapa. 


O Soma, spirit of life realised by veteran saints, 
you flow and vibrate in the sacred heart. Indu, O spirit 
of light divine, abiding in the heart core of the soul, be 
the all watching illuminator and unfailing guardian of 
humanity. O Soma, spirit of protective life and light of 
the world, open the secret treasures of knowledge and 
vision for the lovers of life and the piety of yajna. 


त्वां सोम पव॑मानं स्वाध्योऽ नु विप्रासो अमदन्नवस्यवः | 
त्वां सुपर्णं आभ॑रदिवस्परीन्दो विश्वाभिर्मतिधिः ak 
ष्कृतम्‌ ॥ २४ ॥ 


24. Tvam soma pavamanam svadhyo’nu vipraso 
amadann-avasyavah. Tvam suparna abharad 
divasparindo visvabhir-matibhih pariskrtam. 


O Soma, pure and purifying dynamic spirit of 
the world of existence, men of noble thought, will and 
action, veteran saints, seekers of divine favour and 
protection adore and exalt you. Indu, O spirit of life 
and light higher than highest regions of light, exalted 
and glorified in purity by all sages of the world of 
wisdom, the imaginative seeker of divinity attains to 
you by his flights of meditation. 


अव्ये पुनानं परि an ऊर्मिणा हरिं नवन्ते अभि सप्त era: 1 
अपामुपस्थे अध्यायवः कविमृतस्य योनां महिषा अंहे- 
षत ॥ २५॥ 

25. Avye punanam pari vara urmina harim navante 


abhi sapta dhenavah. Apamupasthe adhya-yavah 
kavim-rtasya yona mahisa ahesata. 


280 RGVEDA 


Seven faculties of the soul, i.e., five senses, mind 
and intellect, and seven metres of the Vedic voice exult 
in the presence of Hari, divine dispeller of darkness and 
want, pure, purifying and streaming forth in waves in 
the heart of the chosen and protected soul of the devotee. 
Holy men and veteran sages and scholars delight and 
adore the omniscient all watching Soma at the closest 
in their actions at the yajnic level of universal truth and 
observance of divine law. 


इन्दुः पुनानो अतिं गाहते मृ धो विश्वानि कृण्वन्त्सुपथांनि 
यज्य॑वे । गाः कुण्वानो निर्णिजं हर्यतः कविरत्यो न 
क्रीट्छन्परि वारमर्षति i २६॥ 


26. 1141141 punano ati gahate mrdho visvani krn-vant- 
supathani yajyave. Gah krnvano nirnijam 
haryatah kaviratyo na krilan pari varamarsati. 


Indu, soma spirit of life and light of the world, 
pure and purifying, overcomes all adversaries, clearing 
all paths of life, making them simple for the man of 
self-sacrifice for social and creative purposes. Revealing 
its own real form in its original purity, the refulgent and 
omniscient lord goes forward to the chosen soul, bright 
as a flash of light. 


असश्चतः शतधारा sifufsrat हरिं wards a ता 
उदन्युवः । क्षिपो! मृजन्ति परि गोधिरावुंतं तृतीये gs अधिं 
रोचने fea: २७॥ ति ति 

17. Asascatah satadhara abhisriyo harim navante'- 
va ta udanyuvah. Ksipo mrjanti pari gobhiravr- 
tam trttye prsthe adhi rocane divah. 


Those ceaseless, overflowing, bright and 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 281 


extensive showers of adoration in love and homage 
flowing in a hundred streams reach beatific Soma, light 
of life. Holy vibrations of mind in faith exalt the lord 
wrapped in sun-rays abiding in the third and highest 
region over the bright heaven and enshrine it in the soul. 


तवेमाः प्रजा दिव्यस्य रेत॑सस्त्वं विश्व॑स्य भुव॑नस्य राजसि। 
अथेदं विश्वं पवमान ते वशे त्वमिन्दो प्रथमो धामधा 
stan een 


28. Tavemah praja divyasya retasas-tvam visvasya 
bhuvanasya rajasi. Athedam visvam pavamana 
te vase tvamindo prathamo dhamadha asi. 


These people, these birds and beasts, all these 
worlds of existence, are yours, born of your divine 
creative power, the original divine seed. You shine and 
rule over this entire world of existence. And O Spirit 
pure and purifying and omnipresent, this entire universe 
is under your control. Indu, O light of life and life of 
the world, you are the only, first, original and eternal 
cause, foundation and sustainer of the world order. 


त्वं समुद्रो असि विश्ववित्कवे तवेमाः use प्रदिशो 
विधर्मणि । त्वं द्यां च॑ पृथिवीं चाति जिषे तव ज्योतींषि 
पवमान सूर्यः ॥ २९॥ 


29.  Tvam samudro asi visvavit kave tavemah panca 
pradiso vidharmani. Tvam dyam ca prthivim cati 
Jabhrise tava jyotimsi pavamana suryah. 


You are the original infinite womb of life in 
existence and the ultimate haven, absolute master of 
the entire universe, O poet creator. Within you and in 
your order of Dharma are contained and sustained all 


282 RGVEDA 


the five dimensions of existence, material, psychic, 
spiritual, temporal and spatial. You hold and sustain the 
heaven and earth, absolutely, and, O lord immaculate, 
purifying and vibrant, the stars are but reflections of 
your self-refulgence. 


त्वं पवित्रे रज॑सो विधर्मणि देवेभ्य॑: सोम पवमान पूयसे। 
त्वामुशिजंः प्रथमा अगृभ्णत तुभ्येमा विश्वा भुव॑नानि 
येमिरे ॥ ३०॥ 


30. Tvam pavitre rajaso vidharmani devebhyah soma 
pavamana puyase. TvamuSijah prathama 
agrbhnata tubhyema visva bhuvanani yemire. 


In this holy order of existence governed by the 
law of divinity, O Soma, light of life immaculate, your 
presence emanates from every particle of the divine 
elements of Prakrti, from all the divine regions of the 
universe in balanced motion, and the same presence is 
distilled in purity by the wise for noble humanity. The 
first vibrant lovers of divinity perceive and realise this 
presence at the dawn of creation. From you the entire 
worlds of existence emerge and unto you they all return. 


प्र रेभ एत्यति वार॑मव्ययं वृषा वनेष्वव॑ चक्रदब्दरिः । सं 
धीतयो वावशाना अनूषत शिश रिहन्ति मतयः पनि- 
WAU ३९॥ 

31. (27८ 1८70८ etyati varam-avyayam vrsa vanesvava 
cakradadd-harih. Sam dhitayo vavasana anu-sata 
sisum rihanti matayah panipnatam. 


The Absolute divine, Shabda Brahma, emerges 
roaring with a bang, AUM, goes forward creating and 
sounding over and across the imperishable world of his 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 283 


desire, potent in creative showers, and transcends his 
own creation. The same all potent and overflowing 
presence, blissful, projecting all and withdrawing all, 
roars loud and bold in moments of time and acts of love, 
desire and worshipful creations. That do the wise sages, 
loving and worshipful, adore and exalt in prayer. The 
wise and vibrant all love and adore the admirable 
presence living and breathing in the entire world of 
existence. 


स aes रज्मिभिः परि व्यत तन्तुं तन्वानस्तिवृतं यथां 
विदे । tage प्रशिषो नवीयसी: पतिर्जनीनामुप याति 
निष्कृतम्‌ ॥ २२॥ 


32. Sa suryasya rasmibhih pari vyata tantum 
tanvanastrivrtam yatha vide. Nayannrtasya pra- 
Siso naviyasth patirjaninamupa yati niskrtam. 


That Soma, creative Spirit of the universe, 
wrapped in the light of his own refulgence, radiating 
by the rays of the sun, weaving and expanding the three 
dimensional web of existence as he intends and plans, 
inducting the newest and latest designs of the laws of 
cosmic evolution as father generator of successive 
generations, radiates and moves to the creative vedi of 
cosmic yajna. 


राजा सिन्धूनां पवते पतिर्दिव ऋतस्य याति पथिधिः 
कनिंक्रदत्‌। सहस्रधारः परि षिच्यते हरिः पुनानो वाचं 
जनयन्नुपावसुः ॥ २२३ ॥ 

33. Raja sindhunam pavate patirdiva rtasya ydati 
pathibhih kanikradat. Sahasradharah pari sic- 
yate harih punano vacam janayannupavasuh. 


284 RGVEDA 


Ruler and controller of the cosmic streams of 
evolution, lord of the light of heaven, moves and flows 
on loud and bold by the paths of cosmic law in a 
thousand streams and showers of new life. The creative 
spirit dispelling want and darkness, pure and purifying, 
goes on close by sustainers of life, creating new forms 
and names of existence, and is celebrated as divine 
creator, controller and director of the evolution of life. 


पव॑मान मह्यर्णो वि धावसि सूरो न चित्रो अव्ययानि 
पव्य॑या । गभ॑स्तिपूतो TARR: सुतो महे वाजाय धन्याय 
धन्वसि ॥ ३२४ ॥ 


34. Pavamana mahyarno vi dhavasi suro na citro 
avyayani pavyaya. Gabhastiputo nrbhiradri-bhih 
suto mahe vajaya dhanyaya dhanvasi. 


O Soma, immaculate sanctifying spirit of cosmic 
evolution, boundless flood of creative energy, by your 
own potential you rush on like a mighty marvellous 
power to imperishable forms of existence. Exalted by 
rays of the sun, realised by veteran saints and sages, 
you rush on for great wealth and victory in the onward 
progress of the world. 


इषमूर्ज' पवमानाभ्यर्षसि श्येनो न de कलशेषु सीदसि । 
इन्द्राय मद्वा मद्यो मद॑ः सुतो दिवो विं्टम्भ उपमो विंच- 
णः ॥ ३९५ Ul 

35.  Isamurjam pavamanabharsasi Syeno na vamsu 


kalasesu sidasi. Indraya madva madyo madah 
suto divo vistambha upamo vicaksanah. 


O Soma, spirit of the cosmos in evolutionary 
flux, you move food and energy in the process of 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 285 


creative evolution, and like the speediest harbinger of 
joy you settle in the heart core of devoted celebrants. 
You are the self-existent joyous and inspiring source of 
ecstasy for the soul, pillar of the light of heaven, most 
excellent beyond comparison and all watching 
omniscient spirit. 


aa स्वसारो अभि मातरः शिशुं नवं जज्ञानं जेन्यं 
विपज्चित॑म्‌। अपां गन्धर्व दिव्यं नृचश्च॑सं सोमं विश्व॑स्य 
भुव॑नस्य राजसे ।॥ ३६ ॥ 


36. Sapta svasaro abhi matarah sisum navam jajna- 
nam jenyam vipascitam. Apam gandharvam 
divyam nrcaksasam somam visvasya bhuva-nasya 
rajase. 


Seven sisterly perceptive, conceptive and 
discriminative organs of sense and mind jointly confirm 
the presence of Soma, all pervasive, ever new, 
informing, victorious, universally wise, sustainer of 
waters and earth, heavenly, and constant watchful 
guardian of humanity. They perceive you, Soma, as you 
pervade and illuminate all regions of the world. 


ईशान इमा भुव॑नानि वीय॑से युजान इन्दो हरितं: Gave: । 
तास्ते क्षरन्तु मधुमद्‌ घृतं vada ad सोम तिष्ठन्तु 
ped: ॥ ३७॥ ति 

37. [Sana ima bhuvanani viyase yujana indo haritah 
suparnyah. Taste ksarantu madhumad-ghrtam 
payastava vrate soma tisthantu krstayah. 


O Soma, Indu, lord of light and beauty of 
peaceful life, you rule over all these regions of the world 
harnessing dynamic forces of nature’s energy. May these 


286 RGVEDA 


forces of yours produce and shower on us ghrta and 
milk of honeyed sweetness and may the people abide 
by your laws and discipline of life. 


त्वं नृचक्षा असि सोम विश्वतः पव॑मान वृषभ ता वि 
धावसि। स न॑: पवस्व वसुंमद्धिरंण्यवहुयं स्याम भुव॑नेषु 
जीवसे ।॥ ३८ ॥ 


38. Tvam nrcaksa asi soma visvatah pavamana 
vrsabha ta vi dhavasi. Sa nah pavasva vasuma- 
ddhiranyavad-vayam syama bhuvanesu jivase. 


O Soma, you are constant watchful guardian of 
humanity all round in all ways. O lord pure and 
purifying, vigorous and generous, you cleanse us with 
all those powers of yours. Pray purify and energise us 
so that we may be prosperous with peaceful settlement 
and golden graces of wealth, honour and excellence to 
live happy in the regions of the world. 


गोवित्प॑वस्व वसुवि्दिरण्यविद्रैतोधा इन्दो भुवं नेष्वर्पितः। 
त्वं सुवीरों असि सोम विश्ववित्तं त्वा विप्रा sd गिरेम 
आसते ॥ ३९॥ 


39. Govit pavasva vasuvid-dhiranyavid-retodha indo 
bhuvanesvarpitah. Tvam suviro asi soma visvavit 
tam tva vipra upa girema asate. 


O Soma, Indu, lord of life, beauty and grace, 
flow, pure and purifying, vibrant omnipresent in all 
regions of the world. You master and control the wealth 
of lands and cows, light of knowledge and culture, 
jewels of peace and settlement, and the beauty of gold 
and grace. You are virile and command creative energy. 
You are mighty brave, ruler over the world. We, vibrant 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 287 


devotees, adore you with songs of praise and prayer, 
and pray we may be close to you. 


उन्मध्वं ऊर्मिर्वनना अतिष्ठिपदपो वसानो महिषो वि गाहते । 
राजा पवित्ररथो वाजमारुहत्सहस्त्र॑भृष्टिर्जयति stay 
बृहत्‌ ॥ ० ॥ 


40. Unmadhva urmir-vanana atisthipad-apo va-sano 
mahiso vi gahate. Raja pavitraratho vajam-aruhat 
sahasrabhrstir-jayati 51410 brhat. 


Soma of honey sweets of divinity helps desires 
to be stabilised. The great ardent one wearing the cloak 
of dynamics of creativity sojourns over spaces. 
Refulgent ruler riding the purity chariot advances to 
victory in elemental evolution and, wielding a thousand 
arms of blazing light, wins high and imperishable 
renown and adoration. 


स भन्दना उदियर्ति प्रजाव॑तीर्विंश्वायुर्विंशवाः सुभरा 
अहर्दिवि taal प्रजावंद्रयिमर्व॑पस्त्यं पीत इन्दविन्द्र मस्मभ्यं 
याचतात्‌॥ ४९ ॥ 


41.  Sabhandana udiyarti prajavatir-visvayur-visvah 
subhara ahardivi. Brahma prajavad-rayimasva- 
pastyam pita indavindramasmabhyam yacatat. 


It raises sun rays and moves our thanks and 
adorations which bring up noble progeny, all health and 
long age and abundant fulfilment of universal value day 
and night. Indu, Spirit of light and joy of life, sung and 
celebrated, give us the knowledge of divinity, wealth 
of noble progeny, a home full of comfort and 
achievement, and power and excellence of the world. 


288 RGVEDA 


सो अग्रे stat हरिंर्यतो मदः Weider चेतयते अनु द्युभिः । 
द्वा जना यातयन्नन्तरीयते नरा च शंसं दैव्यं च धर्तरि iw? 


42. So agre ahnam harir-haryato madah pra cetasa 
cetayate anu dyubhih. Dva jana yatayannantart- 
yate nara ca Samsam daivyam ca dhartari. 


That Soma, dispeller of darkness in advance of 
the day, blissful and glorious Spirit, inspiring and 
exalting, illuminates with intelligence and enlightens 
with consciousness day by day. It moves within, rousing 
both men and women, high and low, general humanity 
and leading lights, and inspires all to acquire, intensify 
and maintain higher and higher intelligence and 
awareness both admirable and divine day by day. 


अञ्जते व्य॑ञ्जते asa cad रिहन्ति मधुनाभ्यञ्जते | 
सिन्धोरुच्छ्वासे पतयन्तमुक्षणं हिरण्यपावाः पशुमासु 
गृभ्णते ।॥ ४३ ॥ 


43. Anjate vyanjate samanjate kratum rihanti 
madhunabhyanjate. Sindhorucchvase patayan- 
tam-uksanam hiranyapavah pasumasu grbhate. 


They realise it in the vibrant soul, diversify the 
presence in various statements of definition and 
communication, and integrate the experience and the 
statements in the awareness of its absolute glory. They 
love and adore the soul of cosmic yajna and worship it 
with honey sweets of homage in acts of soma yajna. In 
these ways of awareness, thoughts, words and deeds, 
do lovers of the golden glory of soma realise and 
integrate with the all watching universal power and 
presence vaulting on top of their waves of consciousness 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 289 
with incessant showers of bliss divine. 


विपश्चिते पव॑मानाय गायत मही न धारात्यन्धो अर्षति। 
अहिर्न जु्णमितिं सर्पति त्वचमत्यो न ऋरीव्छ॑न्नसर द्‌ वृषा 
हरिः usw 


44. Vipascite pavamanaya gayata mahi na dhara-tya- 
ndho arsati. Ahirna jurnamati sarpati tvaca-ma- 
tyo na krilann-asarad-vrsa harih. 


O people, sing in honour of Soma, omniscient 
spirit of life, pure and purifier that brings us food, energy, 
honour and excellence in torrential streams. Knowing 
that, man, free from want, suffering and small 
mindedness, goes forward with life happy, youthful, 
playful as a colt and generous as showers of rain, and at 
the end of life goes on again, having left this body as a 
snake casts off its old skin and goes free and youthful 
again. 


अग्रेगो राजाप्य॑स्तविष्यते विमानो stat भुवं नेष्वर्पितः। 
हरिंघुतस्तुः सुदूशींको अर्णवो ज्यो तीर॑थः पवते राय 
ओक्यः ॥ ४५॥ 


45. Agrego rajapyastavisyate vimano ahnam bhuva- 
nesvarpitah. Harirghrtasnuh sudrsiko arnavo 
Jyotirathah pavate raya okyah. 


Soma, foremost pioneer spirit, refulgent ruler, 
open to all, maker of days and nights, omnipresent in 
all regions of the universe, is adored and worshipped 
by all. Soft and sweet, gracious and illuminative as ghrta, 
destroyer of darkness and suffering, blissful of sight, 
deep as space, riding the chariot of light, universal haven 
of all, moves, initiates and consecrates us for the 


290 RGVEDA 
achievement of honour, wealth and excellence. 


असं जिं स्कम्भो दिव उद्य॑तो मदः परि त्रिधातुर्भुव॑नान्यर्षति । 
अंशुं रिहन्ति मतयः ued गिरा यदि निणिज॑मृभ्मिणों 
ययुः NE ॥ 


46.  Asarji skambho diva udyato madah pari tri- 
dhatur-bhuvananyarsati. Amsum rihanti mata- 
yah panipnatam gira yadi nirnijam-rgmino yayuh. 


Soma, lord supreme, that creates, moves and 
pervades all regions of the universe constituted of three 
modes of Prakrti, sattva, rajas and tamas, is the pillar of 
the highest heavens, up and wakeful, highest of reality 
and inspires humanity with divine ecstasy. The wise love 
and worship the self-manifestive, self-expressive, 
vibrant Soma with songs of praise while the celebrants 
adore the immaculate divinity with hymns of praise, 
the holy Rks, and realise it. 


प्रते धारा अत्यण्वानि मेष्यः पुनानस्य Gaal यन्ति Tea: 1 
agit रिन्दो चम्वोः समज्यस आ सुवानः सोम कलशेषु 
सीदसि ॥ ४७॥ 


47. Pra te dhara atyanvani mesyah pundanasya 
samyato yanti ramhayah. Yadgobhirindo camvoh 
samajyasa व suvanah soma kalasesu sidasi. 


Indu, Spirit of life and light of the world, Soma, 
pure and purifying, the streams of your creative power, 
extremely subtle, virile and generous, move united at 
the speed of thought when, between heaven and earth, 
you vibrate and radiate, one with the rays of the sun, 
and, inspiring, worshipped and consecrated within, you 
abide in the heart core of the realised souls. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 87 291 


पव॑स्व सोम क्रतुविन्न उक्थ्योऽ व्यो वारे परिं धाव मधुं 
प्रियम्‌। जहि विश्वांत्रश्चसं इन्दो अत्रिणो बृहद्वदेम विदथं 
सुवीराः ॥ ४८ ॥ 


48. Pavasva soma kratuvinna ukthyo’vyo vare pari 
dhava madhu priyam. Jahi visvan raksasa indo 
atrino brhadvadema vidathe suvirah. 


O Soma, Spirit of life and peace, Indu, light of 
the world, all knowing master of yajnic action, radiate 
and flow for us, lord adorable and all protective. Distil 
the dearest honey sweets of life for the chosen soul and 
bless. Destroy all ogres and demons who devour human 
wealth. Blest with heroic courage and noble progeny, 
we celebrate and glorify you with abundant praise in 
the yajnic congregation. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 87 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Ushana Kavya Rshi 


प्रतु द्रव ok ae नि षीद्‌ नृभिः पुनानो अभि aning | 
अश्वं न त्वां वाजिनं मर्जयन्तोऽ च्छा बर्ही र॑शनाभिंन- 
यन्ति॥ ९॥ 


1. Pra tu drava pari kosam ni sida nrbhih punano 
abhi vajamarsa. ASvam na tva vajinam marja- 
yanto ’ccha barhi rasanabhir-nayanti. 


O Soma, radiate, flow into the sanctity of the 
heart and sink into the soul of the devotee. Adored by 
the yajakas on the vedi, let the showers of joy stream 
forth. The celebrants, exalting your power and presence, 
invoke and invite you like energy itself with adorations 
to the grass seats of the yajna. 


292 RGVEDA 


स्वायुधः प॑वते देव इन्दुरशस्तिहा वृजनं रक्च॑माणः 1 पिता 
देवानां जनिता सुदक्षो विष्टम्भो दिवो erect: पृथि- 
व्याः॥ २॥ 


2. Svayudhah pavate deva indur-asastiha vrjanam 
raksamanah. Pita devanam janita sudakso 
vistambho divo dharunah prthivyah. 


Divine Indu, light of life, equipped with noble 
arms, destroyer of scandal and malignity, protector of 
yajna vedi against crookedness and intrigue, flows pure 
and purifying. It is the generator and sustainer of the 
divine powers of nature and humanity, perfect and expert 
original agent of action, pillar of heaven and foundation 
support of the earth. 


ऋषिर्विप्रः पुरएता जनानामृभुर्धीर उशना काव्येन । 
स चिंद्िवेद्‌ निहितं यर्दासामपीच्यं१ गुह्यं नाम गोनाम्‌ 3 ॥ 
Rsirviprah pura-eta jananam-rbhurdhira usana 
kavyena. Sa cidviveda nihitam yadasam-apicyam 
guhyam nama gonam. 
Divine seer, vibrant and sagely power, potent 
maker, stable of will and action, Soma is brilliant with 


innate vision and wisdom. He alone knows what is the 
hidden secret and mystery of these stars and planets. 


एष स्य ते मधुमां इन्द्र सोमो वृषा वृष्णे परि पवित्रँ ster: 1 
सहस्रसाः शतसा भूरिदावा शश्वत्तमं बर्हिरा वाज्य॑- 
स्थात्‌ ॥ ४॥ 

4. Esa sya te madhuman indra somo vrsa vrsne pari 
pavitre aksah.Sahasrasah satasa bhuridava 
Sasvattamam barhira vajyasthdt. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 87 293 


Indra, omnipotent generous creator and ruler of 
the universe, this Soma is your honeyed shower of 
beneficence and grace which profusely flows over and 
across the immaculate world of life. May this Soma, 
giving a thousand boons in a hundred forms of infinite 
values, a mighty victorious divine force, abide by us 
and bless the universal vedi of human life with eternal 
grace. 


एते सोमा अभि गव्या weet महे वाजायामूताय 
श्रवांसि। पवित्रेभिः पव॑माना असुग्रञ्छरूवस्यवो न 
पुंतनाजो stat: ॥ ५॥ 


5. Ete soma abhi gavya sahasra mahe vajaya- 
mrtaya srvamsi. Pavitrebhih pavamana asrgran- 
chra-vasyavo na prtanajo atyah. 


The soma showers heading to the earth, like 
mighty warriors rushing to battle for victory and 
immortal fame, bearing a thousand forms of strength, 
sustenance and advancement, enshrined in purity of the 
soul vibrate and flow for the holy seeker’s imperishable 
attainment of immortality over the state of mortality. 


परि हि ष्मा पुरुहूतो जनानां विरूवास॑र द्धोजंना पूयमानः | 
अथा भ॑र श्येनभृत प्रयांसि रयिं तुञ्जानो अभि वाजमर्ष ।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Pari hi sma puruhuto jananam visvasarad- 
bhojana puyamanah. Atha bhara syenabhrta 
prayamsi rayim tunjano abhi vajamarsa. 


O Soma, pure and purifying divine spirit of 
joyous energy, invoked by all people, enshrined in the 
heart core of the soul, bring all forms of life’s joy. Flow 
for our battle of life for the victory of immortality over 


294 RGVEDA 


the state of mortality and bring us food, wealth and 
honour and excellence created by divine energy for the 
soul’s sustenance on way to the final victory. 


एष dar: परि सोम॑ः पवित्रे सर्गो न सृष्टो अ॑दधावदवी | 
तिग्मे शिशानो महिषो न शङ्क गा गव्यन्नभि शूरो न 
सर्त्वा ॥ ७॥ 


7. Esa suvanah pari somah pavitre sargo na srsto 
adadhavad-arva. Tigme 5754710 mahiso na 517६८ 
ga gavyannabhi Suro na satva. 


This Soma, pure and purifying creative energy 
of divinity, vibrates in immaculate nature and flows in 
the devotee’s pure heart like the mighty force of nature 
itself, sharpening its rays of light for dispelling darkness 
and negation. It goes on like a poised hero keen on his 
determination for victory in the battle. 


एषा य॑यो परमादन्तरद्रेः कूचित्सतीरूर्वे गा fade । 
दिवो न विद्युत्स्तनयन्त्यभ्रैः सोम॑स्य ते पवत इन्द्र धारां ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Esa yayau paramad-antaradreh kucit satirurve 
ga viveda. Divo na vidyut stanayantyabhraih 
somasya te pavata indra dhara. 


Indra, lord almighty, this Soma stream of your 
power and bliss flows from the highest regions of 
existence and, sustained somewhere in the vast expanse 
of space, reaches the earthly regions of the universe 
like lightning from the regions of light, thundering with 
the clouds in the middle regions of the skies, seen and 
heard on the earth. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 88 295 


उत स्म॑ राशि परि यासि गोनामिन्द्रेण सोम सरथं पुनानः। 
पूर्वीरिषो' बृहतीर्जीःरदानो शिक्षा शचीवस्तव ता 
उपष्टुत्‌॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Uta sma rasim pari yasi gonam-indrena soma 
saratham punanah. Purviriso brhatir-jiradano 
Siksa Sacivastava ta upastut. 


Soma, O spirit of life and ecstasy of being, you 
move together with Indra, the noble soul riding the body 
chariot, you move together to the multitude of things 
perceivable and radiate to the senses, mind and 
intelligence of man, pure and purifying. O lord of all 
power and knowledge, infinite giver of vast possibilities, 
worshipped at the closest in the heart core of the soul, 
bless us with those abundant and eternal gifts of food 
and energy, honour, power and excellence and the 
wisdom and vision of divinity which we need for 
ultimate freedom. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 88 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Ushana Kavya Rshi 
अयं सोम॑ इन्द्र तुभ्यं सुन्वे तुभ्यं पवते त्वम॑स्य fe 
त्वं ह यं च॑कूषे त्वं व॑वृष इन्दुं मदाय युज्याय सोमं॑म्‌॥ ९ ॥ 
Mh Ayam soma indra tubhyam sunve tubhyam pavate 
tvamasya pahi. Tvam ha yam cakrse tvam vavrsa 
indum madaya yujyaya somam. 

Indra, O soul of life, O man, this soma spirit of 
life and light, this beauty and joy is created for you; it 
flows, illuminates and sanctifies, for you; take it, live 
it, protect and advance it, don’t destroy it. Indeed you 


296 RGVEDA 


create it, it is your choice to create it. And whatever 
you do and choose to do is for your mutual joy and 
indispensable togetherness. O man, enjoy the beauty 
and vibrancy of life, maintain and advance it for peace 
in mutual interest in a spirit of interdependence and 
cooperation. 


ag tat न भुरिषाव्ठयोजि महः gefot सातये adh 
आदीं विश्वा नहुष्याणि जाता स्वर्षाता ad ऊर्ध्वां 
न॑वन्त ॥ २॥ 


2. Saim ratho na bhurisdlayoji mahah puruni sataye 
vasuni. Adim visva nahusyani jata svarsata vana 
urdhva navanta. 


The great exalted soma spirit of life’s vibrancy, 
like a great chariot of abundant comfort, capacity and 
possibility is enjoined for achieving many kinds of 
wealth, honours and excellences, and then all things 
born, created and achieved, all high ups, giving showers 
of joy in the exciting field of life honour, adore and 
celebrate the soma spirit of life divine. 


वायुर्न यो नियुत्व इष्टयामा नासत्येव हव आ शंभ॑विष्ठः | 
विश्ववारो द्रविणोदाडंव त्मन्पूषेवं धीजव॑नोऽ सि सोम ॥ ३॥ 


3: Vayurna yo niyutvan istayama nasatyeva hava a 
sambhavisthah. Visvavaro dravinoda iva tman 
puseva dhijavano’si soma. 


O Soma, vibrant spirit of life in ceaseless flow 
like energy reaching the cherished goal, most blissful 
like the Ashvins, circuitous currents of nature’s energy 
in the exciting field of life, you are the treasure-hold of 
world’s wealth of universal value, infinite giver of 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 88 297 


everything like the parental beneficence and 
nourishment of divinity, and you move forward at the 
speed of thought. 


इन्द्रो न यो महा कर्मीणि चक्रिर्हन्ता वृत्राणामसि सोम 
पूर्भित्‌। पैद्धो न हि त्वमर्हिनाम्नां हन्ता विश्व॑स्यासि सोम 
दस्योः ।॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Indro na yo maha karmani cakrirhanta vrtrana- 
masi soma purbhit. Paidvo na hi tvamahina- 
mnam hanta visvasyasi soma dasyoh. 


O Soma, who are a great performer like Indra, 
the omnipotent, you are the destroyer of demonic forces 
and the breaker of their strongholds. Like lazer beams, 
you are the killer of the malignant, the poisonous and 
all the other negativities of the world. 


अभिर्न यो वन आ सज्यमानो वृथा पाजांसि कृणुते नदीषुं। 
जनो न युध्वा महत उपब्दिरियर्ति सोमः पव॑मान 
ऊर्मिंम्‌॥ ५॥ 


8 Agnirna yo vana व srjyamano vrtha pajamsi 
krnute nadisu. jano na yudhva mahata upabdi- 
riyarti somah pavamana urmim. 


Created like fire by friction in the serious 
business of life, Soma spontaneously creates mighty 
motions of flow in the dynamics of existence. Like a 
mighty man warrior roaring and resounding as a great 
victor, soma goes forward to billows of the sea sending 
out waves of purity and power all round. 


एते सोमा अति वाराण्यव्या दिव्या न कोशासो अभ्रवर्षाः । 
gat समुद्रं सिन्ध॑वो न नीचीः सुतासो! अभि कलशौ 
असूग्रन्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


298 RGVEDA 


6. Ete soma ati varanyavya divya na kosaso abhra- 
varsah. Vrtha samudram sindhavo na nicth sutaso 
abhi kalasan asrgran. 


These soma currents of fluent joyous divine 
energy pass through higher regions of purity and 
refinement in the process of nature, and then these divine 
and protected treasure-holds of joy like vapours of rain 
bearing clouds, cleansed and sanctified, flow to the heart 
core of the devoted celebrants in the same manner as 
showers of rain from the clouds bless the earth and rivers 
flow down to the deep sea. 


शुष्मी शर्धो न मारुतं पवस्वानभिशस्ता दिव्या यथा fare 
आपो न मक्षू सुमतिर्भवा नः सहरस्त्राप्साः पृतनाषाण्न 
यज्ञः ॥ ७॥ 


ds Susmi Sardho na marutam pavasvanabhisasta 
divya yatha vit. Apo na maksu sumatirbhava nah 
sahasrapsah prtanasanna yajnah. 


O mighty power of purity and action like the 
force of winds, flow and purify, blow away the dead 
leaves, dry up the roots of negativity so that the nation 
of humanity may be clean and brilliant, free from malice, 
hate and fear of misfortune. Be instant cleanser and 
sanctifier of our will and understanding like holy waters 
of grace and give us a noble mind. Be like yajna, giver 
of a thousand noble powers and a victor in conflicts 
within and outside. 


राज्ञो नु ते वरणस्य व्रतानि बृहद्र॑भीरं तव॑ सोम ar | 
शुचिष्टम॑सि प्रियो न पित्रो दक्षाय्यो अर्यमिर्वासि सोम ।॥ ८ ॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 89 299 


8. Rajno nu te varunasya vratani brhad-gabhiram 
tava soma dhama. Sucis-tvamasi priyo na mitro 
daksayyo aryamevasi soma. 


Bless us, O Soma, that we may observe the rules 
and laws of your discipline, refulgent ruler and highest 
justicier. Profound is your presence, infinite your space. 
Immaculate you are, dear as a friend, unfailing as an 
expert guide, adorable, all bliss, beauty and pure joy. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 89 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Ushana Kavya Rshi 


प्रो स्य afd: पथ्याभिरस्याद्दिवो न वृष्टिः पव॑मानो अश्चाः। 
सहस्रधारो STASI A मातुरुपस्थे वन आ च सोम॑ः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Pro sya vahnih pathyabhirasyan divo na vrstih 
pavamano aksah. Sahasradharo asadannyasme 
maturupasthe vana a ca somah. 


That Soma, Spirit of life and life’s joy, burden 
bearer and harbinger of living energy and divine vision 
may, we pray, descend by auspicious paths of existence 
and, like showers of divine bliss, pure and purifying, 
bless us. May divine Soma of a thousand streams 
proceed for our yajnic home, pervade over mother 
earth’s lap of love and flourish in the deep clouds, 
flowing streams, dense forests and the profuse greenery 
of fields and gardens. 


राजा सिन्धूनामवसिष्ट ara ऋतस्य नावमारुहद्रलिंष्ठाम्‌। 
अप्सु द्रप्सो वावृधे श्येनजुंतो दुह ई' पिता दुह ई पितु- 
जाम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


300 RGVEDA 


2: Raja sindhunam-avasista vasa rtasya navam- 
aruhad-rajistham. Apsu drapso vavrdhe syena- 
juto duha im pita duha im piturjam. 

The ruler, mover and controller of the flow of 
rivers, Soma takes on the forms of holy waters and the 
laws of nature as helmsman of the ship of life with 
honesty and naturalness. Inspired and moved by divine 
imagination, open minded with the social dynamics of 
humanity, he receives the blessings of heavenly father 
and the father blesses the daughter earth. Thus does 
Soma, the ruler, grow in stature and augment the earth. 


सिहं न॑सन्त veal अयासं eves दिवो अस्य पतिम्‌। 
शूरो युत्सु Wan: deed गा अस्य चक्षसा aR 
पात्युश्चा ॥ ३॥ 


3. Simham nasanta madhvo ayasam harimarusam 
divo asya patim. Suro yustu prathamah prcchate 
ga asya caksasa pari patyuksa. 


Honey sweets of heaven and enlightened 
humanity come to the chief, valiant and benevolent 
sustainer of this world, the mighty hero who longs to 
be the first in the struggles of existence and who, 
generous and vigorous ruler, protects and promotes its 
lands and cows and its culture and traditions with his 
radiance. 


मधुपृष्ठं घोरमयासमश्वं Tal युञ्जन्त्युरुचक्र RATT । स्वसार 
ई जामयो मर्जयन्ति सनाभयो वाजिनमूर्जयन्ति ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Madhuprstham ghoram-ayasam-asvam rathe 


yunjantyurucakra rsvam. Svasara im jamayo 
marjayanti sanabhayo vajinam-urjayanti. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 89 301 


The leader, pioneer and ruler, loving burden 
bearer, awful for the awful, instant in action, 
indefatigable in endeavour and sublime in achievement 
of the goal, such as he is, all enlightened powers of the 
world enjoin him to the highest and foremost position 
in the vast and mighty moving chariot order of the world. 
All dynamic, self-controlled autonomous forces and 
sub-systems anoint and cosecrate the high soma power, 
and all people joined to the centre of the order support, 
strengthen and energise the dynamic, blazing, onrushing 
leader, controller and ruler of the order. 


ade ई Tae: सचन्ते समाने अन्तर्धरुणे Fran: 1 ता 
ई भर्षन्ति नम॑सा पुनानास्ता & fasaa: of! षन्ति 
पूर्वीः ॥५॥ 


Catasra im ghrtaduhah sacante samane antar- 
dharune nisattah. Ta tmarsanti namasa puna- 
nasta im visvatah pari santi purvih. 


Four eternal powers in existence, cooperative, 
creative, and gracious, abiding and integrated with and 
within the one, united, uniform and all integrative 
systemic soma spirit of the cosmic, social and individual 
order of life, pure, purifying and strengthening it with 
obedience and sustaining energy, move to the central 
master spirit, all time stay around and serve it for the 
continuance of life in existence. 


(In the cosmic system, the four are earth, water, 
fire and air in time and space. In the social order, they 
are the four classes: intellectuals, teachers and 
researchers; rulers, administrators and organisers of 
defence and law and order of peace and justice system; 


302 RGVEDA 


producers and distributors in the economic system; and 
the support services.) At the individual level, they are 
mana (mind and senses), buddhi (intelligence and 
discrimination), chitta (memory), and ahankara ([- 
sense). 


विष्टम्भो दिवो धरूण॑ः पृथिव्या विश्वां उत farcat हस्ते 
अस्य । असंत्त उत्सो गृणते नियुत्वान्मध्वों अंशुः प॑वत 
इद्ियायं।। ६ ॥ 


6. Vistambho divo dharunah prthivya visva uta 
ksitayo haste asya. Asat ta utso grnate niyutvan 
madhvo amsuh pavata indriyaya. 


Soma, cosmic spirit of peace and glory, is the 
pillar of heaven, and it is the foundation support of the 
earth. Indeed all stars and planets of the universe and 
all people of the earth are in its hand for control and 
sustenance. O man, may this soma spirit, this fount of 
infinite glory and benevolence, commanding all forces 
of the universe, the honey sweet vibrations and 
radiations of it, be for the good and glory of the celebrant 
humanity. Indeed they all flow for humanity. 


वन्वन्नवातो अभि देववीतिमिन्द्राय सोम वृत्रहा dare | 
शग्धि महः पुरुश्चन्द्रस्य रायः सुवीर्यस्य पत॑यः स्याम ॥ ७॥ 


ध Vanvannavato abhi devavitimindraya soma 
vrtraha pavasva. Sagdhi mahah puruscandra-sya 
rayah suviryasya patayah syama. 


O Soma, lord of universal peace and bliss, 
winsome, gracious giver unsolicited, inviolable power 
of the universe, destroyer of evil and darkness, let the 
gifts of divinities flow to the yajna of humanity for our 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 90 303 


worldly good and spiritual glory. Pray give us strength 
so that we may be masters, protectors and promoters of 
great and glorious wealth of excellence and 
enlightenment and a brave virile and generous progeny. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 90 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


प्र हिन्वानो ज॑निता eet रथो न वाजं सनिष्यन्न॑यासीत्‌। 
इन्द्रं गच्छन्नायुधा संशिशानो विषूवा वसु हस्त॑योराद- 
धानः ।॥ ९॥ 


| Pra hinvano janita rodasyo ratho na vajam sani- 


syannayasit. Indram gacchannayudha samsisano 
visva vasu hastayor-adadhanah. 


Inspiring the celebrants to action and 
achievement, creator of heaven and earth, winning 
strength and victory like a chariot warrior, moving to 
the karma-yogi, sharpening and calibrating weapons of 
warlike action, bearing all wealth and power of the world 
in hands, may the spirit of peace and power come and 
bless us. 


sifu fas वृष॑णं वयोधामाङ्गूषाणामवावशन्त वाणीं: | 
वना वसानो वरुणो न सिन्धून्वि र॑त्नधा Sarat वायीणि ॥ २॥ 


2 Abhi triprstham vrsanam vayodham-angusana- 
mavavasanta vanth. Vana vasano varuno na sin- 
dhun vi ratnadha dayate varyani. 


The celebrants’ songs of adoration in honour of 
the generous, virile and life bearing Soma, sustainer of 
three worlds arise in homage of love and faith. Holding 
precious treasures and powers of the world like Varuna, 


304 RGVEDA 


all covering space and the ocean holding the deep seas, 
the wielder of world jewels bestows gifts of choice on 
mankind. 


sham: सर्ववीरः सहावाञ्जेतां पवस्व सनिता धनानि। 
तिग्मायुधः क्षिप्रध॑न्वा समत्स्वषाक्हः साह्ान्पृत॑नासु 
STAN ३॥ ति 
3: Suragramah sarvavirah sahavadiijeta pavasva 
sanita dhanani. Tigmayudhah ksipradhanva 
samatsvasalhah sahvan prtanasu 54111111. 


Commander of a multitude of heroes, himself 
brave in every way, patient and mighty, all time victor, 
generous giver of all wealth, honour and excellence, 
wielding weapons of instant light and fire power, 
unconquerable in contests of values and destroyer of 
the enemy in battles of arms, may we pray, flow and 
purify us. 


उरुगव्यूतिरभयानि कृण्वन्त्स॑मीचीने आ प॑वस्वा पुरन्धी । 
अपः सिषासन्नुषसः taint: सं चिक्रदो महो अस्मभ्यं 
वाजान्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Urugavyutir-abhayani krnvant-samicine ठ pava- 
sva purandhi. Apah sisasannusasah svargah sam 
cikrado maho asmabhyam vajan. 


Bountiful bearer of the abundant world of 
heaven and earth, creating and clearing the wide paths 
of truth and rectitude, making them free from fear and 
mutual conflict, enlightening us on the dynamics of 
karma in the flow of existence, expanding heavenly 
lights of the dawns of successive days, pray speak loud 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 90 305 


and bold and clear and bring us great victories of 
sustenance, power, honour and excellence in the struggle 
for progress in a state of purity. 


मत्सि सोम वरुणं ae fast मत्सीन्द्र॑मिन्दो पवमान 
विष्णुम्‌ । मत्सि शर्धो मारुतं मत्सि देवान्मत्सि पहापिन्द्र॑- 
मिन्दो मदाय॥ ५॥ 


Matsi soma varunam matsi mitram matsindra- 
mindo pavamana visnum. Matsi Sardho maru-tam 
matsi devan matsi maham-indram-indo madaya. 


O Soma, universal spirit of life’s joy, Indu, spirit 
of brilliancy, pure and purifying divinity, you inspire 
and exhilarate Varuna, freedom of choice, law and 
justice, advance and inspire Mitra, spirit of love, 
friendship and cooperation, inspire and exhilarate Indra, 
ruling powers of governance and defence, honour, 
exhort and advance Vishnu, all prevailing powers of 
intelligence and enlightenment, exhort and intensify the 
force and powers of Maruts, stormy pioneers and 
fighters, honour and advance brilliant scholars and 
creative artists and technologists. O divine and brilliant 
spirit of divinity, Indra, inspire and exhilarate the great 
ruler Indra for the sake of high honour and excellence 
of humanity. 


एवा राजव क्रतुमा अमेन विश्वा ufivetar प॑वस्व । 
इन्दो सूक्ताय वच॑से वयो! धा यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां 
TUE I 

6. Eva rajeva kratuman amena visva ghanigh- 


naddurita pavasva. Indo suktaya vacase vayo dha 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


306 RGVEDA 


Thus like a brilliant ruler, presiding power of 
universal action and human endeavour, pray flow on 
and purify us with your divine powers destroying all 
evils and undesirables of the world. O lord of refulgence 
and life’s joy, bless us with good health and long age 
for the sake of holy speech and grateful songs of 
adoration. O divinities of heaven and earth, pray bless 
us with all time peace, progress and all round happiness 
and well being. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 91 


Pavamana Soma Devata, Kashyapa Maricha Rshi 


असं्जिं वक्वा रथ्ये यथाजौ धिया मनोता प्रथमो are । 
दश॒ स्वसारो अधि सानो अव्येऽ ज॑न्ति वद्धिं सद॑ना- 
FT ९॥ 


1. Asarji vakva rathye yathajau dhiya manota 
prathamo manist. Dasa svasaro adhi sano avye- 
*janti vahnim sadananyaccha. 


As in a chariot race, so in the progressive 
business of organised society, an eloquent speaker, 
prominent thinker and manager of imaginative and 
decisive first order is appointed to take on the business 
of governance and administration. Ten cooperative 
persons capable of independent thinking, working in 
perfect unison like sister powers or ten pranas or ten 
senses of perception and volition, in the house, assist 
the leader on top of the protective social order of yajnic 
sanctity. 


वीती जन॑स्य दिव्यस्यं कव्यैरधि सुवानो Aga भिरिन्दुः | 
प्रयो नृभि॑रमृतो मर्त्ये भिरर्मर्मजानोऽविंथिर्गोभिरद्धिः॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 91 307 


2. Viti janasya divyasya kavyairadhi suvano nahu- 
syebhir-induh. Pra yo nrbhir-amrto martyebhir- 
marmyjano ’vibhir-gobhiradbhih. 


The high priest of the yajnic social order, 
brilliant and benevolent, immortal soul, consecrated by 
wisest of the brilliant people and the general community 
and exalted by leading lights and ordinary mortals with 
common voice, supportive actions and protective 
thoughts and opinions, goes forward leading the yajnic 
order for their common good. 


तृषा वृष्णो रोरुवदंशुरस्मै पव॑मानो रुशदीर्ते पयो गोः। 
सहस्रमृक्वां पथिभिर्वचोविद॑ध्वस्मभथिः सूरो अण्वं वि 
याति।॥ ३॥ 


Vrsa vrsne roruvad-amsurasmai pavamano 
rusadirte payo goh. Sahasramrkva pathibhir- 
vacovid-adhvasmabhih suro anvam vi yati. 


Virile and generous Soma, leading power of the 
yajnic order, pure and purifying, creative and brilliant, 
goes forward for the abundant social order, roaring and 
illuminating, and elevating the fertility and abundance 
of the earth. Speaking and chanting a thousand holy 
words, visionary of thought and communication, the 
hero goes on by paths of love and non-violence, reaches 
and opens the subtlest secrets and even breaks through 
the atom. 


रूजा gou fazer: सदांसि पुनान इन्द ऊर्णुहि वि 
वाजान्‌ । वृश्चोपरिं्टात्तुजता वधेन ये अन्ति दूरादुंपनाय- 
Aer ४ ॥ 


308 RGVEDA 


4. Ruja drlha cidraksasah sadamsi punana inda 
urnuhi vi vajan. Vrscoparistat tujata vadhena 
ye anti duradupanayamesam. 


Indra, lord of power, break down the strongholds 
of demonic destroyers. Pure, purifying and consecrated, 
cover the forces of positive strength of creativity. Uproot 
the saboteurs and the destroyers coming from above, 
break with the bolt those who are far off or near within, 
destroy their leaders. 


स प्र॑ल्नवन्नव्य॑से विश्ववार gra पथः कुणुहि प्राच॑ः । ये 
दुष्षहासो वनुषां बृहन्तस्तास्तें अश्याम पुरुकृत्पुरुश्चो ॥ ५ ॥ 


त Sa pratnavan-navyase visvavara suktaya pathah 
krnuhi pracah. Ye dussahaso vanusa brhanta- 
stanste aSyama purukrt purukso. 


O lord of universal acceptance and adoration, 
open the paths of advancement for the modern celebrant 
as ever before and let the paths be constant as the ancient 
ones. O lord of infinite action and munificent giver, let 
us have those means, methods and weapons which are 
of high uncounterable calibre over a vast effective area 
of operation. 


एवा पुनानो अपः स्ववैर्गां अस्मभ्यं तोका तन॑यानि भूरिं। 
शं नः कषेत्रमुरु ज्योतींषि सोम Sie नः सूर्य" दायें 
Rafe ति 

6. Eva punano apah svarga asmabhyam toka 
tanayani bhuri. Sam nah ksetramuru jyotimsi 
soma jyonnah suryam drsaye rirthi. 


O Soma, spirit of peace and joy, pure, purifying 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 92 309 


and thus adored and consecrated, bless us with the 
abundance of earth, showers of the skies and 
illuminations of the highest regions of light, wealth of 
children and grand children. Give us peace and well 
being, vast field of action for expansion, and brilliant 
illuminations of knowledge and wisdom. And give us 
the vision to see the light of the sun for all time. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 92 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Kashyapa Maricha Rshi 


परिं सुवानो हरिरंशुः पवित्रे रथो न aft सनये fears: | 
आपच्छलोकमिन्ियं पूयमानः प्रति dar अजुषत 
प्रयोंभिः॥ ९॥ 


॥, Pari suvano hariramsuh pavitre ratho na sarji 
sanaye hiyanah. Apacchlokamindriyam puyam- 
anah prati devan ajusata prayobhih. 


Invoked and adored for the attainment of 
fulfilment, inspired and pleased, may the divine 
destroyer of suffering and frustration, unifying 
omnipresence of divinity, radiate as joy and bless the 
soul. Worshipped as pure presence, may the divine Spirit 
come, acknowledge and receive my song of prayer and 
exaltation, and bless the noble nature of humanity with 
food and inspiration for the body and mind, and freedom 
for the soul. 


अच्छ Taal असरत्यवित्रे नाम दर्धानः कविर॑स्य योनौ । 
eda सद॑ने चमूषुपेमग्मन्नृष॑यः सप्त विप्राः ॥ २॥ 
2. Accha nrcaksa asarat pavitre nama dadhanah 


kavirasya yonau. Sidan hoteva sadane camusu- 
pem-agmann-rsayah sapta viprah. 


310 RGVEDA 


Soma, all watchful guardian of humanity and 
omniscient creator, bearing the divine name and the 
essential nature of divine bliss, radiates and vibrates 
with joy in the pure heart core of the soul, abiding there 
as chief high priest at the head of congregations at yajna, 
and around him concentrate and join seven seers, that 
is, five organs of perception, mind and will, and the 
discriminative intelligence. (That personal yajna of the 
individual and the joint yajna of society is the essential 
seat of Soma.) 


प्र सुमेधा गातुविद्धिश्वदेवः सोम॑ः पुनानः सद॑ एति नित्य॑म्‌ । 
भु वद्िश्वेषु काव्येषु रन्ताऽनु जनान्यतते पञ्च धीरं: ॥ ३ ॥ 


3: Pra sumedha gatuvid-visvadevah somah puna- 
nah sada eti nityam. Bhuvad-visvesu kavyesu 
ranta’nu janan yatate panca dhirah. 


Soma, Spirit of divine intelligence, knowing all 
ways of the earthly world, universal refulgent generous 
giver, pure and purifying power, always moves and takes 
its divine seat in the heart core of the soul and on the 
yajnic grass of the vedi. Rejoicing in all intellectual and 
poetic holy meets of the world and, inspiring the 
constant spirit of steady wisdom and resolution, it joins 
the five orders of universal humanity and exhorts them 
together to move forward on the common way to 
collective progress. 


तव त्ये सोम पवमान निण्ये विश्वे देवास्त्रय॑ एकादशासः । 
दरं स्वधाभिरधि सानो अव्ये मृजन्ति त्वा wal: सस 
यह्वीः ॥ ४ ॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 92 311 


4. Tava tye soma pavamana ninye visve devastraya 
ekadasasah. Dasa svadhabhiradhi sano avye 
mrjanti tva nadyah sapta yahvih. 


O Soma, vibrant omnipresent spirit of life, pure 
and purifying, all those thirty three divinities of 
existence, for sure, integrate in the mysterious depth of 
your presence. Ten pranas, ten subtle and gross elements 
of nature and seven mighty constant streams of existence 
at the cosmic and microcosmic levels with their own 
oblations serve, adore and glorify you on top of the 
protected and protective world of existence. 


तन्नु सत्यं पवमानस्यास्तु यत्र विश्वे कारवः संनसन्त । 
wifes अकणोदु लोकं प्रावन्मनुं दस्य॑वे कर्‌ - 
भीकम्‌॥ ५॥ 


5. Tannu satyam pavamanasyastu yatra visve 
karavah samnasanta. Jyotiryadahne akrnodu 
lokam pravanmanum dasyave karabhikam. 


True it is of Soma, pure and purifying, Truth 
itself of Soma, wherein all basic causes of existence 
converge, merge and integrate: Soma it is who created 
the sun and light of knowledge for the day and 
enlightenment, which protects the man of thought and 
knowledge, which for the ignorant lost in darkness is 
but a distant possibility or even a cause for collision. 


परि सदोव पशुमान्ति होता राजा न सत्यः समितीरियानः 1 
सोम॑ः पुनानः कलशं अयासीत्सीदन्मृगो न म॑हिषो 
वनेषु ।॥ ६ ॥ 7 

6. Pari sadmeva pasumanti hota raja na satyah 
samitiriyanah. somah punanah kalasan ayasit 
sidan mrgo na mahiso vanesu. 


312 RGVEDA 


Like a high priest going to a prosperous and 
enlightened hall of yajna, and like a real kingly ruler 
going to the assemblies of state, may Soma, pure and 
purifying, consecrate the heart and soul of a dedicated 
devotee and reign there as a mighty lion ruling 
majestically over the forests. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 93 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Nodha Gautama Rshi 


साकमुक्षो मर्जयन्त स्वसारो दश धीरस्य धीतयो erasit: । 
हरिः पर्य्रवज्नाः सूर्यस्य द्रोणं ननक्षे अत्यो न वाजी ॥ ९॥ 


Le Sakamukso marjayanta svasaro dasa dhirasya 
dhitayo dhanutrth. Harih paryadravajjah surya- 
sya dronam nanakse atyo na vdji. 


Ten generous, agile, spontaneous and simultane- 
ous sister faculties of the self-controlled, self-established 
yogi together concentrate, communicate and glorify 
Hari, Soma spirit of divine joy that eliminates want and 
suffering, and the Spirit, pervading the vibrations of 
divinity, the light born of the sun, radiates like a constant 
wave, reaches and settles in the heart core of the blessed 
soul, the seat of divinity. (The faculties are faculties of 
perception, thought and will which normally wander 
over the world of outside reality but which are 
controlled, concentrated and inverted in meditation and 
focussed on the presence of divinity within, and then 
the presence reveals itself in all its refulgent glory.) 


सं oat शिशुववशानो aut दधन्वे पुरुवारो! अद्धिः। 
मर्यो न योषामभि निष्कृतं यन्त्सं ग॑च्छते कलशं She 
याभिः॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 93 313 


2. Sam matrbhirna sisurvavasano vrsa dadhanve 
puruvaro adbhih. Maryo na yosamabhi niskr-tam 
yantsam gacchate kalasa usriyabhih. 


Like a child fulfilled and secure with mother’s 
and grandmother’s love, the loving Soma, generous 
treasure home of universal gifts of life, fulfils the 
celebrant with showers of pranic energy and, like a lover 
meeting his lady love, blesses his consecrated heart, and 
therein vibrates with the dedicated soul with divine 
radiations of light in thought, word and deed. 


उत प्र पिप्य ऊधरघ्न्याया इन्दुर्धाराभिः सचते सुमेधाः | 
मूर्धानं गावः पय॑सा चमूष्वभि श्रीणन्ति aq 
निक्तैः ॥ ३॥ 


a Uta pra pipya udhar-aghnyaya indurdharabhih 
sacate sumedhah. Murdhanam gavah payasa 
camusvabhi Srinanti vasubhirna niktaih. 


Soma, spirit of blessed light and omniscient 
power, essence of self-refulgent beauty, fills the 
inviolable receptacles of nature with milky nourishment 
which the man of enlightenment, joining the milky flow, 
enjoys. The radiations of light, currents of energy and 
the words of wisdom all shine and elevate the soul in 
all situations of life with spiritual food as they shower 
him with the wealth and honours of immaculate order. 


स नो देवेभिः पवमान रदेन्दो रयिमश्विनं वावशानः। 
रथिरायतामुशती पुरन्धिरस्पद्रय4 गा दावने GSAT IX ॥ 


4. Sa no devebhih pavamana radendo rayim- 
asvinam vavasanah. RathirayatamuSsati puran- 
dhirasmadryaga davane vasunam. 


314 RGVEDA 


Lord of lght and love, refulgent and 
illuminative, pure, purifying and vibrating with the 
divinities of nature and humanity, loving and 
commanding dynamic wealth and virtues of existence, 
give us the wealth and virtues of the world and open 
the paths of fast, penetrative, brilliant and all sustaining 
intelligence and will so that we may achieve the gifts of 
wealth, honour and excellence without delay or 
procrastination. 


नू नो tag मास्व नृवन्तं पुनानो वाताप्यं विश्वश्च॑न््रम्‌। 
प्र व॑द्दितुरिन्दो तार्यायुः प्रातर्म्षु धियाव॑सुर्जगम्यात्‌ ॥ ५५ ॥ 


2: Nu no rayimupa masva nrvantam punano 
vatapyam visvascandram. Pra vanditurindo 
taryayuh pratarmaksu dhiyavasur-jagamyat. 


Indu, divine spirit of beauty, brilliance and 
benevolence, pure and purifying presence, give us the 
wealth and power of leading lights and noble progeny 
worthy of the brave, blest with universal beauty and 
grace flowing in at the spiral speed of winds. O Spirit 
of life, bless the celebrant with good health and long 
age, and in the morning may the divine light and spirit 
of intelligence and will radiate to us. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 94 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Kanva Ghaura Rshi 
अधि यद॑स्मिन्वाजिनीव शुभः स्पर्धन्ते धियः सूर्ये न Farst: 1 
अपो duns: प॑वते कवीयन्त्रजं न पशुवर्धनाय मन्म॑ ॥ ९॥ 
1. 44/77 yadasmin vajiniva subhah spardhante 
dhiyah surye na visah. Apo vrnanah pavate 
kaviyan vrajam na pasuvardhanaya manma. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 94 315 


As people exert themselves for the achievement 
of light and brilliance and when their mind, thoughts 
and higher intelligence concentrate on this Soma, divine 
spirit of peace and inspiring brilliance, for illumination, 
then the Soma spirit, choosing, loving and enlightening 
the intelligence, thought and creativity of the devotee, 
radiates into the mind and spirit of the devotee for the 
augmentation and elevation of the thought, imagination 
and sensibility of the celebrant. 


द्विता व्यूण्वन्नमृतस्य ara स्वर्विदे भुव॑नानि प्रथन्त । धिय॑ः 
पिन्वानाः स्वसरे न गाव॑ ऋतायन्तींरभि वावश्र इन्दुम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Dvita vyurnvannamrtasya dhama svarvide 
bhuvanani prathanta. Dhiyah pinvanah svasare 
na gava rtayantirabhi vavasra indum. 


For the man of divine vision the worlds of 
existence extend revealing the twofold, physical and 
spiritual, grandeur of the treasure-hold of immortal 
Soma. Like cows lowing in their own stall, the songs of 
divine Veda, inspiring and expanding in their own abode 
of the mind and nature, resound and celebrate the 
refulgent Indu, Soma, divine spirit of beauty, peace, 
power and bliss. 


परि यत्कविः काव्या ata शूरो न रथो भुव॑नानि विश्वां | 
देवेषु यशो ude भूषन्दर्चाय रायः पुरु भूषु नव्य॑ः ॥ ३ ॥ 
a Pari yat kavih kavya bharate suro na ratho 


bhuvanani visva. Devesu yaso martaya bhiusan 
daksaya rayah purubhusu navyah. 


Soma, omniscient poetic spirit of the universe, 
which holds and brings us all celebrated beauties of the 


316 RGVEDA 


world and, as the omnipotent hero and master of the 
universal chariot, bears and sustains all regions of the 
universe, is the living glory in all divinities, 
magnificence for mortal humanity, wealth for the expert 
artist and ever new life in all forms of existence. 


fara जातः fra आ निरियाय श्रियं वयो। जरितृभ्यो 
दधाति। भियं वसाना अमृतत्वर्मायन्भवंन्ति सत्या 
समिथा मितद्रौ su 

4. Sriye jatah Sriya a niriyaya sriyam vayo jaritr- 
bhyo dadhati. Sriyam vasana amrtatvamayan 
bhavanti satya samitha mitadrau. 


Soma manifests in glory for the grace and 
magnificence of the world, moves simultaneously, 
omnipresent, for glory and bears beauty and grace, 
health and age for the celebrants. The yajakas wearing 
vestments of immortality, with their oblations into the 
fire of measured law and movement, join together in 
truth and achieve their immortal meaning and purpose 
in the battle of life. 


इषमूर्जपभ्य१ aid गामुरु ज्योतिः कृणुहि aia देवान्‌ । 
विश्वानि हि सुषहा तानि तुभ्यं पव॑मान बाध॑से सोम 
शत्रून्‌ ॥५॥ ` 

> Isam-urjam-abhyarsasvam gamuru jyotih krnuhi 
matsi devan. Visvani hi susaha tani tubhyam 
pavamana badhase soma Satrun. 


O Soma, spirit of divine peace and power, move 
and bring us food, energy and excellence, move and 
bring movement and progress, lands, cows and light of 
knowledge. Make these expansive and rising. Give joy 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 95 317 


and fulfilment to the noble sages, scholars and generous 
people. You are the power and courage of forbearance. 
O pure and purifying power, we pray and ask for these 
of you. You prevent and cast off the enemies and 
negative forces of life. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 95 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Praskanva Kanva Rshi 


कनिक्रन्ति हरिरा gern: dearer जठरे पुनानः | 
नृभिर्यतः pura निर्णिजं गा अतो मतीर्जनयत स्व- 
धाभिंः॥ ९॥ 


॥. Kanikranti harira srjyamanah sidan vanasya 
jathare punanah. Nrbhiryatah krnute nirnijam ga 
ato matirjanayata svadhabhih. 


Soma, divine spirit blithe and blissful, saviour 
and sustainer, invoked in meditation, abiding in the heart 
core of the soul, pure and purifying, vibrates loud and 
bold. Served and adored and celebrated by devotees, it 
renders the senses, mind and intelligence pure and 
immaculate and then it gives rise to spontaneous songs 
of praise offered with complete surrender and self- 
sacrifice. 


aR: सृजानः पर्थ्यामृतस्येयंतिं arduteta नावम्‌ | 
देवो देवानां गुह्यानि नामाऽऽविष्कृणोति afte 
Vara nu 


2. Harih srjanah pathyamrtasyeyarti vacamariteva 
navam. Devo devanam guhyani nama’ ’viskrnoti 
barhisi pravace. 


Soma, saviour and sustainer of life, invoked and 


318 RGVEDA 


self-manifested, reveals and proclaims aloud the divine 
voice of the path to eternal truth guiding listeners to the 
shores of Infinity like a pilot rowing man to the sea 
shore. That same spirit, further, reveals the names, 
definitions, secrets and mysteries of existences in the 
meditative yajnic mind for expression and 
communication on the vedi. 


अपामिवेदूर्म॑यस्तर्तुःराणाः प्र म॑नीषा ईरते सोममच्छ। 
नमस्यन्तीरुप च यन्ति सं चाऽऽ च॑ विशन्त्युशतीसु - 
रान्त॑म्‌॥ ३॥ 


a: Apamivedurmayastarturanah pra manisa trate 
somamaccha. Namasyantirupa ca yanti sam 
ca’’ca visantyusatir-usantam. 


Like waves of the sea pressing onward with 
force and speed, the songs of adoration rise and radiate 
with love to Soma. Expressive of ardent love, faith and 
reverence, they reach and join the divine presence which 
too is equally ardent and anxious to receive them. 


dado महिषं न सानावंशं दुहन्त्युक्षणं Piers | 
तं वावशानं मतय: सचन्ते त्रितो बिभर्ति वरूणं समुद्रे ।॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Tam marmrjanam mahisam na sanavamsum 
duhantyuksanam giristham. Tam vavasanam 
matayah sacante trito bibharti varunam samu- 
dre. 


That Soma spirit of existence, adored and 
exalted by devotees like the supreme presence on top 
of existence, subtlest and self-refulgent, virile and 
generous, abiding over clouds and mountains and 
reflected in divine voices, that same loving and beloved 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 96 319 


spirited and divinity, leading lights of humanity adore, 
join and milk forth for the nectar of life. The Spirit of 
three worlds over three times bears and sustains the law, 
justice and Dharma in space. 


इष्यन्वाच॑मुपवक्तेव होतुः पुनान इन्दो वि ष्या मनीषाम्‌। 
इन्द्रश्च यत्क्षय॑थः सौभ॑गाय सुवीर्यस्य पत॑यः स्याम । ५॥ 


5. Isyan vacam-upavakteva hotuh punana indo vi sya 
manisam. Indrasca yat ksayathah saubha-gaya 
suviryasya patayah syama. 


Indu, spirit of peace, light and life of the world, 
lover of songs of adoration, pure and purifying, we pray 
you and Indra, omnipotent ruler, like prompter of the 
priest, abiding both together, give us the vision and 
wisdom of divinity for our good so that we may be 
masters of that courage, endurance and fighting force 
which is worthy of the brave. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 96 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Pratardana Daivodasi Rshi 


प्र सेनानीः शुरो अग्रे रथानां गव्यन्नेति हर्षते अस्य सेना । 
भद्रान्कृण्वन्निन्द्र हवान्त्सखिंभ्य आ सोमो वस्त्रा रभसानि 
दत्ते॥ ९॥ 


L. Pra senanih suro agre rathanam gavyanneti 
harsate asya sena. Bhadran krnvann-indra- 
havant-sakhibhya ठ somo vastra rabhasani datte. 


Soma, heroic brave leader, warrior and 
commander, marches at the head of chariots, ardently 
ambitious for positive gains for the commonalty, his 
army follows with joyous enthusiasm. Thus nobly 


320 RGVEDA 


fulfilling the divine call of Indra for the advancement 
and excellence of the friends of humanity, Soma takes 
on the robe and role of peace and protection and the 
arms for the defence of humanity. 


सम॑स्य हरिं हर॑यो मृजन्त्यरुव हयैरनिंशितं नमोभिः। 
आ तिति रथमिन्द्रस्य सखा विदां एना सुमतिं यात्यच्छ।। २ ॥ 


00 Samasya harim harayo mrjantyasvahayaira- 
nisitam namobhih. A tisthati ratham-indrasya 
sakha vidvan ena sumatim yatyaccha. 


Active and self-sacrificing people of society 
with fast driving forces and incessant inputs of men, 
materials and committed loyalties empower the chariot 
of this leader of humanity. Also, the ruling Indra’s friend, 
a sagely scholar, comes up and joins the chariot, and 
with him Soma goes forward well with proper 
understanding, principles and policies. 


स नो देव देवताति पवस्व महे सोम wate इन्द्रपानः | 
कृण्वन्नपो वर्षयन्द्यासुतेमामुरोरा नों वरिवस्या पुनानः ॥ ३ ॥ 


2 Sano deva devatate pavasva mahe soma psa-rasa 
indrapanah. Krnvannapo varsayan dyam- 
utemam-urora no varivasya punanah. 


O divine Soma, you are the protector of the 
honour and excellence of humanity, indeed of the very 
soul of life. Come and bless our great and beautiful 
social yajna in honour of divinities, initiating, 
stimulating and exciting noble thoughts and actions, 
blessing this earth from heaven and the vast spaces with 
showers of divine favours of grace, purifying us and 
giving us fulfilment of our highest order of desire and 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 96 321 
ambition. 


अजीतयेऽ ह॑तये पवस्व स्वस्तये सर्वतातये बहते । तदुशन्ति 
विश्व॑ इमे सखायस्तदहं व॑श्मि पवमान सोम ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ajitaye’hataye pavasva svastaye sarvatataye 
brhate. Tadusanti visva ime sakhayas-tadaham 
vasmi pavamana soma. 


O pure and purifying Soma, peace and power 
of divinity, come, purify and strengthen us against 
slavery and injury to our honour and excellence, come 
for our well being and universal welfare of high order. 
That gift of honour, freedom and welfare, all these 
friendly communities of the world love and pray for, 
that same I love, and that we all pray and strive for. 


सोम॑ः पवते जनिता म॑तीनां जनिता दिवो ज॑निता पंथिव्याः। 
जनिताग्नेर्जनिता सूर्यस्य जनितेन्द्रस्य जनितोत विष्णोः ॥ ५ ॥ 


2: Somah pavate janita matinam janita divo janita 
prthivyah. Janitagnerjanita suryasya janitendra- 
sya janitota visnoh. 


Soma, spirit of divine peace, power and 
generous creativity, flows and purifies universally. It is 
generator of heavens, maker of the earth and creator of 
the nobilities of sagely wisdom, generator of fire, maker 
of the stars, manifester of its own omnipotence, and 
manifester of the omnipresence of its own self in 
expansive space. 


ब्रह्मा देवानां पदवीः कवीनामृषिर्विप्राणां महिषो मृगाणाम्‌ | 
श्येनो गृध्राणां स्वधितिर्वनानां सोम॑ः पवित्रमत्येति 
VALUE 


322 RGVEDA 


6. Brahma devanam padavth kavinamrsirvipranam 
mahiso mrganam. Syeno grdhranam svadhi- 
tirvananam somah pavitramatyeti rebhan. 


The Soma Spirit is Brahma, supreme over 
divinities, highest of the poets, divine seer among the 
wise, lion among the strongest animals, eagle among 
the birds of power, sword among the killers and, roaring 
and thundering, it goes forward, excels all others, and 
blesses the pure heart core of the soul. 


प्रावीविपद्वाच ऊर्मिं न सिन्धुर्गिर : सोमः पव॑मानो मनीषाः | 
अन्तः पश्यन्वृ जनेमावराण्या fasta वृषभो गोषु 
जानन्‌ ७॥ 


Ds Pravivipadvaca urmim na sindhur-girah somah 
pavamano manisah. Antah pasyan vrjanema- 
vara-nya tisthati vrsabho gosu janan. 


Soma stirs and inspires the flow of thought into 
speech as the sea stirs and rolls the waves of the flood. 
Pure and purifying, it inspires imagination, poetry and 
adoration. Pervading all within and watching, it abides 
in the closest intimacies of all yajna within and without 
and, potent as it is, knowing every thing, it energises all 
organs of thought and sense. 


स dear: पृत्सु वन्वन्नवातः सहस््र॑रेता अभि वाजमर्ष | 
इन्द्रायिन्दो पव॑मानो मनीष्यं4शोरूर्मिमीरय गा इषघण- 
खन्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Sa matsarah prtsu vanvannavatah sahasrareta 


abhi vajamarsa. Indrayendo pavamano mani- 
syamsorurmimiraya ga isanyan. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 96 323 


Soma is inspiration, excitement and ecstasy. 
Itself unmoved, it destroys negativities in the yajnic 
battles of life. Power and generative vigour of a thousand 
sort, pray move and energise all power, energy and 
enthusiasm of life. Pure and purifying, O spirit of beauty, 
peace and power, thinker and imaginative creator, 
inspiring and energising all senses and imagination, pray 
let the waves of ecstasy roll and flow for Indra, spirit, 
honour and excellence of life for humanity. 


uft प्रियः कलशो देवर्वात इन्द्राय सोमो रण्यो wate | 
सहस्रधारः staat इन्दुर्वाजी न सिः सम॑ना 
जिगाति ue ul 


न Pari priyah kalase devavata indraya somo ranyo 
madaya. Sahasradharah satavaja indurvaji na 
saptih samana jigati. 


Soma, spirit of peace, beauty and joy, dearest 
favourite of all, inspirer and worshipped of divinities 
and nobilities, beatific shower of joy in a thousand 
streams, commanding a hundred forms and orders of 
energy and power, all bliss at heart, radiates like the 
spirit of energy itself, moves, vibrates and blesses the 
pure heart core of the soul for its joy, honour and 
excellence, 


स पूर्व्यो व॑सुविज्नाय॑मानो म्रजानो अप्सु दुदुहानो अद्रौं। 
अथिशस्तिपा भुव॑नस्य राजा faaard ब्रह्मणे पूय- 
मानः॥ १०॥ ति 

10. Sa purvyo vasuvijjayamano mrjano apsu dudu- 
hano adrau. Abhisastipa bhuvanasya raja vida- 
dgatum brahmane puyamanah. 


324 RGVEDA 


Soma, eternal spirit, master sustainer of the 
world and its wealth, universally manifestive, adored 
and exalted, distilled in the cloud and envisioned in 
thought and action, protector from evil and calumny, 
ruler and sustainer of the universe, knower and revealer 
of the paths to divinity is realised in purity and illumined 
in spiritual yajna of meditation for the attainment of the 
vision of eternity. 


त्वया हि न॑: faer: सोम पूर्वे क्मीणि चक्रुः प॑वमान धीराः। 
वन्वन्नवातः परिधीरपोर्ण्‌ वीरेथिरश्वैर्मघवां भवा नः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. = Tvaya hinah pitarah soma purve karmani ca-kruh 
pavamana dhirah. Vanvann-avatah pari- 
dhinrapornu virebhir-asvairmaghava bhava nah. 


O Soma, pure and purifying spirit of the world, 
itis only by your grace that our forefathers of yore all 
time performed their acts of Dharma in life. Unhurt, 
unmoved and unchallenged, pray open up all inhibiting 
limitations and raise us to honour, excellence and glory 
with brave heroes and dynamic forces of progress and 
achievement. 


यथाप॑वथा मन॑वे वयोधा अमित्रहा व॑रिवोविद्छविष्पान्‌। 
एवा प॑वस्व द्रविणं cata इन्द्रे सं तिं जनयायुधानि ॥ १२॥ 


12. Yathapavatha manave vayodha amitraha 
varivoviddhavisman. Eva pavasva dravinam 
dadhana indre sam tistha janayayudhani. 


As ever before for all time immemorial you 
vibrate, flow and purify humanity for their good, bearing 
good health and happy age, destroying negativities and 
enmities, knowing the wealth we need and bearing the 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 96 325 


wealth unbounded with honour and excellences of life 
and holy fragrances of the yajna of living, so now too, 
pray, vibrate, flow and purify, bearing wealth, honour 
and excellence, vest in the spirit of humanity and in 
human glory, and create the weapons of defence against 
the onslaughts of conflict and contradictions. 


पव॑स्व सोप मधुं्मों ऋतावाऽपो वसानो अधि सानो अव्यें। 
अव द्रोणानि धूतवान्ति सीद मदिन्त॑मो मत्सर इन्द्र 
पानं: 123 ॥ 


13. Pavasva soma madhuman rtavapo’vasano adhi 
sano avye. Ava dronani ghrtavanti sida madinta- 
mo matsara indrapanah. 


Flow, purify and bless, O Soma, rich in the 
honey sweets of life, high priest of cosmic yajna, 
reflecting in the cosmic processes of evolution on top 
of protective nature. Flow and abide in the depth of 
holy hearts deep in love and faith divine, O spirit most 
exhilarating, ecstatic and infinite source of fulfilment 
for Indra, potent vibrant soul, lover of divine glory. 


वृष्टं दिवः शतधारः पवस्व सहस्रसा वाजयुर्देववीतौ । सं 
सिन्धुभिः कलशो वावशानः समुस्रियाभिः ufara 
आयुः ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Vrstim divah satadharah pavasva sahasrasa 
vajayur-devavitau. Sam sindhubhih kalase 
vavasanah samusriyabhih pratiran na ayuh. 


O lord of thousandfold speed, power and victory, 
harbinger of a hundred showers of bliss, bring us 
showers of heavenly light for our yajnic worship of 
divinity. Loving and abiding in the holy hearts of 


326 RGVEDA 


celebrants, let streams of good health and joyous age 
flow to us with infinite oceans of love and bliss and 
showers of the light of knowledge. 


एष स्य सोमो मतिभिः पुनानोऽ त्यो न वाजी तर तीदरातीः। 
पयो न दुग्धमदि तेरिषिरमुर्विव गातुः सुयमो न Aloo ।॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Esasya somo matibhih punano’tyo na vajt tarati- 
daratih. Payo na dugdham-aditer-isiram-urviva 
gatuh suyamo na volha. 


This, the lord Soma, celebrated and exalted by 
devotees and wise sages, overcomes contradictions and 
negativities like a victor war horse trampling the 
enemies. It is delicious like the milk of the inviolable 
cow, sure guide like a wide path on earth, and unfailing 
carrier and saviour like a trained courser for the 
destination. 


स्वायुधः aig: पूयमानोऽभ्य॑षं गुह्यं are नाम॑ | अभि 
वाजं सिरिव श्रवस्याऽभि वायुमभि गा देव सोम ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Svayudhah sotrbhih puyamano’bhyarsa guhyam 
caru nama. Abhi vajam saptiriva Sravasya’ bhi 
vayumabhi ga deva soma. 


Wielding powers of law and justice, exalted by 
lovers and celebrants, O Name and Word beatific, come 
and bless the secret cave of the heart. O Soma, like an 
instant power of transportive ecstasy, take us to the 
strength and speed of success and fulfilment, lead us to 
honour and fame of excellence, take us to the vibrancy 
of the winds and, O lord of light and generosity, give us 
illuminative knowledge and perceptive and 
discriminative intelligence. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 96 327 


शिशुं जज्ञानं dad मुंजन्ति शुम्भन्ति ats मरुतो Wor । 
कविर्गीर्भिः काव्येना कविः सन्त्सोम॑ः पवित्रमत्येति 
रेभ॑न्‌ ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Sisum jajnanam haryatam mrjanti sumbhanti 
vahnim maruto ganena. Kavir-girbhih kavyena 
kavih sant-somah pavitram-atyeti rebhan. 


Dedicated celebrants perceive the presence 
beatific, manifested and expansive in the experience of 
nature around, cleanse it like a new born baby, discover 
and distil it in the spirit and adore it in song. As winds 
in storm raise a spark to blazing fire, bands of admirers 
celebrate it in its native glory. Omnipresent all-watching 
sagely divine, exalted to its omniscience and 
omnipotence in human consciousness by the music of 
the poetic voice, Soma, divine presence, radiates into 
the pure human heart loud and bold and transcends the 
soul to infinite space. 


ऋषिमना य ऋषिकृत्स्वर्षाः सहस्रणीथः पदवीः haar । 
तृतीयं धाम॑ महिषः सिषासन्त्सोमों विराजमनु राजति 
षटुप्‌॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Rsimana ya rsikrt svarsah sahasranithah pada- 
vih kavinam. Trttyam dhama mahisah sisasant- 
somo virajamanu rajati stup. 


Soma is the presence that is the universal seer 
and poetic creator, maker of poets, exalted by sages, 
shower streams of bliss, adored a thousand ways for 
infinite power and glory, ultimate love and desire of 
poets, awful refulgence radiating to the third blazing 
space beyond the earthly and paradisal regions of life, 
the presence that rules and illuminates the heart and 


328 RGVEDA 


soul beyond the state of existential involvement, the 
one loving, blessing, beatific ultimate object of 
adoration and worship. 


चमूषच्छ्येनः शंकुनो विभृत्वा गोविन्दुर्द्रप्स आयुं धानि 
faut अपामूर्मिं सच॑मानः समुद्रं तुरीयं धामं महिषो 
विवक्ति ।॥ ९९॥ 


19. = Camusacchyenah sakuno vibhrtva govindurdra- 
psa ayudhani bibhrat. Apamurmim sacamanah 
samudram turtyam dhama mahiso vivakti. 


Pervading every form of life and nature, 
adorable supreme Soma presence of divinity, abiding 
with stars and planets in motion, bearing infinite powers, 
vibrating with the waves of nature’s dynamics, vesting 
the cosmic structure, transcends to the fourth state of 
absolute bliss. Only the mighty sage speaks of the 
presence beyond speech. 


मर्यो न शुभ्रस्तन्वं WSIS त्यो न सूत्वा सनये धनानाम्‌ । 
gaa यूथा परि कोशमर्षन्कनिक्रदच्चम्बो डेरा विवेश ॥ २०॥ 


20. Maryo na subhrastanvam mrjano’tyo na srtva 
sanaye dhananam. Vrseva yutha pari kosamar- 
san kanikradaccamvora vivesa. 


Radiant and adorable Soma wearing the 
manifestive cosmic form like the mortal human wearing 
the body form, moving fast like radiations of light for 
the realisation of world’s wealth by pervading, vibrating 
like a mighty power across the cosmic structure as a 
virile leader, fills the skies between earth and heaven 
and abides there proclaiming its presence loud and bold. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 96 329 


पव॑स्वेन्दो पव॑मानो महोभिः कनिंक्रदत्परि वाराण्यर्ष | 
क्रीव्ठ॑ञ्चम्वो ST विंश पूयमान इन्द्रं ते रसो मदिरो AT ॥ २९॥ 


21. | Pavasvendo pavamano mahobhih kanikradat pari 
varanyarsa. Krilancamvora visa puyamana 
indram te raso madiro mamattu. 


O spirit of light divine, beauty and peace, flow, 
pure and purifying, adored and exalted by great souls, 
radiate bright and bold and self-proclaimed, and seep 
into the heart core of chosen souls. Come playing over 
and between heaven and earth, enter pure and exalted, 
and may your exalting spirit of ecstasy exhilarate and 
exalt the soul and its glory in the world of existence. 


प्रास्य ant बृहतीरं सूग्रन्नक्तो गोभिः कलर्शो आ विवेश । 
सामं कृ ण्वन्त्सामन्यो' विपश्चित्क्रन्द॑न्नेत्यभि सख्युर्न 
जामिम्‌॥ २२॥ 


22.  Prasya dhara brhatir--asrgrannakto gobhih 
kalasan a vivesa. Sama krnvant-samanyo vipascit 
krandann-etyabhi sakhyurna jamim. 


The streams of this Soma joy flow vaulting full, 
and the spirit adorned by songs of celebration seeps 
into the heart core of chosen souls. Thus does Soma, 
creating peace, supreme peace itself, cosmic intelligence 
omniscient, goes forward with humanity proclaiming 
its presence and loving like a twin brother and sister. 


sTagafe पवमान शत्र च्प्रियां न जारो अभिगीत इन्दुः | 
सीदन्वनेंषु शकुनो न पत्वा सोम॑ः पुनानः कलशेषु सत्ता ॥ २३॥ 
23. Apaghnannesi pavamana Satrun priyam na jaro 


abhigita induh. Sidan vanesu Sakuno na patva 
somah punanah kalasesu satta. 


330 RGVEDA 


O spirit pure and purifying, you go forward 
bright and blissful, loving life, casting off and destroying 
enemy forces of negation and contradiction against life, 
moving like a lover cleansed by fire to meet his lady 
love, sitting in the hearts of lovers and admirers, flying 
like the eagle bird to its nest, and pure, exalted and 
edifying, abiding in the heart core of the celebrants. 


आ ते रुचः पव॑मानस्य सोम योषेव यन्ति सुदुर्घाः GANT: | 
हरिरानीतः पुरू वारो अप्स्वचिंक्रदत्कलशें देवयूनाम्‌ ॥ रय ॥ 


24. A te rucah pavamanasya soma yoseva yanti 
sudughah sudharah. Hariranitah puruvaro apsva- 
cikradat kalase devayunam. 


The rays of your light and glory, O Soma, spirit 
pure, purifying and radiating, replete with life energy 
streaming forth, rain in showers like the love of a 
youthful mother. The divine spirit, destroyer of want 
and suffering, love and choice of all humanity, manifests 
bright and beautiful in the dynamics of nature and in 
the heart and actions of the lovers of divinity. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 97 


Pavamana Soma Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni (1-3), 

Indrapramati Vasishtha (4-6), Vrshagana Vasishtha (7-9), 

Manyu Vasishtha (10-12), Upamanyu Vasishtha (13-15), 

Vyaghrapada Vasishtha (16-18), Shakti Vasishtha (19-21), 

Karnashrut Vasishtha (22-24), Mrlika Vasishtha (25-27), 

Vasukra Vasishtha (28-30), Parashara Shaktya (31-44), 
Kutsa Angirasa (45-58) Rshis 


अस्य प्रेषा हेमनां पूयमानो देवो देवेभिः TH TAA | 
सुतः पवित्रं पर्येति रेभ॑न्मितेव wal पशुमान्ति होता ॥ ९ ॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 331 


im Asya presa hemana puyamano devo devebhih 
samaprkta rasam. Sutah pavitram paryeti rebhan 
miteva sadma pasumanti hota. 


Divine Soma, moved and energised by the surge 
of golden impulse, joins its potency with the senses and 
mind, and thus seasoned and empowered, vibrant with 
vitality, it moves to the holiness of the heart like a 
sanative, or as a priest going to 8 yajnic enclosure, seat 
and anchor of sensitive visionary powers of humanity. 


wal वस्त्रा समन्या३ वसानो महान्कविर्निवच॑नानि शंस॑न्‌ । 
आ dara wal: पूयमानो विचश्चणो जाग विर्देव- 
वींतौ॥ २॥ 


2 Bhadra vastra samanya vasano mahan kavirni- 
vacanani Samsan. A vacyasva camvoh puya-mano 
vicaksano jagrvir-devavitau. 


O holy Soma power, pure, purified and 
purifying, wearing vestments of a fighting force, great 
and creative, expressive loud and bold, come, expand 
and resound between heaven and earth over all things 
material and spiritual, ever watchful, ever awake, in the 
service of divinities in yajna. 
समु प्रियो deere सानो अव्ये यशस्त॑रो यशसां Sal अस्मे 1 
अभि स्व॑र्‌ धन्वां पूयमानो यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः cet 
नः॥३॥ 

Samu priyo mrjyate sano avye yasastaro yasa- 
sam ksaito asme. Abhi svara dhanva puyamano 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


O Soma spirit of power and poetic creativity, 


332 RGVEDA 


exalted on top of protection, defence and advancement, 
honoured of the honourable, of the earth earthy for our 
sake, shine and resound across the spaces. O divinities, 
pray protect and promote us with all round well being 
and good fortune for all time. 


प्र्गायताभ्य॑चमि देवान्त्सोमं हिनोत महते eta । स्वादुः 
dara अति वारमव्यमा सीदाति कलशं देवयुर्नः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Pra gayatabhyarcama devantsomam hinota 
mahate dhanaya. Svaduh pavate ati varamavya- 
ma sidati kalasam devayurnah. 


Sing and celebrate, let us honour the divinities 
and exhort Soma for great victory and achievement of 
wealth, honour and excellence. Sweet and lovable, Soma 
rises to the protective position of choice and, loving 
the divinities, it abides in the right position at the centre. 


sedan सख्यमायन्त्सहस्त्र॑धारः पवते मर्दाय। 
नृभिः स्तवानो अनु धाम पूर्वमगच्निन्द्रं महते सौभ॑गाय ॥ ५ ॥ 


a. Indurdevanamupa sakhyamayant-sahasradha- 
rah pavate madaya. Nrbhih stavano anu dhama 
purvam-agann-indram mahate saubhagaya. 


Indu, Soma spirit of light and life, coming close 
to friendship of the divinities, purifies and flows in a 
thousand streams for the joy of humanity. Adored by 
leading lights, it rises to the top of honour and glory in 
keeping with its position and reaches Indra, the ruling 
soul, for the great good fortune of society. 


स्तोत्रे राये हरिरर्षा पुनान इन्द्रं मदो गच्छतु ते भराय । देवैयीहि 
सरथं राधो अच्छा यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदा नः ॥ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 333 


6. Stotre raye harirarsa punana indram mado ga- 
cchatu te bharaya. Devairyahi saratham radho 
accha yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


O Hari, Soma spirit destroyer of suffering, flow 
pure and purifying for the achievement of wealth, 
honour and excellence when songs are sung and yajna 
is performed. O Soma, may your vigour and ecstasy 
flow to Indra, the ruling soul, for the sake of victory 
and human glory. May your power and potential come 
well with the light and vigour of divinities by the chariot 
of glory and may all the divinities protect and promote 
us with all round well being and good fortune for all 
time. 


प्र काव्यमुशनेव gaunt देवो देवानां जनिमा विवक्ति । 
महिव्रतः शुचिबन्धुः पावकः पदा वराहो अभ्येति 
रेभ॑न्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


a Pra kavyamuSaneva bruvano devo devanam 
jJanima vivakti. Mahivratah sucibandhuh pava- 
kah pada varaho abhyeti rebhan. 


The brilliant poet, singing like an inspired fiery 
power divine, reveals the origin of nature’s divinities 
and the rise of human brilliancies. Great is his 
commitment, inviolable his discipline, bonded is he with 
purity as a brother, having chosen light of the sun and 
shower of clouds for his element, and he goes forward 
proclaiming the message of his vision by the paths of 


piety. 
प्र हंसासंस्तरपल मन्युमच्छामादस्तं वृष॑गणा अयासुः | 
आङ्गृष्यं १ पव॑मानं सखायो दुर्मर्ष" साकं प्र व॑दन्ति 
वाणम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


334 RGVEDA 


8. Pra hamsasas-trpalam manyum-acchamad-astam 
vrsagand ayasuh. Angusyam pavamanam 
sakhayo durmarsam sakam pra vadanti vanam. 


Like hansa birds of discriminative taste by 
instinct, judicious poets and scholars spontaneously 
come home to passion and ardour of thought and 
imagination free from fear and violence and, together 
in unison as a band of friends, generous and mighty of 
power and understanding, sing and celebrate the 
adorable, pure and purifying unforgettable Soma source 
of beauty, music and poetry. 


स रंहत उरुगायस्य जूतिं वृथा saad मिमते न गावं: | 
परीणसं कृणुते तिग्मशद्खो दिवा ede शो नक्तमृज्रः ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Sa ramhata urugayasya jutim vrtha krilantam 
mimate na gavah. Parinasam krnute tigmasrngo 
diva harirdadrse naktamrjrah. 


That Soma source of beauty, music and poetry 
is ever dynamic spontaneously playing the sportive 
game. The power, force and velocity of that presence, 
the mind and senses do not comprehend. The spirit of 
ultimate penetrative and pervasive power reflects 
infinite possibilities, the beatific saviour manifests its 
omnipotence day and night. 


इन्दुर्वाजी प॑वते गोन्योघा इन्द्रे सोमः सह इन्वन्मर्दाय। 
हन्ति रक्षो बाध॑ते पर्यरातीर्वरिवः कृण्वन्वृजनंस्य 
राजा You 

10.  Indurvaji pavate gonyogha indre somah saha 


invan madaya. Hanti rakso badhate paryaratir- 
varivah krnvan vrjanasya raja. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 335 


Indu, brilliant Soma, energetic and victorious, 
pure and purifying, vibrant and dynamic, creating 
strength, patience and endurance for the soul’s joy, is 
ever on the move. It destroys evil, prevents negativities 
and opposition and casts them far off, and, giving 
wealth, honour and excellence of the best order of our 
choice, rules as the brilliant creator, controller and 
dispenser of strength, courage, power and life saving 
vitality in existence. 


sta धारया neat पृचानस्तिरो tet पवते अद्विदुग्धः। 
इन्दुरिन्द्रस्य सख्यं जुषाणो देवो देवस्य॑ मत्सरो मदाय ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Adha dharaya madhva prcanastiro roma pavate 
adridugdhah. Indurindrasya sakhyam jusano 
devo devasya matsaro madaya. 


And by streams of honey shower, joining 
spiritual awareness, overflowing the heart cave, Soma, 
distilled from the adamantine practice of meditative self- 
control, flows pure, purifying, wholly fulfilling. The 
brilliant divine spirit of joy cherishing friendly 
communion with Indra, the Soul, is the ecstasy meant 
for the joyous fulfilment of the soul. 


अभि प्रियाणि पवते पुनानो देवो देवान्त्स्वेन रसेन Wr 
इन्दुर्धमीौण्यृतुथा वसानो दश क्षिपो अव्यत सानो 
अव्ये UI 

12. Abhi priyani pavate punano devo devantsvena 


rasena prncan. Indur-dharmanyrtutha vasano 
dasa ksipo avyata sano avye. 


To all dear loving ones flows divine and brilliant 
Soma, pure, purifying and fulfilling the noble sages with 


336 RGVEDA 


its nectar of ecstasy. May the brilliant joyous divinity, 
pervading and shining with virtues according to time 
and season, purify and fulfill us on top of this protective 
world of ten senses, ten pranas and ten gross and subtle 
elements. 


वृषा शोणो! अभिकनिंक्रद द्रा नदयन्नेति पृथिवीमुत द्याम्‌ । 
इन्द्र॑स्येव ag शुण्व आजौ प्र॑चेतयंत्र्षति वाचमे- 
माम्‌॥ ९३॥ 


13. Vrsa Sono abhikanikradadga nadayanneti prthi- 
vimuta dyam. Indrasyeva vagnura 5171114 dajau 
pracetayann-arsati vacamemam. 


Generous, joyous and refulgent Soma spirit 
divine pervades the stars and planets and vibrates in 
the sun rays, making the heaven and earth resound. It is 
the very voice of Indra, lord omnipotent, heard in the 
dynamics of existence, awakening the spirit, and it 
inspires this holy speech to burst forth in adoration. 


रसाय्यः पय॑सा पिन्वमान ईरयन्नेषि मधुमन्तपंशुम्‌। पव॑मानः 
सन्तनिमेषि कृण्वन्निन्द्रय सोम परिषिच्यमानः ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Rasdayyah payasa pinvamana trayannesi madhu- 
mantamamsum. Pavamanah samtanim-esi 
krnvann-indraya soma parisicyamanah. 


O Soma, stream of divine joy exalted with songs 
of praise, inspiring honey sweets of vital growth and 
enlightenment, you go forward, pure and purifying, and 
release continuous showers of ecstasy for the soul for 
its grandeur and glory when you are honoured and 
adored by the celebrants. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 337 


एवा प॑वस्व मदिरो मदायोदग्राभस्य नमय॑न्वधस्नैः। परि 
वर्णा भरमाणो रुशन्तं गव्युर्नो अर्ष परि सोम सिक्तः ॥ १५॥ 


15. Eva pavasva madiro madayodagrabhasya 
namayan vadhasnaih. Pari varnam bharamano 
rusantam gavyurno arsa pari soma siktah. 


Thus vibrate and flow on, spirit of ecstasy, for 
joy, bending and breaking the clouds which hold up the 
rain and radiations of light, and, bearing bright light 
and illuminative varieties of knowledge, continue to 
flow on, O Soma, generous and exalted presence, lover 
of showers and light and bearer of the bolt of power 
and force to strike down the negativities. 


जुष्टी न॑ इन्दो सुपथा सुगान्युरौ प॑वस्व वरिवांसि कूण्वन्‌। 
घनेव विष्व॑ग्द्रि तानि विष्चन्नधि ष्णुना धन्व सानो 
अव्ये ।॥ ९६॥ 


16. Justvi na indo supatha sugadnyurau pavasva 
varivamsi krnvan. Ghaneva visvagduritani 
vighnannadhi snuna dhanva sano avye. 


Indu, refulgent Soma, happy and kind, flow and 
purify us, creating simple and straight paths of living in 
the wide world and giving us honest and virtuous wealth 
and honours of our choice. Destroying all evils of the 
world as thunder of the clouds, let ceaseless streams of 
joy flow for us and protect us on top of the protective 
world. 


वृष्टं नं orf दिव्यां जिंगलुमिव्ठावतीं शंगयीं जीरदानुम्‌ । 
स्तुकेव वीता ध॑न्वा विचिन्वन्बन्धू'रिमां अव॑राँ इन्दो 
वायून्‌ ॥ ९७॥ 


338 RGVEDA 


17. Vrstim no arsa divyam jigatnumilavatim sam- 
gayim jiradanum. Stukeva vita dhanva vicinvan 
bandhunriman avaran indo vayun. 


O Soma, refulgent giver, bring us celestial rains, 
dynamic and universal, productive and illuminative, 
peace giving and abundantly generous. Selecting and 
favouring like loved children these friendly and 
brotherly people here and elsewhere, vibrant as winds, 
pray inspire and energise them to live a full joyous life. 


ग्रन्थिं न fa ष्य॑ ग्रथितं पुनान ऋजं चं गातुं ari a 
सोम । अत्यो न क्रदो हरिरा Bart मर्यो देव धन्व परस्त्या- 
ALN ९८ ॥ 


18. Granthim na vi sya grathitam punana rjum ca 
gatum vrjinam ca soma. Atyo na krado harira 
srjano maryo deva dhanva pastyavan. 


O Soma, pure, purifying and refulgent divinity, 
liberate the man in chains, breaking the bond as you 
untie a tough knot. Make the paths of life simple and 
straight, let the strength be natural and sincere, free from 
guile. Spirit of divinity, you roar as thunder, you are 
saviour and sustainer, creator and maker of the mortal 
humanity, and you are the sole master of the universe, 
your home. 


जुष्टो मदाय देवतात इन्दो परि wrt धन्व सानो steal) 
सहस्रधारः सुरभिरदब्धः oR स्रव वाज॑सातौ Fad ut ९९ ॥ 
19. Justo madaya devatata indo pari snuna dhanva 


sano avye. Sahasradharah surabhir-adabdhah 
pari srava vajasatau nrsahye. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 339 


O Soma, refulgent spirit of divinity, lover of joy 
and loved for the sake of joy, in yajna, pray flow, inspire 
and energise us on top of safety, security and prosperity 
with incessant stream of joy. Undaunted and invincible, 
let a thousand streams of ecstasy flow, let the breeze of 
fragrance blow, in the battle for victory worthy of brave 
humanity. 


अरश्मानो Aster अयुक्ता अत्यासो न संसृजानासः 
आजौ । एते शुक्रासो! धन्वन्ति सोमा देवांसस्ताँ उप॑ याता 
पिब॑ध्यै ।॥ २०॥ 


20. Arasmano ye’ratha ayukta atyaso na sasrjanasa 
ajau. Ete sukraso dhanvanti soma devasastan upa 
yata pibadhyai. 


Soma streams of ecstasy, unfettered, unbound, 
uninvolved, flow free like radiations of energy, 
refulgent, pure and consecrated, inspiring and energising 
in the yajnic battle of life. Let the leading lights of 
humanity advance and join the yajna to drink of the 
nectar. 


एवा न॑ इन्दो अभि देववीतिं परि स्रव नभो अर्णश्चमूषु । 
सोमो अस्मभ्यं काम्यं बृहन्तं र॒यिं द॑दातु वीरवंन्तमु- 
ग्रम्‌॥ २९॥ 


21. तव व indo abhi devavitim pari srava nabho 
arnascamusu. Somo asmabhyam kamyam br- 
hantam rayim dadatu viravantam-ugram. 


Thus O self-refulgent Indu, spirit of divine 
peace, power, beauty and prosperity, let there be a 
shower of light and knowledge on us in yajna. Let 
showers of rain fill our tanks, lakes and rivers and 


340 RGVEDA 


fructify our fields and gardens. May Soma give us 
wealth, honour and excellence of the highest order of 
our choice with mighty brave heroes. 


तक्षद्यदी मन॑सो वेन॑तो वाग्ज्येष्ठस्य वा धर्म॑णि atte | 
आदींमायन्वर मा वावशाना जुष्टं पतिं कलशो गाव 
इन्दुम्‌ ॥ २२॥ 


22. Taksadyadi manaso venato vagjyesthasya va 
dharmani ksoranike. Adimayan varama vavasana 
justam patim kalase gava indum. 


If the language of the mind in words of love of 
the vibrant sage of worshipful devotion, established in 
the beauty and splendour of the supreme spirit and law 
of the universe, were to visualise the picture-presence 
of Soma, ultimate sustenance of life, then all 
perceptions, thoughts and imaginations, loving and 
faithful, would move and concentrate into that presence 
of the choicest, most loved and beatific master vibrating 
in the heart core of the soul. 


प्र दानुदो दिव्यो दानुपिन्व saga पवते सुमेधाः । धर्मा 
Wag वृजन्य॑स्य राजा प्र रश्मिभिवर्दशभिंरभारि भूम॑ ॥ २३॥ 


23. Pra danudo divyo danupinva rtamrtaya pavate 
sumedhah. Dharma bhuvad-vrjanyasya raja 
pra rasmibhir-dasabhir-bhari bhuma. 


Most charitable giver, heavenly, promoter of 
liberal philanthropists, self-refulgent inspirer of noble 
intelligence, Soma purifies and enhances the rectitude 
of the enlightened. Being the sustainer of Dharma, 
master ruler of all powers and forces of the universe, 
the mighty Soma sustains the world by the dynamics of 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 341 


the ten gross and subtle elements of nature. 


पवित्रेभिः पव॑मानो नृचश्चा राजां देवानामुत मत्सौनाम्‌। 
द्विता भुंवद्रयिपती' रयीणामूृतं भ॑र त्सुभूतं चार्विन्दुः ।॥ २४॥ 


24. Pavitrebhih pavamano nrcaksa raja devana-muta 
martyanam. Dvita bhuvad-rayipati rayi-nam- 
rtam bharat subhrtam carvinduh. 


Flowing and purifying by its pervasive presence 
of sanctity, all watching Soma is the ruler of all divine 
forces of both nature and humanity. Controller of both 
nature and humanity, presiding over the dynamics of 
universal law, bearing and sustaining the cosmos, 
brilliant and beatific, Soma is the master, ruler and 
dispenser of all wealth, honours and excellence of the 
world. 


अर्वा इव श्रव॑से सातिमच्छेन्द्र॑स्य वायोरभि वीति्मर्ष।स 
न॑: सहस्त्र बह तीरिषो दा भवा सोम द्रविणोवित्पु- 
नानः॥ २५॥ 


25. Arvan iva Sravase satimacchendrasya vayorabhi 
vitimarsa. Sa nah sahasra brahatiriso da bhava 
soma dravinovit punanah. 


Vibrate and flow for the good of Indra, the soul 
in search of power, and for Vayu, the vibrant seeker of 
Karma, radiating like energy itself for the sake of honour 
and success in yajna. O Soma, knowing and 
commanding wealth and power, pure and purifying, be 
the giver of a thousand powers of sustenance, energy 
and enlightenment for us. 


342 RGVEDA 


caren नः परिषिच्यर्मानाः क्षयं सुवीरं धन्वन्तु arat: 1 
आयज्यवः सुमतिं विश्ववारा होतारो न दिवियजो 
मन्द्रतमाः ॥ २६॥ 


26. Devavyo nah parisicyamanah ksayam suviram 
dhanvantu somah. Ayajyavah sumatim visva-vara 
hotaro na diviyajo mandratamah. 


May showers of the power and grace of Soma, 
generous to the divinities of nature and nobilities of 
humanity, served, adored and sanctifying, bless our 
peaceful home with noble heroes of action. Creative 
they are by nature’s yajna, overflowing with universal 
light and intelligence like yajakas in the regions of the 
sun where universal Soma yajna is going on, and they 
are the most inspiring and most beatific. 


एवा देव देवताते पवस्व महे सोमर ura ean: | 
महश्चिद्ि wate हिताः समर्ये कृधि सुं्टाने weet 
पुनानः ॥ २७॥ 


27. Eva deva devatate pavasva mahe soma psarase 
devapanah. Mahasciddhi smasi hitah samarye 
krdhih susthane rodast punanah. 


O self-refulgent Soma, sanctifier and giver of 
fulfilment to the holy and nobly brave in yajna, flow, 
inspire and energise us for the achievement of a great 
organised social order. Pure and purifying power of 
divinity, great we shall be, for sure, nobly inspired and 
committed to the good in the battle of life. Make the 
earth and the global environment, heavens and the skies, 
noble, good and creative as ahome good for the progress 
of life. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 343 


अश्वो न क्रदो वृष॑भिर्युंजानः सिंहो न भीमो मन॑सो 
जवींयान्‌। अवचिीनैः पथिधिर्ये रजिष्ठा आ प॑वस्व सौमनसं 
न॑ इन्दो ॥ २८ ॥ 


28. Asvo na krado vrsabhiryujanah simho na bhimo 
manaso javiyan. Arvacinaih pathibhirye rajistha 
a pavasva saumanasam na indo. 


Roaring as thunder and lightning, awful as a 
lion, faster than mind, enjoining and inspiring the 
generous and the brave, O lord self-refulgent and 
gracious, come by the latest modern paths which are 
simple, natural and true, and purify, inspire and energise 
the noble power and virtue of our mind and soul. 


शतं धारां देवजाता असग्रन्त्स स्त्र मेनाः eae aaa 
इन्दो सनित्रं fea आ प॑वस्व पुरएतासिं महतो 
धन॑स्य ॥ २९॥ 


29. Satam dhara devajata asrgrantsahasramenah 
kavayo mrjanti. Indo sanitram diva a pavasva 
pura etasi mahato dhanasya. 


Hundred streams of soma joy born of divinity 
flow for the divinities of nature and nobilities of 
humanity. A thousand ways poets and sages sing of them, 
adore and exalt them. O self-refulgent lord of bliss and 
generosity, let the holiest wealth and virtue flow from 
the light of divinity. You alone are the eternal, original 
and prime giver of the great wealth, honour and 
excellence of life. 


दिवो न सगौ अससूग्रमह्यां राजा न मित्रं प्र मिनाति धीरः | 
पितुर्न पुत्रः करतुभिर्यतान आ प॑वस्व fast अस्या अजीं- 
तिम्‌॥ ३०॥ 


344 RGVEDA 


30. Divo na sarga asasrgramahnam raja na mitram 
pra minati dhirah. Piturna putrah kratubhir- 
yatana व pavasva vise asya ajitim. 


As the rays of day light radiate from the sun, as 
a good ruler does not hurt the people and treats them as 
friends, as the son tries by yajnic actions to win the 
father’s love and favour, 80 O Soma, come to bless this 
people and assure their victory and progress. 


प्रते धारा मधरुमतीरसूग्रन्वारान्यत्पूतो अत्येष्यव्यान | पव॑मान 
Uae धाम गोनां जज्ञानः सूर्यमपिन्वो अर्कैः 132 01 


31.  Prate dhara madhumatir-asrgran varan yat puto 
atyesyavyan. Pavamana pavase dhama gonam 
jJajnanah suryam-apinvo arkaih. 


O Soma, the honeyed showers of your gifts 
radiate and flow when you, with your power and purity, 
move to your favourite choices well protective and well 
protected. Indeed, pure and purifying, you move and 
bless the treasure homes of light, and, self-manifesting 
and generative, you vest the sun with the light that 
illuminates the days. 


कनिक्रददनु पन्थामृतस्य शुक्रो वि भा॑स्यमूत॑स्य धामं। स 
इन्द्राय पवसे मत्सर्वाद्हिन्वानो वाचं मतिभिः कवी- 
नाम्‌॥ BRU 

32. Kanikradadanu pantham-rtasya 5111-0 vi bhasya- 


mrtasya dhama. Sa indraya pavase matsaravan 
hivnano vacam matibhih kavinam. 


Loud and bold you reveal the path of truth and 
rectitude and define the eternal law of existence. Self- 
refulgent, immaculate and omnipotent, you shine in 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 345 


glory, the very abode of immortality. You vibrate, radiate 
and sanctify for the sake of Indra, the soul of the karma- 
yogi, and for the conscience of humanity, inspiring the 
poets and sages with vision and imagination and the 
visionary scientists with thought to burst forth in 
spontaneous songs of adoration, you being the treasure- 
hold of ecstasy, indeed ecstasy itself. 


दिव्यः सुपर्णोऽ व॑ afer सोप पिन्वन्धाराः कर्मणा देव- 
तीतौ । एन्दो fast कलशं सोमधानं se fate सूर्यस्योप॑ 
रस्मिम्‌॥ 33 ॥ 


33. Divyah suparno’va caksi soma pinvan dharah 
karmana devavitau. Endo visa kalasam soma- 
dhanam krandannihi suryasyopa rasmim. 


Heavenly light, super-abundant spirit of peace, 
protection and divine bliss, O Soma, reveal yourself, 
speak and shine, and let the rising streams of your 
presence flow into our divine life-yajna with higher and 
higher potential. O Spirit of peace and protection, bliss 
and beauty, consecrate this heart-core of the soul open 
to Soma, awaiting, come resounding, and let the 
radiations of refulgent divinity illuminate and sanctify 
us. 


frat are ईरयति प्र वद्धिं ऋतस्य धीतिं aaton मनीषाम्‌। 
गावो यन्ति गोप॑तिं पृच्छमानाः सोमं यन्ति मतयो वाव- 
जानाः UBS Il त 

34. = 17570 vaca trayati pra vahnir-rtasya dhitim bra- 
hmano manisam. Gavo yanti gopatim prccha- 
manah somam yanti matayo vavasanah. 


Soma inspires three orders of speech: practical 


346 RGVEDA 


speech that carries on the daily business of life, the 
thought that conceives of the vibrant immanent divine 
presence, and the deeper language of silence which is 
the mode of transcendent reality. The language 
operations of daily business move in search of the master 
source of world mystery as in science and philosophy, 
and the speech of thought and imagination and of love 
and worship moves to the presence of peace and bliss, 
Soma. (The three speeches in Vedic language are Ida, 
Sarasvati, and Mahi or Bharati as described in Rgveda 
1, 13, 9 and Yajurveda 21, 19. Explained another way 
these are the language of the Rks or knowledge, Yajus 
or karma, and Samans or worship.) 


सोमं गावो धेनवो वावशानाः सोमं विप्रा मतिभिः 
पृच्छमानाः | सोमं: सुतः पूयते अज्यमानः सोमे अर्का - 
fers: सं न॑वन्ते ॥ Bu 


35. Somam gavo dhenavo vavasanah somam vipra 
matibhih prcechamanah. Somah sutah puyate 
ajyamanah some arkastristubhah sam navante. 


Dynamic and creative languages of love and 
faith celebrate Soma, the languages of scholars 
enquiring into reality with thought and analysis 
concentrate on Soma. It is Soma which, distilled from 
observation and experience and crystallised in nature 
and function, is sought to be comprehended or 
apprehended in the language medium. Indeed all speech 
media of description, definition, comprehension, 
apprehension, celebration or adoration arise from Soma 
and merge into Soma. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 347 


एवा न॑: सोम परिषिच्यमान आ प॑वस्व पूयमानः स्वस्ति। 
इन्द्रमा fast बृहता रवेण वर्धया वाचं जनया पुर॑ं- 
Feat ३६ ul 


36. Eva nah soma parisicyamana a pavasva puya- 
manah svasti. Indrama visa brahata ravena 
vardhaya vacam janaya purandhim. 


Thus, O Soma, served, adored and celebrated 
with your power and purity, let your presence radiate 
and purify us for our good and all round well being. 
Come and settle in the soul with the mighty voice of 
divinity. Generate and exalt the awareness and speech 
of vision and celebration communicative of high divine 
realisation. 


आ जागृविर्विप्रं ऋता म॑तीनां सोम॑ः पुनानो अंसदच्यमूषु । 
सप॑न्ति यं मिथुनासो निकामा अध्वर्यवो' रथिरासः 
सुहस्ताः ॥ ३७॥ 

37. A jagrvirvipra rtd matinam somah punadno 


asadaccamusu. Sapanti yam mithunaso nikama 
adhvaryavo rathirasah suhastah. 


Ever wakeful, all intelligent, ever true, pure, 
purifying and celebrated, Soma abides in the heart core 
of the visionary sages, and him, loving yajakas dedicated 
to yajna of love and non-violence, noble of action 
commanding their body chariot of personality, together 
serve, adore and worship with high love and devotion 
of their mind and soul. 


स पुनान sa सूरे न धातोभे stor रोद॑सी वि ष आवः। 
प्रिया चिद्यस्य प्रियसास ऊती सतू धनं कारिणे नप्र 
यंसत्‌ ॥ ३८ ॥ 


348 RGVEDA 


38. Sa punana upa sure na dhatobhe apra rodasi vi 
sa avah, Priya cidyasya priyasasa uti sa tu 
dhanam karine na pra yamsat. 


That Soma, pure and purifying, creator and 
sustainer, pervades and fills the heaven and earth as it 
abides in the sun and destroys darkness and ignorance. 
Dearer than dear are its powers for our protection for 
sure. May Soma give us wealth, honour and excellence 
as one would give wealth to the artist. 


स व॑र्धिता वर्ध॑नः पूयमानः ural digat srr =r 
ज्योतिःषावीत्‌। येना नः पूर्वे' frat: पदज्ञाः स्वर्विदो अभि 
गा अद्िमुष्णन्‌ ॥ ३९ ॥ 


39. Savardhita vardhanah puyamanah somo midhvan 
abhi no jyotisavit. Yena nah purve pitarah 
padajnah svarvido abhi ga adrimusnan. 


Soma, exalted and exalting, pure and purifying, 
virile and generous, may, we pray, protect and promote 
us with the light of knowledge by which our forefathers, 
knowing the meaning and purpose of life step by step 
with a passionate desire for knowledge, rising to the 
sun, attained to the ultimate freedom and bliss of heaven. 


अक्रान्त्समुद्रः Wan विधर्मञ्जनय॑न्प्रजा भुवनस्य रा्जा। 
वृषा पवित्रे अधि सानो अव्ये बृहत्सोमो! वावृधे सुवान 
इन्दुः ॥ ४० ॥ 


40.  Akrantsamudrah prathame vidharmanjanayan 
praja bhuvanasya raja. Vrsa pavitre adhi sano 
avye brhat somo vavrdhe suvana induh. 


Soma, prime cause of the world of existence, 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 349 


unfathomable as ocean, taking on by itself countless 
causes of existence in the vast vault of space and time, 
roaring and generating the evolving stars, planets and 
forms of life, is the ruling power of the universe. Potent 
and generous, infinite, creative and generative, refulgent 
Soma pervades the immaculate, sacred and protective 
universe and on top of it expands it and transcends. 


Ted महिषश्चंकाराऽपां agauls duit देवान्‌। 
अदधादिन्द्रे पव॑मान ओजोऽ ज॑नयत्सूर्ये ज्योतिरिन्दुः ॥ ४९ ॥ 


41.  Mahat tat somo mahisascakara’pam yadgar- 
bho’vrnita devan. Adadhadindre pavamana 
ojo’janayat surye jyotirinduh. 


Soma, potent absolute, generated the Mahat 
mode of Prakrti, Mother Nature, which is the womb of 
all elements, energies and forms of existence and which 
comprehends all perceptive, intelligential and psychic 
powers as well. And then the creative-generative lord 
of evolutionary action, Soma, vested lustre and energy 
in Indra, the soul, and, lord of light as it is, Soma vested 
light in the sun. 


मत्सि वायुपिष्टये राध॑से च मत्सिं मित्रावरुणा gaa: 1 
मत्सि र्थो मारुतं मत्सि देवान्मत्सि द्यार्वापरथिवी देव 
सोम ॥ ४२॥ 

42. Matsi vayumistaye radhase ca matsi mitra-varuna 
puyamanah. Matsi sardho marutam matsi devan 
matsi dyavaprthivi deva soma. 


O self-refulgent Soma, you energise the Vayu 
for its windy fulfilment and accomplishment of the 
purpose of creative evolution and, purifying and 


350 RGVEDA 


sanctifying as you are, you energise and fulfil the 
centripetal and centrifugal modes of energy. You 
energise the sense of courage, boldness and even 
defiance of stormy energy, you energise the senses, mind 
and intelligence, and you energise and fulfil the heaven, 
earth and the skies of space. 


ऋजुः प॑वस्व वृजिनस्य हन्ताऽपामीं वां बाधंमानो else | 
अभिश्रीणन्पयः पय॑साभि गोनामिन्द्रस्य त्वं ad वयं 
सराय: ।॥ ४३ ॥ 


43. Rjuh pavasva vrjinasya hanta’pamivam badha- 
mano mrdhasca. Abhisrinan payah payasabhi 
gonamindrasya tvam tava vayam sakhayah. 


Flow on, creative power, pure and purifying, 
simple, straight and natural, destroyer of crookedness, 
driving away and warding off violence and negativities, 
extending and refining knowledge with knowledge of 
the dynamics of nature, mind and senses. You and we, 
then, are friends and cooperators in progress, O friend 
of the karma-yogi. 
मध्वः सूदं पवस्व वस्व उत्सं वीरं च॑ न आ प॑वस्वा भगं 
च। स्वदस्वेन्द्राय पव॑मान इन्दो रयिंच॑न आ प॑वस्वा 
समुद्रात्‌ ॥ VS I 

44.  Madhvah sudam pavasva vasva utsam viram ca 


na a pavasva bhagam ca. Svadasvendraya pava- 
mana indo rayim ca na व pavasva samudrat. 


Pacify and consecrate the springs of honey 
sweets and let these flow free, let abundance of wealth, 
honour and excellence, let power, prosperity and glory 
flow to us all. Spirit and power of peace and purity, 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 351 


refulgent and beatific Indu, be sweet and kind for the 
soul. Let immense wealth flow from the bottomless sea. 


सोम॑ः सुतो धार्‌ यात्यो न हित्वा सिन्धुर्न निम्नमभि 
arden: | आ योनिं वन्य॑मसदत्पुनानः समिन्दुर्गोभिरस- 
रत्समद्धिः ॥ ४५ ॥ 


45. Somah suto dharayatyo na hitva sindhurna 
nimnamabhi vajyaksah. A yonim vanyamasadat 
punanah samindur-gobhir-asarat samadbhih. 


Soma, self-existent Spirit of creativity realised 
and exalted by humanity, inspiring and energising like 
radiations of light, rushing down in streams like a flood, 
pray come with the glory of victory. May the spirit of 
Soma, pure and purifying, flow and bless the loved heart 
core of the soul. May the spirit, bright and illuminating, 
flow with showers of knowledge and enlightenment and 
beatify us with the soothing waters of peace for the mind, 
senses and the soul. 


एष स्य a पवत इन्द्र सोमश्चमूषु धीरं उशते तवंस्वान्‌ । 
स्वर्चना रथिरः सत्यशुष्पः कामो न यो देवयताम- 
सर्जि ॥ ४६ ॥ 


46. Esasya te pavata indra somascamusu dhira usate 
tavasvan. Svarcaksa rathirah satyasus-mah kamo 
na yo devayatam-asarji. 


Hey Indra, dear soul, it is that Soma, Spirit of 
divinity which flows free and purifying for you, the 
human lover that cherish the Spirit. Pervasive in the 
holy hearts and indeed in all forms of existence, 
constant, almighty, watching, radiating and revealing, 
itself the light of heaven, master of the cosmic chariot, 


352 RGVEDA 


inviolably true in its potential, it flows free like the love 
as well as the lover of the celebrants of divinity. 


एष vast वय॑सा पुनानस्तिरो वपी सि eeadeats: । वसानः 
शर्म तरिवरूथमप्सु होतेव याति सम॑नेषु रेभ॑न्‌ ॥ ४७॥ 


47. Esa pratnena vayasa punanas-tiro varpamsi 
duhitur-dadhanah. Vasanah sarma trivar-utham- 
apsu hoteva yati samanesu rebhan. 


This Soma, for eternity, bearing eternal life 
energy for body, mind and soul, pure, purifying, 
sanctifying, sustaining and yet transcending all 
existential forms of its generated world, its darling 
daughter, pervading, loving and enlightening the holy 
peaceful three-level universe of heaven, earth and the 
middle regions sustained in the atomic dynamics of 
nature’s laws, goes on and on resounding as the high- 
priest and chief yajaka through the creative-conflictive- 
evolving orders of yajnic mutability reaching the divine 
destination. 


नू नस्त्वं tit दैव सोम परि स्रव areal: पूयर्मानः 1 अप्सु 
स्वादिष्ठो मधुमाँ ऋतावा देवो न यः स॑विता सत्य- 
म॑न्मा॥ ४८ ॥ 


48. Nunastvam rathiro deva soma pari srava camvoh 
puyamanah. Apsu svadistho madhuman rtava 
devo na yah savita satyamanma. 


Verily to us for our vision and experience, you, 
O master of the cosmic chariot, refulgent Soma, flow 
on in the mighty forms of existence both physical and 
psychic. Flow on, pure, purifying and sanctifying in the 
dynamics of nature, flow into our actions, thoughts and 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 303 


words. Flow on, sweetest spirit, bearing honeyed joys 
of life, the very spirit of truth and eternal law, you who 
are self-refulgent and generous like the life-giving sun, 
sole lord of truth and laws of constant mutability at heart. 


अभि वायुं dicta गृणानो ऽ भि मित्रावरुणा gaat: | 
अभी नरं धीजवनं रथेष्ठापभीन्द्रं वृष॑णं वज्र॑बाहुम्‌ ul ४९ ॥ 


49. Abhi vayum vityarsa grnano’bhi mitravaruna 
puyamanah. Abhi naram dhijavanam rathes- 
tham-abhindram vrsanam vajrabahum. 


O Soma, pure and purifying, resounding across 
the spaces, flow, sung and celebrated, and bring peace, 
progress and fulfilment to humanity, to the man of 
vibrant enthusiasm, to the man of love and judgement. 
To humanity, bring readiness of intellect and 
understanding, firm and undisturbed yet dynamic like 
a master of the chariot sitting at peace, unmoving and 
undisturbed, while the chariot may be speeding at the 
velocity of light. So also flow to Indra, master ruler of 
the arms of thunder, virile and generous, mighty yet 
calm. 


अभि वस्त्रा सुवसनान्य॑ां ऽभि धेनूः सुदुघाः पूयर्मानः। 
अभि चन्द्रा भर्त॑वे नो हिरण्याऽभ्यश्वाच्रथिनों देव 
सोम ॥ ५० ॥ 

50. Abhi vastra suvasananyarsa’bhi dhenuh sudug- 
hah puyamanah. Abhi candra bhartave no 
hiranya’bhyasvan rathino deva soma. 

O refulgent Soma, pure and purifying, sung and 
celebrated, bring us vestments of beauty and grace, 
cows, abundant and fertile, words of knowledge 


354 RGVEDA 


brilliant, deep and creative, bring us golden graces of 
beauty and soothing vitality for sustenance and success, 
bring us the energy and motive powers for our chariot 
of corporate life. 


अभी नो अषं दिव्या वसून्यभि विश्वा पार्थिवा पूयर्मानः। 
अभि येन्‌ द्रविंणमश्नर्वामाऽभ्यार्षेयं ज॑मदगिवन्न॑ः ॥ ५९ ॥ 


51. Abhi no arsa divya vasunyabhi 17510 parthiva 
puyamanah. Abhi yena dravinam-asnavama’ 
bhyarseyam jamadagnivannah. 


O Soma, pure and purifying spirit and power of 
divinity, bring us celestial honour and excellence and 
the peaceful shelter of divinity, all materials of the 
world’s wealth and power by which, like people of 
divine vision, we may attain to the universal wealth and 
virtue of the universe worthy of the sages of divine 
imagination. 


अया पवा प॑वस्वैना वसूनि aigaca इन्दो otha प्र eter । 
ब्रध्नश्चिदत्र वातो न जूतः पुंरूमेधंश्चित्तकवे नरं दात्‌ ॥ ५२॥ 


52. Ayd pava pavasvaina vasuni manscatva indo 
sarasi pra dhanva. Bradhnascidatra vato na jutah 
purumedhascit takave naram dat. 


Generous, refulgent Soma spirit of beauty, peace 
and glory, sanctify us by these streams of grace. In the 
ocean depths of this honourable universe, energise and 
move all forms of wealth and peaceful settlements and 
consecrate us in the space of divine voice and wisdom. 
Spirit of the expansive universe, dynamic like the stormy 
winds, high-priest of cosmic yajna for all, bless us with 
a settled state of humanity in the vibrant system of a 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 355 
volatile world. 


उत न॑ एना प॑वया प॑वस्वाऽधिं श्रुते श्रवाय्यस्य तीर्थ | 
षष्टिं सहस्रा नैगुतो वस्रनि gai न पक्वं धूनवद्रणाय ॥ ५३ ॥ 


53. Uta na ena pavaya pavasva’dhi srute Srava- 
yyasya tirthe. Sastim sahasra naiguto vasuni 
vrksam na pakvam dhunavadranaya. 


And by this sacred stream of divinity, cleanse 
and sanctify us in this holy lake of the divine Word worth 
hearing over and above what has been heard. Master of 
infinite power and wealth, destroyer of hoards of 
negativities, give us boundless forms of wealth for our 
battle of life, shaking, as if, like a tree of ripe fruit this 
mighty tree of the world. 


महीमे अस्य quad शूषे uryaca वा पृशने वा 
वधत्रे । अस्वापयच्चिगुत॑ः स्ेहयच्यापाऽपित्रं अपाचितो 
अचेतः ॥ ५४ ॥ 


54. Mahime asya vrsanama suse manscatve va [115411८ 
va vadhatre. Asvapayannigutah snehayaccapa’ - 
mitran apacito acetah. 


These are the mighty great and constructive 
works of the virile and generous Soma in the battles of 
life either in social dynamics or close encounters or in 
fierce conflicts: sending the destroyers to sleep, 
separating off the unfriendly and removing the unawake 
and unaware from here where they are, (by constructive, 
waking up friendly exercise). 


सं त्री पवित्रा वितंतान्येष्यन्वेकं धावसि पूयमानः । असि 
भगो असिं दात्रस्य दाताऽसिं मघवां Aaa Sa इन्दो ॥ ५५ ॥ 


356 RGVEDA 


54. Sam tri pavitra vitatanyesyanvekam dhavasi 
puyamanah. Asi bhago asi datrasya data 
*si maghava maghavadbhya indo. 


Hey Indu, spirit of beauty, power and glory of 
divinity, you move and bless three holy expansive loved 
favourites of your choice and, pure and purifying, you 
hasten to them one by one since you are the wealth and 
power for the mighty, you are the giver for the generous, 
and you are the glory for the glorious. 


एष विंरुववित्प॑वते मनीषी सोमो विश्व॑स्य भुव॑नस्य राजा । 
द्रप्सं ईरयन्विदथेष्विन्दुर्विं वार मव्यं समयाति याति ॥ ५६ ॥ 


56. Esa viSvavit [4141८ manisi somo viSvasya 
bhuvanasya raja. drapsan trayan vidathesvindu- 
rvi varamavyam samayati yati. 


This Soma knows, holds and consecrates the 
world as a holy place for life. Omniscient and all- 
sentient, it is the refulgent ruler of the entire universe. 
Spirit of light, beauty and grace of generosity, inspiring 
and energising perception and awareness of the holy 
performers in yajnas, it moves and enlightens the chosen 
protected soul, abides there and moves on. 


इन्दुं रिहन्ति महिषा अद॑ब्धाः पदे रेभन्ति कवयो न ett: 1 
हिन्वन्ति धीरां दशः कषिपाभिः समञ्जते रूपमपां 
रसेन ॥ ५७॥ 

57. Indum rihanti mahisa adabdhah pade rebhanti 
kavayo na grdhrah. Hinvanti dhira dasabhih 
ksipabhih samanjate rapamapam rasena. 

Great undaunted celebrants love and adore 

Soma on the yajna vedi. Passionate strivers as well as 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 98 357 


poets sing and celebrate it in song. Constant devotees 
with all ten senses and pranic energies worship it in 
peace and quiet, and by the fluent pleasure and power 
of it they join the very presence of it. 


त्वया वयं पव॑मानेन सोम भर कृतं वि चिनुयाम शश्व॑त्‌। 
तन्नो पित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः पृथिवी उत 
द्यौः ॥ ५८ ॥ 


58. = {14)व vayam pavamanena soma bhare krtam vi 
cinuyama Sasvat. Tanno mitro varuno mama-han- 
tamaditih sindhuh prthivi uta dyauh. 


O Soma, spirit of divine peace, power, beauty 
and glory, in our battle for self-control and divine 
realisation, let us always choose and abide by paths and 
performances shown and accomplished by you, pure 
and purifying power of divinity. And that resolve of 
ours, we pray, may Mitra, the sun, Varuna, the ocean, 
Aditi, mother Infinity, Sindhu, divine space and fluent 
vapour, earth and heaven, help us achieve with credit. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 98 
Pavamana Soma Devata. Ambarisha Varshagira and 
Rjishva Bharadvaja Rshis 
अभि नो वाजसातमं रयिम॑षं पुरुस्पृहम्‌ । 
इन्दो सहस्रभर्णसं तुविद्युम्नं वि॑भ्वासदह॑म्‌॥ ९॥ 
1. Abhi no vajasatamam rayimarsa purusprham. 


Indo sahasrabharnasam tuvidyumnam vibhy- 
asaham. 


Indu, divine spirit of peace, power, beauty and 
grace, move and bless us to achieve wealth, honour and 
excellence of high order, universally loved and valued, 


358 RGVEDA 


a thousandfold sustaining, mighty powerful, all 
challenging and finally victorious. 


परि ष्य dart अव्ययं रथे न ante 
इन्दुरभिद्रुणा हितो हियानो धाराभिरक्षाः ॥ २॥ 


pe Pari sya suvano avyayam rathe na varmavyata. 
Indurabhi druna hito hiyano dharabhiraksah. 


May that Soma, brilliant spirit of peace, power 
and purity of divinity, invoked and inspired to bless the 
pious heart, flow by streams and showers, inspiring and 
fertilizing, and reach the imperishable soul of the 
devotee and protect him like the armour protecting the 
watrior in the chariot. 


परि ष्य qari stam इन्दुरव्ये मद॑च्युतः | 
धारा य ऊर्ध्वो steat भ्राजा नेति गव्ययुः ॥ ३॥ 


a Pari sya suvano aksa induravye madacyutah. 
Dhara ya urdhvo adhvare bhraja naiti gavya-yuh. 


May that Indu, divine Spirit of peace, purity and 
beauty, inspiring and strengthening, overflowing with 
the power of ecstasy, flow and reach into the favoured 
heart of the devotee, that supreme shower of divinity 
which goes forward like radiations of light into the yajna 
of love and non-violence with love and desire to reveal 
the truth of life. 


a fe da शश्व॑ते वसु मतौय दाशुषें। 
इन्दो! सहस्रिणं रयिं शतात्मानं विवाससि ॥ ४॥ 


4. Sa hi tvam deva sasvate vasu martaya dasuse. 
Indo sahasrinam rayim satatmanam vivasasi. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 98 359 


O Soma, refulgent and generous spirit of peace, 
prosperity and beauty, you shine upon the charitable 
mortal of relentless discipline and bestow upon him 
wealth, honour and excellence of a hundredfold power 
and a thousandfold value. 


वयं त अस्य चुंत्रहन्वसो aed: पुरु स्पृहः | 
नि नेदिं्तमा इषः स्याम॑ सुम्नस्याच्रिगो ॥ ५॥ 


9, Vayam te asya vrtrahan vaso vasvah purus-prhah. 
Ni nedisthatama isah syama sumnasya-dhrigo. 


O spirit of instant mantra movement, lord of 
world’s wealth and shelter home of life, destroyer of 
evil, darkness and ignorance, let us be closest to you 
and the all desired world’s wealth, let us be closest to 
your treasure of food, energy, and knowledge and to 
your divine peace and comfort. 


fee पञ्च स्वय॑शसं स्वसारो अद्रि संहतम्‌ । 
प्रियमिन्द्रस्य काम्यं प्रस्नापय॑न्त्यूर्मिंण॑म्‌॥ ६॥ 

6. Dviryam panca svayasasam svasaro adrisamha- 
tam. Priyamindrasya kamyam prasnapayantyur- 
minam. 

Soma, dearest love of the soul, innately glorious, 
the glory intensified by spiritual light, vibrant spirit 
rolling in the consciousness whom ten psychic powers 


of mind and sense perceive, conceive and exalt, that 
spirit we cherish and adore. 


परि त्यं हर्यतं हरि' बभ्रुं पुनन्ति वारेण। 
यो देवान्विश्वां इत्परि मदेन सह गच्छ॑ति ॥ ७॥ 


360 RGVEDA 


te Pari tyam haryatam harim babhrum punanti 
varena. Yo devan visvan it pari madena saha 
gacchati. 


Ten psychic powers with the best of their 
potential adore and exalt that dear divinity, omniscience 
itself, who, omnipresent, pervades and rejoices with all 
divinities of the world with divine ecstasy. 


अस्य वो Waar ural दक्षसाध॑नम्‌। 
यः सूरिषु श्रवो! geet स्वर्णं हर्यतः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Asya vo hyavasa panto daksasadhanam. 
Yah surisu Sravo brhad-dadhe svarna haryatah. 


This spirit of beauty and perfection, sublime like 
the sun, by virtue of its own innate potential which vests 
all great ones with their mighty power and honour, that 
spirit you all adore for protection and perfection of your 
life. 
स वां यज्ञेषुं मानवी इन्दुर्जनिष्ट रोदसी । 
देवो देवी गिरिष्ठा sealed तुविष्वणि ॥ ९ ॥ 

च Sa vam yajnesu manavi indurjanista rodasi. 
Devo devi giristha asredhan tam tuvisvani. 

That divine spirit of beauty and perfection, 
brilliant and generous, resounding over heaven and 
earth, vested in cloud showers and mountain tops, 
loving, gracious and deeply human at heart, O men and 
women of the earth, create in your yajnas and realise in 
lite: 

इन्द्राय सोम पात॑वे ara परिं षिच्यसे । 
नरे च दक्षिणावते देवाय सदनासदे॥ ९०॥ 


MANDAL - १ / SUKTA - 98 361 


10. Indradya soma patave vrtraghne pari sicyase. 
Nare ca daksinavate devaya sadanasade. 


O Soma spirit of light and ecstasy of grace, you 
are adored and served for the soul’s experience of 
divinity, for the man of charity and the brilliant sage on 
the vedi of yajnic service so that the demon of evil, 
darkness and ignorance may be expelled from the soul 
of humanity and destroyed. 


ते प्रलासो व्युष्टिषु सोमाः पवित्रे अक्षरन्‌ । 
अपप्रोथन्तः सनुतर्हुर्‌ श्चितंः प्रातस्तां अप्र॑चेतसः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Te pratnaso vyustisu somah pavitre aksaran. 
Apaprothantah sanutarhurascitah pratastan 
apracetasah. 


Those eternal, natural and universal vibrations 
of divine love and grace flow and beatify the human 
soul in the purity of heart core in the holy light of the 
dawn, subduing, expelling and destroying those crooked 
and clandestine forces of evil, darkness and ignorance 
of the human mind. 


तं स॑खायः पुरोरुचं यूयं वयं च॑ aa: | 
अश्याम वाज॑गन्ध्यं सनेम वाज॑पस्त्यम्‌ ९२॥ 

12. Tam sakhayah purorucam yuyam vayam ca 
surayah. ASyama vajagandhyam sanema vajapa- 
styam. 


Come friends, all of us and all the wise and 
brave, let us reach that Soma spirit of light and grace 
and achieve the spirit as a prize and treasure home of 
peace, fragrance and life’s victory. 


362 RGVEDA 


Mandala 9/Sukta 99 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Rebhasunus Kashyapas Rshis 


आ हर्यताय धृष्णवे धनुस्तन्वन्ति पौस्य॑म्‌। 
शुक्रां व॑यन्त्यसुंराय निर्णिजं विपामग्रे महीयुवः ue 


ly A haryataya dhrsnave dhanustanvanti paum- 
syam. Sukram vayantyasuraya nirnijam vipama- 
gre mahiyuvah. 


For the lovely bold Soma, devotees wield and 
stretch the manly bow, and joyous celebrants of heaven 
and earth before the vibrants create and sing exalting 
songs of power and purity in honour of the life giving 
spirit of divinity. 
अधं ator परिष्कृतो वाजी अभि प्र गाहते । 
यदी विवस्व॑तो धियो हरिं हिन्वन्ति यात॑वे ।॥ २॥ 

2 Adha ksapa pariskrto vajan abhi pra gahate. 
Yadi vivasvato dhiyo harim hinvanti yatave. 
When the thoughts and actions of bright 
celebrants invoke, invite and inspire Soma to move, 
initiate and bless, then the divine spirit, exalted by the 
songs, moves toward battles and inspires, energises and 
exalts their mind and courage for victory. 
तम॑स्य मर्जयामसि मदो य इन्द्रपातंमः। 
यं गावं आसभिर्दधुः पुरा नूनं च॑ सूरयः ॥ ३॥ 

ध Tamasya marjayamasi mado ya indrapatamah. 
Yam gava asabhir-dadhuh pura nunam ca 
surayah. 


That power and ecstasy of this Soma, worthiest 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 99 363 


of the soul’s delight, we adore and exalt, which the sense 
and mind with their perceptions and reflection receive 
and which, for sure, veteran sages too have experienced 
for times immemorial. 


तं गाथया पुराण्या पुनानमभ्यनूषत। 
उतो ura धीतयो देवानां नाम बिभ्र॑तीः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Tam gathaya puranya punanam-abhyanusata. 
Uto krpanta dhitayo devanam nama bibhratih. 


That spirit of Soma, pure and purifying, the 
celebrants adore and exalt by songs of old in Vedic voice 
and, the same, thoughts and actions of veteran sages 
with the divine name content of the lord supplicate and 
glorify. 


तमुक्षमाणमव्यये वारे पुनन्ति धर्णासिम्‌। 
दूतं न पूर्वचित्तय आ शासते मनीषिणः ॥ & ॥ 
2: Tam-uksamanam-avyaye vare punanti dharna- 
sim. Dutam na purvacittaya व Sasate manisinah. 
That omnipotent virile generative Soma creator, 
the very pillar and foundation of the universe, thinkers 
and meditative sages sanctify and hold in the pure heart 
core of their soul and celebrate as the prime divine voice 


of revelation of the eternal Vedic knowledge for 
enlightenment of the human soul. 


स पुनानो मदिन्त॑मः सोमश्चमूषु सीदति। 
पशौ न रेत॑ आदधत्पतिर्वचस्यते धियः॥ ६॥ 


6. Sa punano madintamah somascamusu sidati. 
Pasau na reta adadhat patirvacasyate dhiyah. 


364 RGVEDA 


That Soma, pure and purifying, most ecstatic 
and exhilarating, abides in all forms of yajnic existence 
and, holding the cosmic seed and impregnating Nature 
as a living organism, is worshipped as the father and 
sustainer of all thoughts of living beings. 


स मुज्यते qed fudat dasa: qa: | 
fae यदासु a-efeddicat fa गाहते।॥ ७॥ 


a: Sa mrjyate sukarmabhir-devo devebhyah sutah. 
Vide yadasu samdadir-mahirapo vi gahate. 


That divine, refulgent and generous Soma, 
realised by sages of holy action for noble humanity, is 
celebrated and glorified in the human world, and when 
itis known as the sole giver of every thing among these 
people, then it releases mighty floods of living waters 
for life sustenance. 


सुत इन्दो पवित्र आ Waa वि aa 
इन्द्राय मत्सरिन्त॑मणश्चमूष्वा नि षीदसि।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Suta indo pavitra a nrbhiryato vi niyase. 
Indraya matsarintamascamusva ni sidasi. 


O spirit of divinity, brilliant and blissful, 
perceived, reflected and meditated with constant 
exercise of spiritual discipline, you are distilled from 
experience and realised by devoted people in the purity 
of heart for the soul. It is thus that, most ecstatic and 
exhilarating, you abide in the heart and soul of humanity. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 100 365 


Mandala 9/Sukta 100 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Rebhasunus Kashyapas Rshis 


अभी न॑वन्ते ated: प्रियमिन्द्रस्य oretq 
वत्सं न पूर्वं आयुनि जातं रिहन्ति मातरः ॥ ९॥ 


I. Abhi navante adruhah priyamindrasya kamyam. 
Vatsam na purva ayuni jatam rihanti matarah. 


Just as young mothers love and caress the first 
born baby in early age, so do people free from malice 
and jealousy take to Soma, meditative realisation of 
divinity, dear favourite love of Indra, the soul. 


पुनान इन्दवा भ॑र॒ सोमं द्विबर्हसं र यिम्‌। 
त्वं वसूनि पुष्यसि विश्वानि दाशुषो! गृहे॥ २ ॥ 


2: Punana indava bhara soma dvibarhasam rayim. 
Tvam vasuni pusyasi visvani dasuso grhe. 

O Soma spirit of divinity, bright and blissful, 
bring us twofold wealth and excellence, expansive for 
both life on earth and beyond, and give us complete 
fulfilment. Indeed, you create and augment the wealth, 
honour and excellence of the world in the house of the 
man of generosity and charity. 

त्वं धियं मनोयुजं सृजा वृष्टिं न त॑न्यतुः। 
त्वं वसूनि पार्थिवा दिव्या च॑ सोम पुष्यसि ।॥ ३॥ 


2 Tvam dhiyam manoyujam srja vrstim na tan- 
yatuh. Tvam vasuni parthiva divyad ca soma 
pusyasi. 

O Soma, like the rain showers of the clouds, 
pray create, inspire and augment the vision, intelligence, 


366 RGVEDA 


understanding and will which may stabilise the mind in 
the state of peace and constancy. Indeed, you create and 
augment the wealth, honour and excellence of both 
earthly and heavenly order. 


aR ते जिग्युषो यथा धारां सुतस्य॑ धावति। 
Wann व्य4 व्ययं वारं वाजीव सानसिः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Pari te jigyuso yatha dhara sutasya dhavati. 
Ramhamana vyavyayam varam vajiva sanasih. 


When you are distilled from experience and 
meditation, then the stream of your bliss, fast and 
ceaseless, flows to the chosen and protected heart of 
the devotee like the prize winning spirit of a victorious 
warrior. 


क्रत्वे cata नः कवे पवस्व सोम धार॑या। 
इन्द्राय पात॑वे सुतो मित्राय वरुणाय च॥५॥ 


J: Kratve daksaya nah kave pavasva soma dha-raya. 
Indraya patave suto mitraya varunaya ca. 


Soma, spirit of poetic omniscience, flow and 
purify us by streams of bliss distilled from experience 
and meditation for our intelligence, expertise and 
enlightenment, for fulfilment of Indra, man of power, 
Mitra, man of love, and Varuna, man of judgement. 


पव॑स्व वाजसातमः पवित्रे धार॑या सुतः। 
इन्द्राय सोप विष्णवे देवेभ्यो मधुमत्तमः ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Pavasva vajasatamah pavitre dharaya sutah. 


Indraya soma visnave devebhyo madhumatta- 
mah. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 100 367 


Soma, all inspiring spirit of the universe, 
sweetest presence distilled and realised in the holy heart, 
flow on purifying by the stream of exhilaration, giving 
food, energy and fulfilment for the soul, for the universal 
vibrancy of nature and humanity, and for all the noble, 
generous and enlightened people. 


त्वां Rafa मातरो हरि' पवित्रे sree: 
ad जातं न धेनवः पव॑मान विधर्मणि ॥ ७॥ 


a Tvam rihanti mataro harim pavitre adruhah. 
Vatsam jatam na dhenavah pavamana vidhar- 
mani. 


O Soma, pure and purifying saviour spirit of 
universal sanctity, just as mother cows love and caress 
anew born calf, so do the motherly forces of nature and 
humanity free from the negativities of malice and 
jealousy love and cherish you arising in the heart and 
inspiring the soul in various dharmic situations of life. 


पव॑मान महि श्रव॑श्चित्रेभिर्यासि रण्मिभि॑ः। 
शर्धन्तमांसि जिघ्नसे विश्वानि दाशुषो! गृहे ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Pavamana mahi Sravas-citrebhiryasi rasmibhih. 
Sardhan tamamsi jighnase visvani dasuso grhe. 


Soma, pure, purifying vibrant spirit of life divine 
commanding great power, honour and glory, you go 
forward with wondrous manifestations of your power, 
bold and indomitable, destroying the darkness and evils 
of the world, and reach and bless the yajnic house of 
the man of charity and generosity. 


368 RGVEDA 


त्वं द्यां च॑ महिव्रत पृथिवीं चाति wafare 
प्रतिं द्रापिममुञ्चथाः पव॑मान महित्वना ॥ ९ ॥ 
9. Tvam dyam ca mahivrata prthivim cati jabhrise. 
Prati drapim-amuncathah pavamana mahit-vana. 
O Soma, universal soul of high commitment of 
Dharma, pure and purifying energy of omnipresent 
divine flow, you wear the armour of omnipotence, bear, 


sustain and edify the heaven and earth by your majesty 
and transcend. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 101 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Andhigu Shyavashvi (1-3), Yayati 
Nahusha (4-6), Nahusha Manava (7-9), Manu Samvarana 
(10-12), Vaishvamitra or Vachya Prajapati (13-16) Rshis 
पुरोजिती वो अन्ध॑सः सुताय॑ मादयित्नवे | 
अप श्वानं श्नधिष्टन सर्वायो दीर्घजिह्छय॑म्‌॥ ९॥ 
il; Purojiti vo andhasah sutaya mdadayitnave. 
Apa svanam snathistana sakhayo dirghaji-hvyam. 


O friends, for your attainment of the purified 
and exhilarating Soma bliss of existence, eliminate 
vociferous disturbances of the mind and concentrate on 
the deep resounding voice of divinity. 


यो धार॑या पावकया परिप्रस्यन्दते सुतः। 
इन्दुरश्वो न कृत्व्यः ॥ २॥ 


2 Yo dharaya pavakaya pariprasyandate sutah. 
Indurasvo na krtvyah. 


Brilliant and blissful Soma, when, filtered and 
exhilarated, vibrates and flows in clear purifying streams 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 101 369 
like waves of energy itself. 


तं दुरोषमभी नर॒: सोमं विश्वाच्या धिया । 
यज्ञं हिन्वन्त्यद्िंभिः॥ ३॥ 


3 Tam durosamabhi narah somam visvacya dhiya. 
Yajnam hivnantyadribhih. 


That blazing unassailable Soma, adorable in 
yajna, leading lights invoke and impel with universal 
thought and speech, with controlled mental reflection 
for self-realisation. 


सुतासो मधुमत्तमाः सोमा इन्द्राय BK: । 
पवित्र॑वन्तो अश्चरन्देवान्गंच्छन्तु वो मदाः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Sutaso madhumattamah soma indraya mandi- 
nah. Pavitravanto aksaran devan gacchantu vo 
madah. 


Filtered, felt and cleansed, honey sweet soma 
streams, pure and exhilarating, flow for Indra, the soul, 
and may the exhilarations reach you, noble favourites 
of divinity. 


इन्दुरिन्द्राय पवत इतिं देवासो! अन्नुवन्‌ । 
वाचस्पतिर्मखस्यते विश्वस्येशान ओज॑सा ॥ ५ ॥ 


a, Indurindraya pavata iti devaso abruvan. 
Vacaspatir-makhasyate visvasyesana ojasa. 


Soma, divine, brilliant and blissful, flows for 
Indra, the soul, say the noble sages, and thus Soma, 
divine source and master of speech and thought, ruler 
and sustainer of the entire world by his own lustre and 
power, is honoured at all yajnas of knowledge, yoga 


370 RGVEDA 
and austerity, for advancement. 


सहस्रधारः पवते समुद्रो वाचमीङ्कयः। 
सोमः पती रयीणां सखेन्द्र॑स्य दिवेदिवे ।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sahasradharah pavate samudro vacaminkhyah. 
Somah pati rayinam sakhendrasya divedive. 


A thousand streams of Soma joy and 
enlightenment flow, inspiring and purifying. It is a 
bottomless ocean that rolls impelling the language and 
thought of new knowledge. It is the preserver, promoter 
and sustainer of all wealths and honours and a friend of 
the soul, inspiring and exalting us day by day. 
अयं पूषा thin: सोम॑ः पुनानो अर्षति। 
पतिर्विंश्व॑स्य भूम॑नो व्यख्यद्रोदसी उभे।॥ ७॥ 

ce Ayam pusa rayirbhagah somah punano arsati. 
Patir-visvasya bhumano vyakhyad-rodasi ubhe. 
It is Pusha, life-sustaining and nourishing 
protector, wealth and honour of the world, power and 
the glory, Soma that is pure and purifying, ever going 
forward with the world. It is the master, sustainer and 
ruler of the vast expansive universe and illuminates both 
heaven and earth. 
aq प्रिया अनूषत गावो मर्दाय घुष्व॑यः। 
सोमासः कृण्वते पथः पव॑मानास इन्द॑वः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Samu priya anusata gavo madaya ghrsvayah. 
Somasah krnvate pathah pavamanasa indavah. 


Dear daring voices exalt and extol Soma for the 
sheer joy of illumination. Indeed men of Soma vision 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 101 371 


and courage, blazing brilliant, pure, purifying and 
pursuing, create and carve their own paths of progress. 


य ओजिष्ठस्तमा भ॑र पव॑मान श्रवाय्य॑म्‌ । 
यः पञ्च॑ चर्षणीरभि रयिं येन वनामहै।॥ ९॥ 


9. Ya ojisthastama bhara pavamana sravayyam. 
Yah panca carsanirabhi rayim yena vanamahai. 


O pure and purifying Soma, bring us honour 
and excellence most lustrous and renowned, valued 
among all the five classes of people by which we may be 
able to win the real material and spiritual wealth of life. 


at: पवन्त इन्द॑वोऽ स्मभ्यं गातुवित्तमाः | 
fast: सुंवाना अरेपसः स्वाध्यः स्वर्विदः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Somah pavanta indavo’smabhyam gatuvitta-mah. 
Mitrah suvana arepasah svadhyah svar-vidah. 


Streams of Soma flow for us, brilliant, eloquent 
and expansive, friendly, inspiring, free from sin, 
intellectually creative and spiritually illuminative. 


सुष्वाणासो व्यद्विभिश्चिताना met त्वचि । 
इषमस्मभ्य॑मभितः समस्वरन्वसुविदः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Susvanaso vyadribhis-citana goradhi tvaci. 
Isamasmabhyamabhitah samasvaran vasu-vidah. 


Reflective, inspiring and generative by 
controlled operations of higher mind in the purified heart 
core, let the Soma streams, vibrant and vocal, bring us 
spiritual energy, intelligential illumination and divine 
awareness all round in the world. 


372 RGVEDA 


एते पूता विपश्चितः सोमासो दध्यांशिरः। 
सू्यीसो न द्॑शंतासो! raat gar घृते ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Ete puta vipascitah somaso dadhyasirah. 
Suryaso na darsataso jigatnavo dhruva ghrte. 


These Soma streams, nourishing, energising, 
illuminating, are bright and beatific as the dawn and, 
vibrant but unfluctuating, they abide constant in the 
heart. 


प्र सुन्वानस्यान्ध॑सो मर्तो न da aga: | 
अप श्वान॑मराधसं हता मरं न भृग॑वः ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Pra sunvanasyandhaso marto na vrta tadvacah. 
Apa svanam-ardadhasam hata makham na 
bhrgavah. 


That silent voice of the generative illuminative 
Soma of divine food, energy and enlightenment, the 
ordinary mortal does not perceive. O yajakas, ward off 
the clamours and noises which disturb the meditative 
yajna as men of wisdom ward them off to save their 
yajna. 


आ जामिरत्के अव्यत भुजे न पुत्र ओण्योः | 
at न योष॑णां वरो न योनिमासदम्‌ ९४॥ 
14. A jamiratke avyata bhuje na putra onyoh. 
Sarajjaro na yosanam varo na yonim-asadam. 
As a child feels secure with joy in the arms of 
its parents, as the lover goes to the beloved, as the groom 


sits on the wedding vedi, so does the Soma spirit pervade 
in the natural form of its choice love. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 102 373 


स वीरो द॑श्चसाध॑नो वि यस्तस्तम्भ रोद॑सी | 
हरिः पवित्रँ अव्यत वेधा न योनिंमासद॑म्‌॥ ९५॥ 


15. Sa viro daksasadhano vi yastastambha rodasi. 
Harih pavitre avyata vedha na yonim-asadam. 


That potent Soma, master controller of all 
powers, means and materials of success in existence, 
who sustains both heaven and earth, is the saviour power 
of protection and pervades the universe presiding as 
omniscient high priest over the vedi of cosmic yajna. 


अव्यो वारेभिः पवते सोमो गव्ये अधिं caer 1 
arin हरिरिन्द्रस्याभ्येति निष्कृतम्‌ ॥ ९६॥ 
16. 410 varebhih pavate somo gavye adhi tvaci. 


Kanikradadvrsa harir-indrasyabhyeti niskrtam. 


Soma, omnipresent protector, abides with the 
souls of its choice discipline, vibrating in the heart core 
across the fluctuations of mind and senses. Loud and 
bold and voluble, thus, the generous potent saviour spirit 
blesses the original nature of the soul in its innate purity. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 102 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Trita Aptya Rshi 
क्राणा Pretest हिन्वन्नृतस्य दीधिंतिम्‌। 
विश्वा परि प्रिया भुंवदधं fear ९॥ 
1. Krana sisur-mahinam hinvannrtasya didhitim. 
Visva pari priya bhuvadadha dvita. 


Maker of stars and planets, inspiring the light 
and law of the dynamics of existence, dear adorable 
giver of fulfilment, Soma rules over both spirit and 


374 RGVEDA 
nature, heaven and earth. 


a0 त्रितस्य॑ पाष्यो इरभ॑क्त यद्‌ गुहां पदम्‌। 
यज्ञस्य॑ सप्त धा्म॑भिरधं प्रियम्‌ २॥ 


2: Upa tritasya pasyorabhakta yadguha padam. 
Yajnasya sapta dhamabhir-adha priyam. 


Close to the adamantine integration of Purusha 
and Prakrti in human form is the secret seat of heart 
and clairvoyant intelligence wherein the climactic 
presence of the master of three orders of Prakrti and 
super presence of divinity, and there it is shared by seven 
prakrtic, pranic and psychic orders of existence and 
adored by seven metres of Vedic hymns as the dearest 
supreme object of worship. 


त्रीणि त्रितस्य धार॑या पष्टेष्वेर॑या र यिम्‌। 
मिमीते अस्य योज॑ना वि सुक्रतुं: ॥ ३॥ 

3. Trini tritasya dharaya prsthesveraya rayim. 
Mimite asya yojana vi sukratuh. 
By three streams of the moving particles of 
matter, energy and mind does the triple master, Soma, 
move the dynamics of existence, and thus does the 
supreme high priest order and accomplish his cosmic 
plan. 
Wari aa arent वेधामंशासत fra 1 
अयं gat र॑यीणां चिकेत AU  ॥ 

4. Jajnanam sapta marato vedham-asasata Sriye. 
Ayam dhruvo ryinam ciketa yat. 


Seven measured motherly orders of existence 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 102 375 


at the material, pranic and psychic level join, reveal and 
celebrate Soma manifesting in beauty and glory, this 
constant unmoved mover who, being omnipresent and 
pervasive, knows of the wealth and sublimity of the 
universe. 


अस्य व्रते स॒जोष॑सो विश्वे carat अद्रुहः 1 
स्पार्हा भ॑वन्ति रन्त॑यो जुषन्त यत्‌॥ ५ ॥ 


Asya vrate sajosaso visve devaso adruhah. 
Sparha bhavanti rantayo jusanta yat. 


Enjoined in the law and order of discipline of 
this Soma, all divinities of nature and nobilities of 
humanity, committed and free from malice and 
negativity, who join and rejoice in him command the 
enviable love and respect of the world. 


यमी गर्भमृतावृधों eet चारु मजीजनन्‌। 
कविं मंहिष्ठमध्वरे पुंस स्पूर्हम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yami garbham-rtavrdho drse carum-ajijanan. 
Kavim mamhistham-adhvare purusprham. 


To realise and reveal that divine treasure origin 
of the world and its glory, sages and divines, celebrating 
his law, truth and yajnic evolution, love and join the 
presence of Soma, great and glorious, poetic creator, 
mighty generous, universally adored, and manifesting 
anew in the world of love and beauty. 


समीचीने अभि त्मनां यह्वी ऋतस्य मातरा । 
तन्वाना यज्ञमानुषग्यद॑ञ्जते ॥ ७ ॥ 


qi Samicine abhi tmana yahvi rtasya matara. 
Tanvana yajnam-anusag-yadanjate. 


376 RGVEDA 


The great joint spontaneous generators of the 
dynamic world in existence are Soma, supreme Purusha, 
and Prakrti, which the sages, who enact and advance 
the meditative yajna of science and direct realisation, 
constantly adore and glorify. 


क्रत्वा शुक्रेभिर्‌ क्षभिव॑ऋणोरपं व्रजं fea: | 
हिन्वन्नृतस्य दीधितिं प्राध्वरे ।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Kratva sukrebhiraksabhirrnorapa vrajam divah. 
Hinvann-rtasya didhitim pradhvare. 


O Soma, creative spirit of the universe, by holy 
action, brilliant light of pure knowledge and the inner 
vision of the spirit, pray open wide the paths and doors 
of the light of divinity, thereby inspiring and advancing 
yajnic revelations of the divine law and its operation in 
this advancing world of love and non-violence. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 103 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Dvita Aptya Rshi 
प्र पुनानाय॑ वेधसे सोमाय वच उद्य॑तम्‌ । 
भूतिं न भ॑रा मतिभिर्जुजोषते ॥ ९॥ 
Ly Pra punanaya vedhase somaya vaca udyatam. 
Bhrtim na bhara matibhir-jujosate. 


Sing rising songs of adoration in honour of 
Soma, pure and purifying, omniscient and inspiring 
ordainer of life, and offer the songs as homage of yajnic 
gratitude. Soma feels pleased with enlightened songs 
of love and faith. 


परि वाराण्यव्यया गोभिरञ्जानो अंर्षति। 
त्री षधस्था पुनानः कुणुते हरिः ॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 103 377 


2. Pari varanyavyaya gobhir-anjano arsati. 
Tri sadhastha punanah krnute harih. 


Pleased and exalted with songs of adoration, 
Soma, saviour spirit of bliss, radiates with its protective 
presence to the distinguished hearts and, purifying the 
body, mind and soul of the celebrants, blesses them in 
their physical, subtle and causal body states of existence. 


परि कोशं मधुश्चुत॑मव्यये at अर्षति | 
अभि वाणीऋषीणां सप्त नंषत ॥ ३ ॥ 

Pari kosam madhuSscutam-avyaye vare arsati. 
Abhi vanir-rsinam sapta nusata. 


In the protected heart core of the blessed soul 
overflowing with honey joy, the Soma presence vibrates, 
and hymnal voices of the seer sages in seven Vedic 
musical metres adore and glorify the divine presence in 
ecstatic response to the guiding spirit of divinity. 


Uk णेता म॑तीनां fasadat state: | 
सोम॑ः पुनानश्चम्वोर्विश्ब्दरिः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Pari neta matinam visvadevo adabhyah. 
Somah punanas-camvor-visaddharih. 


Soma, guiding spirit of the mind and soul, self- 
refulgent soul of the universe, undaunted and invincible, 
pure and purifying, pervading the heaven and earth, 
manifests inspiring in the mind and soul of meditative 
celebrants, eliminating their darkness and sufferance. 


परि दैवीरनु स्वधा इन्द्रेण याहि सरथ॑म्‌। 
पुनानो वाघदाघद्धिरमर्त्यः॥ ५॥ 


378 RGVEDA 


5: Pari daiviranu svadha indrena yahi saratham. 
Punano vaghadvaghadbhir-amartyah. 


O Soma, immortal spirit of existence, pure, 
purifying and realised in the pure heart core of the soul, 
vibrant and voluble with the celebrants in response to 
their yajnic homage and divine attainments, radiate with 
the human soul as a chariot mate of its physical existence 
on the move. 


uk aft वाजयुर्देवो देवेभ्यः सुतः। 
व्यानशिः पव॑मानो वि धावति ६ ॥ 

6. Pari saptirna vajayurdevo devebhyah sutah. 
Vyanasih pavamano vi dhavati. 


Like universal energy, the glorious Soma, all 
victorious, brilliant, realised by sages in its original 
nature and character, pervades vibrant here, there, 
everywhere and beyond, transcending. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 104 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Parvata and Narada Kanvas or 
both Shikhandinyas or Kashyapyas or Apsarasas Rshis 

सखाय आ नि wea पुनानाय प्र गायत। 

शिशुं न यज्ञैः UR भूषत श्चिये ॥ ९॥ 
le Sakhaya ठ ni sidata punanaya pra gayata. 

Sisum na yajnaih pari bhusata Sriye. 

Come friends, sit on the yajna vedi, sing and 

celebrate Soma, pure and purifying spirit of life, and 


with yajna exalt him like an adorable power for the grace 
and glory of life. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 104 379 


समी वत्सं न मातृभिः सृजतां गयसाधंनम्‌। 
देवाव्यं१ मद॑पभि द्विशवसम्‌॥ २॥ 


2. Sami vatsam na matrbhih srjata gayasadhanam. 
Devavayam madamabhi dvisavasam. 


As mothers love, adore and adorn a child with 
beauty and ornaments, so energise and exalt Soma as 
versatile beauty and grace of life, protector of divinities, 
source of ecstasy and doubly strong both physically and 
spiritually. 


पुनाता दश्चसाध॑नं यथा शर्धीय वीतये । 
यथां पित्राय वरुणाय शन्तमः॥ ३॥ 


3, Punata daksasadhanam yatha sardhaya vitaye. 
Yatha mitraya varunaya santamah. 


Realise and exalt Soma in the essential purity 
of its nature, power and presence as the very foundation 
of perfection and achievement in life, so that it may be 
the surest and most peaceful base of strength, power 
and fulfilment for the spirit of love and friendship as 
well as for freedom and judgement. 


अस्मभ्यं त्वा वसुविद॑मभि वाणीरनूषत | 
mae वर्णमभि वासयामसि ॥ ४॥ 


4. Asmabhyam tva vasuvidamabhi vaniranusata. 
Gobhiste varnamabhi vasayamasi. 


Our songs of adoration celebrate and exalt you 
as creator, knower and giver of peace, power, wealth 
and honours of the world. Indeed, with thoughts, words 
and vision, we glorify your power and presence as it 
emerges in our experience. 


380 


स at मदानां पत इन्दो देवप्सरा असि। 
wala सख्ये गातुवित्तमो भव ॥ ५ ॥ 


श Sano madanam pata indo devapsara asi. 
Sakheva sakhye gatuvittamo bhava. 


O spirit of beauty, brightness and bliss, 
controller, protector and promoter of life’s joys, divine 
and heavenly indeed is your power and presence. We 
pray be the guide and pioneer as a friend and spirit of 
love for friends. 


सनेमि Heri eaal Card कं चिदत्रिणम्‌ । 
अपादेवं Gadel युयोधि नः ॥ ६॥ 

6. Sanemi krdhyasmada raksasam kam cidatrinam. 
Apadevam dvayumamho yuyodhi nah. 


O Soma, let us be together in peace and 
friendship, in arms and in the daily business rounds 
forward as ever before. Keep off the demonic destroyer, 
the ogre, the impious, the double dealer, and the sin 
and sinner. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 105 


Pavamana Soma Devata, Parvata and 
Narada Kanvas Rshis 


dad: सखायो मदाय पुनानमभि ater । 
शिशुं न यज्ञैः स्वदयन्त गूर्तिभिः ॥ ९॥ 


ke Tam vah sakhayo madaya punanamabhi gayata. 
Sisum na yajnaih svadayanta gurtibhih. 


O friends, enjoying together with creative acts 
of yajna, sing and celebrate Soma, pure and purifying 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 105 381 


presence of divinity, with songs of praise, and exalt and 
adorn him as a darling adorable power for winning the 
joy of life’s fulfilment. 

सं वत्सडव मातृभिरिन्दुर्हिन्वानो अ॑ज्यते। 

टेवावीर्मदो' मतिभिः परिष्कृतः ॥२॥ 


2 Sam vatsa iva matrbhirindurhinvano ajyate. 
Devavirmado matibhih pariskrtah. 


Holily is Soma, brilliant presence of beauty, 
peace and power of divinity, protector of sages, ecstasy 
of life, realised in the essence, and, adorned by devotees 
as a darling presence, it is invoked and worshipped with 
creative acts of meditation by the celebrants. 


अयं दक्षाय साध॑नोऽ यं शधीय वीतये । 
अयं देवेभ्यो मधुमत्तमः सुतः ॥ ३ ॥ 

ध Ayam daksaya sadhano'yam sardhaya vitaye. 
Ayam devebhyo madhumattamah sutah. 
This is the means to efficiency for perfection, 
this is for strength and success for fulfilment, and when 
it is realised, it is the sweetest, most honeyed experience 
for the divines. 
गोमन्न इन्दो अश्ववत्सुतः rar धन्व | 
शुचिं ते वर्णामधि गोषु दीधरम्‌॥ ४॥ 

4. Gomanna indo asvavat sutah sudaksa dhanva. 
Sucim te varnamadhi gosu didharam. 


O Soma, refulgent spirit of divine bliss and 
beauty, manifest every where and realised within, 
commanding universal power and perfection, pray set 


382 RGVEDA 


in motion for us the flow of wealth full of lands, cows, 
knowledge and culture, and of horses, movement, 
progress and achievement. I pray bless me that I may 
honour and worship your pure divine presence above 
all, above mind and senses and above the things mind 
and senses are involved with. 


स alt हरीणां पत इन्दो देवप्संरस्तमः। 
सखेव सख्ये नर्यो रुचे भ॑व nau 
5. Sano harinam pata indo devapsarastamah. 


Sakheva sakhye naryo ruce bhava. 


O spirit of beauty and universal majesty, 
controller of all movements, beauties and perfections, 
divine presence that comprehend all forms of refulgence 
and generosity, like a friend for friends, be good for our 
pioneer leadership and brilliance on the vedi. 


सनेपि त्वमस्मदां अदेवं कं चिंदत्रिणम्‌। 
साह्यं ईन्दो परि बाधो अपं द्वयुम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sanemi tvamasmadan adevam kam cidatrinam. 
Sahvan indo pari badho apa dvayum. 


O spirit of divine beauty, bliss and brilliance, 
one with us in all acts and movements, courageous, bold 
and forbearing, ward off from us all impieties and keep 
away the impious and ungenerous people wherever they 
be, whoever is a devouring destroyer, and a double 
dealer. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 106 383 


Mandala 9/Sukta 106 


Pavamana Soma Devata, Agni Chakshusha (1-3, 10-14), 
Chakshu Manava (4-6), Manu Apsava (7-9) Rshis 


इन्द्रमच्छ सुता इमे वृष॑णं यन्तु BA: | 
श्रुष्टी जातास इन्द॑वः स्वर्विदं: ॥ ९ ॥ 
ll, Indramaccha suta ime vrsanam yantu harayah. 
Srusti jatasa indavah svarvidah. 
May these realised, cleansed and confirmed, 
blessed, beautiful and brilliant virtues and sanskars 
touching the bounds of divine bliss, emerging and risen 


in the mind, well reach and seep into the heart core of 
the soul completely and permanently. 


अयं भराय सानसिरिन्द्राय पवते aa: | 
सोमो जैत्रस्य चेतति यथां विदे ॥ २॥ 

2. Ayam bharaya sanasir-indraya pavate sutah. 
Somo jaitrasya cetati yatha vide. 


This Soma, competent and victorious for the 
battle of life, when realised, flows for Indra, the winning 
soul, and enlightens it about the world’s reality as it is 
and as it knows. 


अस्येदिन्द्रो मदेष्वा ग्राभं गुंभ्णीत सानसिम्‌ । 
ag च वृष॑णं भर त्सम॑प्सुजित्‌॥ ३ ॥ 

ध Asyedindro madesva grabham grbhnita sana-sim. 
Vajram ca vrsanam bharat samapsujit. 


Under the inspiration and ecstasy of this soma 
of divine love, let the soul seize the victorious bow, 
take on the generous virile and mighty bolt of will and 


384 RGVEDA 


power of faith and win the target of the battle of Karma 
to the attainment of Divinity. 


प्र ध॑न्वा सोम जागुविरिन्द्रायेन्दो aR ea 
द्युमन्तं शुष्ममा भ॑रा स्वर्विंद॑म्‌॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Pra dhanva soma jagrvirindrayendo pari srava. 


Dyumntam susmama bhara svarvidam. 


Flow on, O Soma, spirit of divine bliss, ever 
awake, brilliant and enlightening, streaming on and on 
for Indra, the soul, bear and bring the light and fire of 
the sun and vision of heaven. 


इन्द्राय वृष॑णं ud पव॑स्व favadsta: | 
wearer पथिकृद्िं चक्षणः ॥ ५॥ 
=m Indraya vrsanam madam pavasva visvadar-Satah. 
Sahasrayama pathikrdvicaksanah. 
Let divine showers and streams of visionary 
ecstasy rain and flow for Indra, the soul, O Soma, 
charming cosmic power, moving a thousand ways, 


maker of a thousand paths, shining, all watching and 
revealing. 


अस्मभ्यं गातुवित्तमो देवेभ्यो मधुमत्तमः | 
सहस्रं याहि पथिभिः कनिक्रदत्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Asmabhyam gatuvittamo devebhyo madhu-matta- 
mah. Sahasram yahi pathibhih kani-kradat. 


Best pioneer, path finder and highest honeyed 
joy for us, for the divines, come roaring by a thousand 
paths of light and holiness. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 106 385 


पव॑स्व देववीतय इन्दो धाराभिरोजसा । 
आ कलं मधुंमान्त्सोम नः सदः WU 
de Pavasva devavitaya indo dharabhirojasa. 


A kalasam madhumantsoma nah sadah. 


O Soma of divine light and peace, harbinger of 
honeyed joy, flow in streams with power and lustre for 
our attainment of the path of divinity and abide in our 
heart core of the soul. 


ad द्रप्सा उदप्रत इन्द्रं मर्दाय वावृधुः | 
त्वां देवासो अमृताय कं dg: ८ ॥ 

8. Tava drapsa udapruta indram madaya vavr-dhuh. 
Tvam devaso amrtaya kam papuh. 
The streams of your peace, beauty and bliss 
swell like streams of water in flood, and the divines 
drink of the ecstasy for the attainment of immortality. 
आ न॑: सुतास इन्दवः पुनाना धावता रयिम्‌। 
वृष्टिद्यावो रीत्यापः स्वर्विंद॑: ॥ ९ ॥ 

9. A nah sutasa indavah punana dhavata rayim. 
Vrstidyavo rityapah svarvidah. 


O streams of the beauty and bliss of peace and 
joy filtered from experience, heavenly showers, liquid 
floods, paradisal bliss pure and purifying, bring us the 
wealth, honour and excellence of the highest order. 


सोम॑ः पुनान ऊर्मिणाऽव्यो वारं वि धावति। 
अग्रे वाचः पव॑मानः कनिक्रदत्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Somah punana urmina’vyo varam vi dhavati. 
Agre vacah pavamanah kanikradat. 


386 RGVEDA 


Soma, pure and purifying, protective and 
blissful, flowing by streams and sanctifying, roaring 
with ancient and original hymns of divine adoration, 
rushes to the heart core of the distinguished soul. 


धीभिर्हिन्वन्ति वाजिनं वने ्री्ठन्तमत्य॑विम्‌। 
अभि त्रिपृष्ठं मतयः सम॑स्वरन्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 
11. Dhibhirhinvanti vajinam vane krilantamatya-vim. 


Abhi triprstham matayah samasvaran. 


Men of distinguished mind, adoring Soma with 
holy thoughts, words and action, invoke and celebrate 
all protective Soma, victorious spirit and cosmic energy, 
playing in the beautiful world over three regions of 
heaven, earth and the skies. 


stat कलशौ अभि मीके सिर्न ater: | 
पुनानो वाचं जनयं॑न्नसिष्यदत्‌ ॥। ९२ ॥ 

12. Asarji kalasan abhi milhe saptirna vajayuh. 
Punano vacam janayannasisyadat. 

Soma, vibrant spirit of divinity, rushes to the 
heart core of realised souls like instant energy radiating 
to the centre of its target in the human battle of survival 
and distinguished search for immortality, there 


stimulating, creating and sanctifying hymns of 
adoration, and there in the soul it abides. 


पव॑ते हर्यतो हरिरति हवरांसि रंह्या । 
अभ्यर्षन्त्स्तोत॒भ्यो' वीरवद्यशः ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Pavate haryato harirati hvaramsi ramhya. 
Abhyarsantstotrbhyo viravadyasah. 


The beauteous and beatific divine saviour spirit 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 107 387 


of Soma vibrates, purifies and flows with tremendous 
force, casting off all crookedness and contradictions, 
and overflowing with valour, honour and excellence for 
the celebrants and their heroic progeny for generations. 


अया प॑वस्व देवयुर्मधोर्धारा staara | 
रेभ॑न्पवित्रं पर्येषि faved: ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Aya pavasva devayur-madhordhara asrksata. 
Rebhan pavitram paryesi visvatah. 


Thus vibrate, purify and flow, friend of sages 
and divines, releasing these honey streams of joy, and 
go on eloquent to bless the pure heart all round all ways 
in the world. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 107 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Saptarshis Rshis 


(Bharadvaja Barhaspatya, Kashyapa Maricha, 
Gotama Rahugana, Bhauma Atri, Vishvamitra Gathina, 
Jamadagni Bhargava, Vasishtha Maitravaruni) 


परीतो षिंञ्चता सुतं सोमो य उत्तमं ata: | 
Sara यो नर्यो अप्स्वन्तरा सुषाव सोममद्विभिः॥ ९॥ 


I; Parito sincata sutam somo ya uttamam havih. 
Dadhanvan yo naryo apsvantara susava soma- 
madribhih. 


From here onward sprinkle Soma with love and 
service, Soma, the spirit of beauty, peace and joy of 
life, Soma, realised with best of thoughts, effort and 
determined discipline of meditation, Soma which bears 
the best materials for creative yajna of personal and 


388 RGVEDA 


social development, Soma which is the leading light of 
life, realised within in the heart and our Karmas 
performed in life. 


नूनं पुनानोऽ featur: a स्रवाऽद॑ब्धः सुर भिन्त॑रः। 
सुते चिंत्त्वाप्सु म॑दामो अन्ध॑सा श्रीणन्तो MATS ATT २ ॥ 


De Nunam punano’vibhih pari srava’dabdhah 
surabhimtarah. Sute cit tvapsu madamo andha- 
sa $rinanto gobhiruttaram. 


For sure, pure and purifying, flow on with 
protective and promotive forces, gracious, undaunted, 
more and more charming and blissful. When you are 
realised in our actions, mixed as one with our energies, 
will and senses, then we rejoice and celebrate you in 
our perceptions with hymns of praise, and later in silent 
communion. 


UR सुवानश्चक्ष॑से canes: क्रतुरिन्दुर्विंचकश्चणः॥ ३॥ 


Pari suvanas-caksase devamadanah kraturin- 
durvicaksanah. 


Celebrated in our thoughts and perceptions, joy 
of the sages, power of holy yajnic action, brilliant and 
blissful, all intelligent and omniscient, we adore you 
for the augmentation of our intelligence and 
enlightenment. 


पुनानः सोम धार॑याऽपो वसानो अर्षसि। 
आ taen योनिमृतस्य सीदस्युत्सो देव हर्‌ ण्ययंः ॥  ॥ 
4. Punanah soma dharaya’po vasano arsasi. A 


ratnadha yonimrtasya sidasyutso deva hiranya- 
yah. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 107 389 


O Soma, pure and purifying our thought, will 
and actions, abiding in the heart, you move and flow on 
in our consciousness. Bearing treasures of jewels, pray 
come and sit on the seat of yajna vedi and our sense of 
truth and eternal law. Indeed, O lord refulgent, you are 
the fountain head of life’s golden treasures. 


दुहान ऊधर्दिव्यं मधुं प्रियं प्रतरं were | 
आपृच्छ्यं धरुणं वाज्यर्षति नृभिवर्धूतो विचक्षणः ॥ ५॥ 


5. Duhana udhardivyam madhu priyam pratnam 
sadhasthamasadat. Aprcchyam dharunam 
vajyarsati nrbhirdhuto vicaksanah. 


Giver of fulfilment, treasure trove of life’s 
sustaining milk, yielding celestial dear honey sweets of 
living strength and joy, pervasive in its eternal universal 
loved seat, all conqueror all watching and knowing, 
when moved by meditative celebrants, Soma radiates 
and vibrates in the faithful heart of earnest seekers. 


पुनानः सोम जागुविरव्यो वारे परिं प्रियः। 
त्वं विप्रं अभवोऽ द्विरस्तमो मध्वा यज्ञं मिंपिश्च a: ne 


6. Punanah soma jagrviravyo vare pari priyah. 
Tvam vipro abhavo'ngirastamo madhva yajnam 
mimiksa nah. 


Pure and all purifying, O Soma, spirit of peace 
and bliss, ever awake and awakening with your eternal 
consciousness, all protective and promotive, dearest in 
the heart of the cherished loving soul, you are the vibrant 
awareness of omniscience and the very life energy of 
life. O Spirit of peace, joy and divine bliss, pray bless 
our yajna of life with the honey sweets of existence. 


390 RGVEDA 


सोमो मीद्वान्प॑वते गातुवित्तम ऋषिर्विप्र विचक्चणः। 
त्वं कविर॑भवो देववीत॑म आ सूर्य रोहयो दिवि ॥ ७॥ 


as Somo midhvan pavate gatuvittama rsirvipro 
vicaksanah. Tvam kavirabhavo devavitama a 
suryam rohayo divi. 


Soma, virile and generous giver of fulfilment, 
omniscient master of the ways of existence, supreme 
creative seer, vibrant super-soul, all watching and 
knowing, flows and purifies all. O Soma, you are the 
poetic creator, dearest friend of the divines, and it is 
you who generate and raise the sun over to the heaven 
of light. 


सोम॑ उ षुवाणः सोतथिरधि ष्णुथिरवींनाम्‌। 
अश्वयेव हरित याति धार॑या मन्द्रया याति धार॑या ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Soma u suvanah sotrbhiradhi snubhiravinam. 
Asvayeva harita yati dharaya mandraya yati 
dharaya. 

Soma, invoked by celebrants, manifests with 
blissful inspiring powers of protection and promotion 
and, saving, watching, fascinating, goes forward, 
rushing, compelling, in an impetuous stream like waves 
of energy, and it also goes forward by a stream of mild 
motion, soothing and refreshing. 


अनूपे गोमान्गोभिरक्षाः सोमो दुग्धाभिरक्षाः | 
समुद्रं न स्ंवरंणान्यग्मन्मन्दी मदाय तोशते ॥ ९॥ 
9. Anupe goman gobhiraksah somo dugdhabhir- 


aksah. Samudram na samvarananyagman mandi 
madaya (0541. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 107 391 


Soma, divine master of holy speech, emerges in 
the depth of the heart with the voice of divinity and 
blesses the devotee with the revelation of the milk of 
spiritual sustenance. Just as streams of water flow and 
reach the sea, so is the divine stream and spirit of joy 
invoked and celebrated for the central bliss of the soul. 


आ सोम सुवानो अद्रिभिस्तिरो वारराण्यव्यया। 
जनो न पुरि चम्बोर्विशब्दरिः सदो वनेषु दधिषे ॥ ९०॥ 


10. A soma suvano adribhistiro varanyavyaya. Jano 
na puri camvorvisaddharih sado vanesu dadhise. 


O Soma, spirit of universal bliss and protection, 
invoked and stirred by acts of meditation, radiating 
across the covers of darkness, enter the heart core of 
the soul as citizens enter their home in town, arise in 
the depth of heart and intelligence and abide there in 
the love and faith of the soul, your own cherished seat 
of existence among the wise. 


स मामृजे तिरो अण्वानि teal tee aft ater: | 
अनुमाद्यः पव॑मानो मनीषिभिः सोमो विप्रे भितऋ- 
क्व॑भिः॥ ९९॥ 

11. Sa mamrje tiro anvani mesyo milhe saptirna 
vajayuh. Anumadyah pavamano manisibhih 
somo viprebhir-rkvabhih. 

Like a war horse in victorious battle, Soma 
radiates across the fine fluctuations of senses, ecstatic, 


flowing in exuberant streams, when it is impelled and 
realised by the wise, vibrant Vedic sages in meditation. 


प्र सोम देववीतये सिन्धुर्न facet अर्णसा । अंशोः पय॑सा 
मदिरो न जागुंविरच्छा कोशं मधुश्चुत॑म्‌॥ ९२ ॥ 


392 RGVEDA 


Pra soma devavitaye sindhurna pipye arnasa. 
Amsoh payasa madiro na jagrviraccha kosam 
madhuscutam. 


O Soma, be full with the liquid spirit of joy like 
the sea which is full with the flood of streams and rivers, 
and, like the very spirit of ecstasy overflowing with 
delicious exuberance of light divine, ever awake, flow 
into the devotee’s heart blest with the honeyed joy of 
divinity. 

आ हर्यतो अजु ने अत्के अव्यत प्रियः सूनुर्न मर्ज्यः । 
तमीं हिन्वन्त्यपसो यथा रथं नदीष्वा गभस्त्योः ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. A haryato arjune atke avyata priyah sunurna 
marjyah. Tamim hinvantyapaso yatha ratham 
nadisva gabhastyoh. 


Dear, loved and fascinating, Soma emerges in 
transparent unsullied form, winsome worth refinement 
like a child’s and inspiring as a sanative. Devotees 
stimulate it with holy karma, a thing beautiful and 
inspiring, and let it join and flow in the streams of 
thought and action between their intellect and emotion 
and their prana and apana energies. 


अभि diate आयवः पव॑न्ते मद्यं मद॑म्‌। 
समुद्रस्याधि विष्टपि मनीषिणो! मत्सरासः स्वर्विदः ॥ ९४ it 


14. Abhi somasa ayavah pavante madyam madam. 
Samudrasyadhi vistapi manisino matsarasah 
svarvidah. 


Intelligent and dedicated lovers of Soma refine 
and sublimate their pleasurable joy of the heart and 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 107 393 


emotion, direct it to divinity on top of the existential 
ocean of daily business and, thoughtful, ecstatic and 
divinely oriented, experience the heavenly ecstasy of 
Soma as in samadhi. 


तर॑त्समुद्रं पव॑मान ऊर्मिणा राजां देव ऋतं बृहत्‌ । 
अर्ष सित्रस्य वरुणस्य धर्मणा प्र हिन्वान ऋतं बृहत्‌ ॥। ९५ ॥ 


15. Tarat samudram pavamana urmina raja 4८1/व 
rtam brhat. Arsan-mitrasya varunasya dharmana 
pra hinvana rtam brhat. 


Across the ocean of existence, pure, purifying 
and flowing by waves of ecstasy, refulgent generous 
divine ruler of life, itself the law of expansive universe, 
radiating by and with the Dharma of Mitra, spirit of 
love, and Varuna, spirit of justice, inspiring and 
stimulating the universal law of truth and advancement, 
rolls Soma. 


नृभिर्येमानो हर्यतो विंचक्चणो राजां देवः Bafa: ॥ Ve 


16. Nrbhir-yemanpo haryato vicaksano raja devah 
samudriyah. 


Invoked and impelled by leading lights of 
intelligent humanity, graciously charming, all watching, 
self-refulgent divine light of life, omnipresent in the 
universe, it rolls for Indra, the soul. 


इन्द्राय पवते मदः सोमो मरुत्व ते Ua: | 
सहस्त्र॑धारो अत्यव्यमर्षति तमीं मृजन्त्यायवः ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Indraya pavate madah somo marutvate sutah. 
Sahasradharo atyavyamarsati tami mrjantya- 
yavah. 


394 RGVEDA 


Soma, joy of existence, invoked and realised, 
flows purifying and consecrating for Indra, the vibrant 
soul, in a thousand streams of ecstasy and overflows 
the heart and soul of the devotee. That Spirit of the 
universe, intelligent dedicated yogis realise, exalt and 
glorify. 


पुनानश्चमू जनय॑न्मतिं कविः सोमो देवेषुं रण्यति | 
अपो वसानः परि गोभिरुत्तरः सीदन्वनेंष्वव्यत।॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Pundanascamu janayan matim kavih somo devesu 
ranyati. Apo vasanah pari gobhiruttarah sidan 
vanesvavyata. 


Pervading and energising heaven and earth, 
indeed the entire world of Prakrti and Jiva, stimulating 
intelligence, the poetic creator rejoices among the 
divinities, stars and planets and the senses and mind of 
humanity. Wearing the cosmic waters as a cloak, 
inspiring and sanctifying our thoughts and actions, 
manifesting in all beautiful things, and thus perceived 
by our senses and apprehended by intelligence, it abides 
higher and somewhere beyond our apprehension. 


तवाहं सोम रारण सख्य इन्दो दिवेदिवे 1 
पुरूणि aut नि च॑रन्ति मामव परिधीरति at इहि ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Tavaham soma rarana sakhya indo divedive. 
Puruni babhro ni caranti mamava paridhinrati 
tan ihi. 

O Soma, light of life and universal joy of 
existence, I rejoice in your friendly company day in and 
day out. O mighty bearer sustainer of the universe, a 
host of negativities surround me, pray break through 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 107 395 
their bounds and come and save me. 


उताहं नक्तमुत सोम ते दिवां Gera बश्च ऊधनि । 
gon तपन्तमति सूर्यः परः शंकुनाइव UPA २०॥ 


20. Utahamnaktamuta soma te diva sakhyaya babhra 
udhani. Ghrna tapantamati suryam parah sakuna 
iva paptima. 


And I, O Soma, bearer and sustainer, yearn day 
and night to abide in your presence for the sake of your 
love and friendship, and pray that we may rise, flying 
like birds beyond the sun blazing with its refulgence, 
and reach you, the Ultimate. 


मृज्यमानः सुहस्त्य समुद्रे areas । 
रयिं fiers बहुलं पुरुस्पृहं पवमानाभ्यर्षसि ॥ २९॥ 


21. Mrjyamanah suhastya samudre vacaminvasi. 
Rayim pisangam bahulam purusprham pavam- 
anabhyarsasi. 


O Spirit omnipotent with the world in your 
generous hands, celebrated and exalted, you stimulate 
and inspire the song of adoration in the depths of the 
heart and, pure, purifying, radiating and exalting, set in 
motion immense wealth of golden graces of universal 
love and desire for us. 


मृजानो वारे पव॑मानो अव्यये वृषाव॑ चक्रदो वनें। 
देवानां सोम पवमान निष्कृतं गोभिरञ्जानो अर्षसि ॥ २२॥ 
22. Mrjano vare pavamano avyaye vrsava cakrado 


vane. Devanam soma pavamana niskrtam gobhi- 
ranjano arsasi. 


396 RGVEDA 


O Soma, universal spirit of generosity, 
cleansing, purifying and radiating in the protected heart 
of the cherished celebrant, you manifest loud and bold 
in the deep and beautiful world of existence and, sung 
and celebrated with songs of adoration, you move and 
manifest in the holy heart of divinities, pure, purifying, 
vibrating. 


पव॑स्व वाज॑सातयेऽ भि विश्वानि काव्यां । 

त्वं समुद्रं प्र॑थमो वि धारयो देवेभ्यः सोम मत्सरः ॥ २३॥ 
23. Pavasva vajasdtaye’bhi visvani kavya. Tvam 

samudram prathamo vi dharayo devebhyah soma 

matsarah. 


O Soma, spirit of universal light and joy, radiate 
and move, purifying and inspiring, toward the spirit of 
universal vision and creativity for the achievement of 
knowledge and enlightenment. You are the first highest 
and original master poet creator who bore the mighty 
treasure trove of infinite light and joy and let it open to 
flow for the divine sages. 


सतू प॑वस्व परि पार्थिवं रजो दिव्या च॑ सोम धर्मभिः। 
त्वां विप्रासो मतिभिर्विचक्षण शुरं हिन्वन्ति 
धीतिभिः ॥ २४॥ 


24. Satu pavasva pari parthivam rajo divya ca soma 
dharmabhih. Tvam vipraso matibhirvicaksana 
subhram hinvanti dhitibhih. 


O Soma, with all your power, laws and virtues, 
flow purifying and inspiring all that is earthly, heavenly 
and in the middle regions of the universe. O Spirit all 
knowing and watching, bright and pure, the sages with 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 107 397 


their thoughts and actions invoke and exalt you for 
inspiration and enlightenment. 


पव॑माना असृक्षत पवित्रमति धार॑या । 
मरुत्व॑न्तो मत्सरा इद्धया eat मेधामभि प्रयांसि च । २५॥ 


25. Pavamana asrksata pavitramati dharaya. 
Marutvanto matsara indriya haya medhamabhi 
prayamsi ca. 

Purifying, energising and inspiring currents of 
ecstasy and nourishment for the senses, will, intellect 
and imagination flow by stream and shower at the speed 
of winds to the holy heart of the sagely celebrant. 


अपो वसानः परि कोशमर्षतीन्डुर्हियानः atafey: 
जनयञ्ज्योतिर्मन्दनां अवीवश्द्राः कृण्वानो न निर्णिी- 
TU २६॥ 


26. Apo vasanah pari kosam-arsatindur-hiyanah 
sotrbhih. Janayan-jyotir-mandana avivasad- 
gah krnvano na nirnijam. 


Invoked and exalted by celebrants, the Soma 
spirit of light and joy radiates to the heart and soul of 
the devotee, there inspiring and enlightening the 
thoughts, will and imagination to action, creating the 
light of joyous vision and energising the mind and 
senses, as if shaping the original spirit of purity and 
divinity of the soul anew. 


398 RGVEDA 


Mandala 9/Sukta 108 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Gauriviti Shaktya (1-2), Shakti 
Vasishtha (3, 14-16), Uru Angirasa (4-5), Rjishva 
Bharadvaja (6-7), Urdhvasadma Angirasa (8-9), 
Krtayasha Angirasa (10-11), and Rnanchaya Rajarshi 
(12-13) Rshis 


पव॑स्व Hee इन्द्राय सोम क्रतुवित्तमो Aa: | 
महिं द्युक्षतमो मद: ॥ ९ ॥ 


ke Pavasva madhumattama indraya soma kratuvi- 
ttamo madah. Mahi dyuksatamo madah. 


O Soma, sweetest honey spirit of light, action 
and joy, radiate purifying for Indra, the soul. You are 
the wisest spirit of the knowledge of holy action, greatest 
and most enlightened spirit of joy. 


यस्य॑ ते पीत्वा dust बुंषायतेऽ स्य पीता स्वर्विदः । 
स सुप्रकेतो अभ्य॑क्रमीदिषोऽ च्छा वाजं नैत॑शः ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Yasya te pitva vrsabho vrsayate’sya pita svarvi- 
dah. Sa supraketo abhyakramidiso’ccha vajam 
naitasah. 


Having drunk of the Soma spirit of light, action 
and joy, Indra, the soul, overflows with strength and 
virile generosity. Having drunk of it, the soul receives 
the light of heavenly knowledge. And the soul, also, 
blest with inner light of spiritual awareness, rushes to 
achieve food, energy and enlightenment as a warrior 
wins the battle of his challenges. 


त्वं ह्य१ ङ दैव्या पव॑मान Sa द्युमत्त॑मः। 
अमृतत्वाय घोषयः ॥ ३ ॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 108 399 


a Tvam hyanga daivya pavamana janimani dyu- 
mattamah. Amrtatvaya ghosayah. 


O Soma, dear as life, pure and purifying, most 
refulgent enlightened spirit, only you can call up born 
humanity to holy life and proclaim the path to 
immortality. 


येना नवग्वो दध्यङ्कपोर्णुते येन विप्रास आपिरे । 
देवानां सुम्ने अमृत॑स्य चारुणो येन श्रवांस्यानशुः ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Yena navagvo dadhyannapornute yena viprasa 
apire. Devanam sumne amrtasya caruno yena 
Sravamsyanasuh. 


Soma is that spirit of enlightenment by which 
the meditative sages on way to divinity open up the 
path to immortality, by which the saints attain to the 
peace and well being worthy of divinities, and by which 
the lovers of immortality obtain their desired ambition 
and fulfilment. 


एष स्य धार॑या सुतोऽ व्यो वारेभिः पवते मदिन्तमः | 
क्री््डन्नर्मिर्‌ पामिंव॥ ५॥ 


Esa sya dharaya suto’vyo varebhih pavate 
madintamah. krilann-urmir-apamiva. 


It is that Soma, most joyous spirit of life’s beauty, 
which, when realised by controlled minds of choice 
meditative order, flows pure and purifying by the stream 
of ecstasy, playful and exalting like waves of the sea. 


य उस्तरिया stat अन्तरश्मनो निर्गा अकुन्तदोज॑सा। 
अभि ast त॑लिषे गव्यमश्व्यं वर्मविं धृष्णवा Sat ६ ॥ 


400 RGVEDA 


6. Ya usriya apya antarasmano nirga akrntadojasa. 
Abhi vrajam tatnise gavyamasvyam varmiva 
ghrsnava ruja. 


You who with your might and lustre break open 
the cloud and release the streams of water from the 
womb of the cloud, who pervade and extend your power 
over the vault of the universe, pray come like a warrior 
in arms and break open the paths of progress in 
knowledge and advancement. 


आ सोता UR fasedised न स्तोम॑मपुरं रजस्तुरम्‌ । 
वनक्रक्षमुं ead ७॥ 


7. A sota pari Sincata’svam na stomamapturam 
rajasturam. Vanakraksamudaprutam. 


O celebrants, come, realise and all-ways serve 
Soma like sacred adorable energy impelling as particles 
of water and rays of light, the spirit pervasive in the 
universe and deep as the bottomless ocean. 


सहस््र॑धारं वृषभं प॑योवृधं प्रियं देवाय जन्म॑ने । 
ऋतेन य ऋतजातो विवावृधे राजां देव ऋतं बृहत्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sahasradharam vrsabham payovrdham priyam 
devaya janmane. Rtena ya rtajato vivavrdhe raja 
deva rtam brhat. 


For the rise of the self to the state of divine 
refulgence, let us serve and adore Soma, divine spirit 
of a thousand streams and showers, potent and generous, 
augmenter of the milk of life, dear as father and friend, 
who, manifestive in the laws of universal existence, 
pervades the expansive creativity of divine power and 
is the self-refulgent ruler, generous divinity and the 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 108 401 
infinite law, truth and ultimate reality itself. 


अभि द्युम्नं बृहद्यश इषस्पते दिदीहि da देवयुः । 
वि कोशं मध्यमं युंव॥ ९॥ 


o. Abhi dyumnam brhadyaSa isaspate didthi deva 
devayuh. Vi kosam madhyamam yuva. 


O refulgent generous Soma spirit of life, lover 
of divinities, master of food and energy for body, mind 
and soul, give us the light to rise to the honour and 
excellence of higher life towards divinity, and for that 
pray open the middle cover of the soul and let us rise to 
the state of divine bliss. 


आ dared सुदश्च चम्वोः सुतो विशां afet विश्पतिः 1 
वृष्टं दिवः प॑वस्व रीतिमपां जिन्वा गविं्टये धियं: ॥ ९०॥ 


10. A vacyasva sudaksa camvoh suto visam vahnirna 
vispatih. Vrstim divah pavasva ritimapam jinva 
gavistaye dhiyah. 

O Spirit omnipotent of divine action, invoked, 
adored and vibrant in the internal world of mind and 
soul and in the external world of nature, sustainer and 
ruler as burden bearer of humanity, stimulate the 
radiation of light from heaven, sanctify the shower of 
bliss, and inspire and illuminate the mind and 
intelligence for the seeker of enlightenment. 


एतमु त्यं म॑दच्युतं सहस्रधारं वृषभं दिवो दु हुः । 
विर्वा वसूनि fader ९९॥ 


11. Etamu tyam madacyutam sahasradharam 
vrsabham divo duhuh. Visva vasuni bibhratam. 


This treasure trove of the wealth, honour and 


402 RGVEDA 


excellence of existence, overflowing with honey sweets 
of ecstasy in a thousand streams, virile, brilliant and 
generous, the sages worship and they receive the milky 
grace of divinity for life and joy. 


am वि Sa waaaded: प्रतपञ्ज्योतिंषा तमः: । 
स सुष्टुतः कविभिर्निर्णिजं दधे त्रिधात्व॑स्य daar ९२ ॥ 


12. Vrsa vi jajne janayannamartyah pratapanjyotisa 
tamah. Sa sustutah kavibhir-nirnijam dadhe tri- 
dhatvasya damsasa. 


Generous immortal Soma, supreme spirit of 
eternal light, manifests, generating life and removing 
darkness with light. Celebrated and worshipped by 
visionary sages, it manifests in their consciousness 
wearing its immaculate garb of threefold Prakrti of 
matter, mind and motion by virtue of its omnipotence. 


स सुन्वे यो aga यो रायामानेता य इरव्छानाम्‌। 
सोमो यः सुक्षितीनाम्‌ 23 0 

13. = व 5171८ yo vasunam yo rayamaneta ya ilanam. 
Somo yah suksitinam. 

That Soma which is the generator, harbinger and 
ruler guide of all forms of wealth, honour and 
excellence, lands, knowledge and awareness, and of 
happy homes is thus realised in its divine manifestation. 

यस्यं न इन्द्रः पिबाद्यस्य मरुतो यस्य॑ वार्यमणा भग॑ः | 
आ येन॑ पित्रावरुणा करामह एन्द्रमवसे We ९४॥ 
114. Yasya na indrah pibadyasya maruto yasya 


varyamana bhagah. A yena mitravaruna kara- 
maha endramavase mahe. 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 108 403 


Soma is the omniscient and omnipotent divine 
spirit, whose ecstatic presence, our soul experiences, 
whose powers, our vibrant forces experience and adore, 
by whose path and guidance our power and honour 
moves and moves forward, by whose grace we develop 
our pranic energies and our sense of love and judgement, 
and by whose word and grace we anoint and consecrate 
our ruler for our high level of defence and security. 


इन्द्र॑य सोम पात॑वे नृभिर्यतः स्वायुधो मदिन्तमः | 
पवस्व मधुमत्तमः Hee 


15.  Indraya soma patave nrbhiryatah svayudho 
madintamah. Pavasva madhumattamah. 


O Soma, life divine, realised by leading lights, 
wielding noble arms of defence, being most exciting 
and bearing sweetest honey gifts, flow forth in 
consciousness for the soul’s fulfilment and for glory of 
the social order. 


इन्द्र॑स्य हार्दि सोमधानमा विंश समुद्रमिव सिन्ध॑वः | 
जुष्टो पित्राय वरुणाय वायवे दिवो विष्टम्भ उत्तमः ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Indrasya hardi somadhanama visa samudra-miva 
sindhavah. Justo mitraya varunaya vayave divo 
vistambha uttamah. 


O Soma spirit of life divine dear to humanity, 
come, enter the heart core of the soul of humanity’s 
social order full of love and reverence for the joy and 
glory of life. Come, enter as rivers flow to the sea. Loved 
and worshipped for Mitra, spirit of friendship, for 
Varuna, spirit of freedom and choice with justice and 
vision, and for Vayu, vibrant power and dignity of the 


404 RGVEDA 


human nation, come and bless, supreme sustainer of 
heaven and earth. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 109 


Pavamana Soma Devata, Agnis Dhishnyas 
Aishvaris Rshis 


परि प्र धन्वेन्द्राय सोम careftare पूष्णो भर्गाय ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Pari pra dhanvendraya soma svadurmitraya 
pusne bhagaya. 


O Soma, come and inspire as the most delicious 
psychic and spiritual experience for the soul and the 
nation, for friends, for the sustaining guardians and for 
the spirit of honour and glory of humanity. 


इनद्॑स्ते सोम सुतस्य पेयाः रत्वे दक्षाय विश्व च देवाः ॥ २ ॥ 


00 Indraste soma sutasya peyah kratve daksaya visve 
ca devah. 


Soma, spirit of glory and grandeur, loved, 
realised and reverenced, let Indra, the ruling soul, 
experience the ecstasy for noble action and efficiency. 
Let all divinities of the world enjoy the divine presence. 


एवामृताय महे क्षयाय स शुक्रो ate दिव्यः पीयूषं: ॥ ३ ॥ 


ai Evamrtaya mahe ksayaya sa Sukro arsa divyah 
ptyusah. 


Thus for immortality, for great dominion and 
for highest ascension, may that pure, potent and celestial 
Soma presence flow and radiate as the sweetest taste of 
lite, 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 109 405 
पव॑स्व सोम महान्त्समुद्रः पिता देवानां विश्वाभि धामं।। ४ ॥ 


4. Pavasva soma mahantsamudrah pita devanam 
visvabhi dhama. 

Flow forth and consecrate, O Soma presence of 
divinity, as great ocean of life, father, generator and 
sustainer of divinities and ultimate haven and home of 
all the worlds of existence. 


शुक्रः प॑वस्व देवेभ्यं: सोम दिवे पुंथिव्ये शं च॑ प्रजाये ॥। ५ ॥ 


2: Sukrah pavasva devebhyah soma dive prthivyai 
Sam ca prajayai. 

O pure and potent Soma spirit of divinity, 
consecrate and radiate for the generous brilliant 
nobilities and divinities and bring showers of peace and 
joy for heaven and earth and for the human people and 
all other forms of life. 


दिवो cathe शुक्रः पीयूषः सत्ये विधर्मन्वाजी प॑वस्व ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Divo dhartasi sukrah piyusah satye vidharman 
vajl pavasva. 


You are the sustainer of the heavenly regions of 
light, most blissful presence for experience in the yajna 
of truth and divine law, and the ultimate winner of the 
victory. Flow forth, divine Soma, purify and consecrate 
us in the presence. 


पव॑स्व सोम द्युम्नी सुधारो महामवींनामनुं पूर्व्यः ॥ ७ 11 


a Pavasva soma dyumni sudharo mahamavin- 
amanu purvyah. 


O Soma, you are the glory and the grandeur, 


406 RGVEDA 


holy stream and shower, the first and eternal of the 
greatest of the great, pray flow forth in presence, radiate 
and purify as ever before. 


नृभिर्येमानो sar: पूतः श्चर द्विश्वानि मन्द्रः स्वर्वित्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Nrbhiryemano jajnanah piutah ksaradvisvani 
mandrah svarvit. 


Realised by leading lights, manifestive in the 
world and consciousness, presence consecrated in the 
heart core, blessing the world with divinity, ecstatic, 
the presence of heaven itself, that’s what you are, Soma. 


इन्दुः पुनानः प्रजामुंराणः कर द्विर्वानि द्रविणानि a: ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Induh punanah prajamuranah karadvisvani 
dravinani nah. 


Soma, generous, brilliant and blissful spirit of 
divinity, pure and purifying, inspirer and energiser of 
people, may, we pray, generate all wealth and honours 
of the world for us. 


पव॑स्व सोम क्रत्वे दक्चायाऽश्वो न निक्तो वाजी 
धनाय i ९०॥ 


10. Pavasva soma kratve daksaya’svo na nikto vajt 
dhanaya. 


O Soma, as victor of life and divine glory, flow, 
radiate and inspire us like energy itself controlled and 
consecrated for creative and productive holy work, 
expert technique and the production and achievement 
of wealth. 


ad सोतारो ta wale पुनन्ति सोमं महे Tara ९९॥ 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 109 401 


11. Tam te sotaro rasam madaya punanti somam 
mahe dyumnaya. 


O Soma, spirit of divine energy and peace, your 
yajnic celebrants create and consecrate that very blissful 
liquid flow of your ecstatic energy for joy and for the 
great honour and glory of life. 


शिशुं जज्ञानं हरि मृजन्ति पवित्रे सोमं देवेभ्य SST V2 


12. Sisum jajnanam harim mrjanti pavitre somam 
devebhya indum. 


They adore and exalt that Soma spirit of divine 
beauty, peace and glory in their pure heart core, the spirit 
that is creative and lovable, manifestive, saviour and 
inspirer, for the achievement of noble virtues worthy of 
the noble and generous people. 


इन्दुः पविष्ट चारुर्मदायाऽपामुपस्थं कविर्भगाय 23 0 


13. Induh pavista carurmadaya’pamupasthe kavir- 
bhagaya. 


Indu, Soma spirit of refulgent divinity, blissful 
and poetically creative is the omniscient highest 
purifying and saving spirit and power for the sake of 
honour and joy on the basis of one’s own Karmic 
performance. 


बिभर्ति चार्विनद्र॑स्य नाम येन विश्वानि वत्रा जघानं ॥ ९४ ॥ 
14. Bibharti carvindrasya nama yena visvani vrtra 
Jaghana. 


That Soma spirit of beauteous and blissful 
divinity bears the name of Indra, power of omnipotence, 
by virtue of which it overcomes and destroys all the 


408 RGVEDA 
darkness and evil of the world. 
पिबन्त्यस्य विश्वे देवासो गोभिः श्रीतस्य नृभिः सुतस्य॑ ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Pibantyasya visve devaso gobhih 5171452८ nrbhih 
sutasya. 


All the divine nobilities and brilliancies of the 
world drink of this soma sweetness of divine joy realised 
by leading lights of humanity and exalted with the 
beauty and grace of art and imagination. 


प्र सुवानो अक्षाः सहस्रधारस्तिरः पवित्रं वि वारमव्य॑म्‌॥। ee ॥ 

16. Pra suvano aksah sahasradharastirah pavitram 
vi varamavyam. 

The Soma spirit of divinity realised and exalted 

by the celebrant, streaming in a thousand showers, 


reaches and sanctifies the pure, protected and sanctified 
heart of its cherished devotee. 


स वाज्यक्षाः सहस्ररेता अद्धिर्मजानो गोभिः श्रीणानः ॥ ९७॥ 

17. Sa vajyaksah sahasrareta adbhirmrjano gobhih 
Srinanah. 

May that victor spirit of Soma divinity of infinite 

power, realised with meditative Karma and crystallized 


by perception and awareness, manifest in the heart and 
bless us. 


प्र सोम याहीन्द्रस्य कुक्षा नृभिर्येमानो SRA: Ya: ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Pra soma yahindrasya kuksa nrbhiryemano 
adribhih sutah. 


O Soma spirit of divinity, pursued in practice 
by men and realised in name and presence through 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 109 409 


senses, mind and intelligence of the yogis, come and 
abide in the heart core of the soul. 


असं्जिं वाजी तिरः पवित्रमिन्द्र॑य सोम॑ः aeetene: 122 11 


19. Asarji vaji tirah pavitram-indraya somah saha- 
sradharah. 


Soma, the vibrant victor spirit of divinity of 
infinite streams of joy, manifests through the purity of 
heart for the soul’s experience. 


sera मध्वो Tae वृष्णा इन्दुं मदाय ॥ २०॥ 


20. Anjantyenam madhvo rasenendraya vrsna indum 
madaya. 


Celebrants exalt this Soma spirit of beauty and 
bliss with honey sweets of poetic flavour for the joy of 
generous and virile human soul. 


देवेभ्यस्त्वा वृथा ost सेऽ पो वसानं हरिं मरजन्ति ॥ २९॥ 


21. Devebhyastva vrtha pajase ’po vasanam harim 
myrjanti. 


They spontaneously exalt you, Soma, vibrant 
in Prakrti and in Karma, the saviour spirit, for the sages 
and for achievement of strength. 


इन्दुरिन्द्राय तोशते नि तोशते श्रीणान्नुग्रो रिणन्नपः ॥ २२॥ 


22. Indurindraya 10441 ni tosate $rinannugro rina- 
nnapah. 


The mighty self-refulgent Soma spirit of beauty 
and bliss is realised for the soul and, mingling and 
moving with the flow of karma, it is attained for the 
salvation of the soul in ultimate freedom from karma 


410 RGVEDA 


and sufferance. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 110 


Pavamana Soma Devata, Tryaruna Traivrshna, 
Trasadasyu Paurukutsya Rshis 


पर्यू षु प्र धन्व वाज॑सातये परिं वृत्राणि Garter: | 
द्विषस्तरध्या ऋणया न॑ ईयसे ॥ ९॥ 


1. Puryu su pra dhanva vajasataye pari vrtrani 
saksanih. Dvisastaradhya rnaya na tyase. 


O Soma, vibrant Spirit of life, victor over evils 
and darkness, move on with us, inspiring and energising 
us for the achievement of food, energy and 
enlightenment, for elimination of malignity, negativities 
and contradictions, with the obligation that we pay the 
debts and never overdraw on our karmic account. 


अनु हि wat सुतं सोम मदामसि महे aaa । 
वाजी अभि प॑वमान प्र्गाहसे ॥ २॥ 

2: Anu hi tva sutam soma madamasi mahe samar- 
yarajye. Vajan abhi pavamana pra gahase. 


While you are with us at heart, O Soma, spirit 
of constant peaceful life, we rejoice with you in the great 
common-wealth order of governance where, dynamic, 
pure and purifying, you ever advance to victories in 
honour, excellence and glory. 


अजीजनो हि प॑वमान ae विधारे शक्म॑ना पय॑: | 
गोजीरया रंहंमाणः पुर॑न्ध्या ॥ ३॥ 


ai Ajijano hi pavamana suryam vidhare sakmana 
payah. Gojiraya ramhamanah purandhya. 


MANDAL - १ / SUKTA - 110 411 


Soma, pure, purifying and dynamic by your 
essential omnipotence, mighty moving with cosmic 
intelligence and ignition of oceanic particles of Prakrti, 
you create the sun, generate bio-energy in all containing 
space and set in motion the stars and planets of the 
universe. 


अजीजनो अमत Teter ऋतस्य धर्मन्नमृत॑स्य चारुणः | 
सदासरो वाजमच्छा सनिंष्यदत्‌॥ ४ ॥ 


4. 4.1 4710 amrta martyesvan rtasya dharma- 
nnamrtasya carunah. Sadasaro vajamaccha 
sanisyadat. 


Immortal Soma, manifesting in mortal forms, 
radiating in the operative laws of eternal and immortal 
blissful dynamics of existence, vesting in mortals the 
energy and ambition to live, you move on ever in union 
with mortals and immortals. 


snafu हि श्रव॑सा ततर्दिथोत्सं न कं चिंजनपानमक्षिंतम्‌। 
शयीभिर्न भरमाणो गभस्त्योः ॥ ५ ॥ 


a Abhyabhi hi sravasa tatardithotsam na kam 
cijjanapanamaksitam. Saryabhirna bharamano 
gabhastyoh. 


Bearing in hands as if, and maintaining in 
balance by evolutionary powers, you hold and control 
the means of life sustenance, and release them in 
constant flow of food and energy like an inexhaustible 
stream of water for the maintenance and fulfilment of 
common humanity. 


आदीं के चित्पश्य॑मानास आप्यं वसुरुचो दिव्या अभ्यनूषत । 
वारं न देवः सविता व्युंणति ॥ ६ ॥ 


412 RGVEDA 


6. Adim ke cit pas’yamanasa &pyam vasuruco divya 
abhyanusata. Varam na devah savita vyurnute. 


And some men of vision who can perceive the 
adorable presence worthy of attainment, and some 
divinely blest lovers of the life sustainer Soma who 
adore and exalt him, these reveal the mystery and 
majesty of the supreme Soma spirit as the sun reveals 
the world of physical reality. 


त्वे सोम प्रथमा वृक्तबर्हिषो महे वाजाय श्रव॑से धियं दधुः | 
सत्वनो वीर dita चोदय॥७॥ 


i Tve soma prathama vrktabarhiso mahe vajaya 
sravase dhiyam dadhuh. Sa tvam no vira viryaya 
codaya. 


Into you, O Soma, did ancient sages of 
uninvolved mind with yajnic dedication concentrate and 
focus their mind and senses for the attainment of a high 
order of spiritual enlightenment. O Soma spirit of 
divinity that enlightened the sages, pray inspire and 
enlighten us too with that same divine manliness of 
vision and action. 


दिवः पीयूषं पूर्व्यं यदुक्थ्यं महो गाहादिव आ निरधुक्षत । 
इन्द्र॑मभि जाय॑मानं सम॑स्वरन्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Devah piyusam purvyam yadukthyam maho 
gahaddiva a niradhuksata. Indramabhi jaya- 
manam samasvaran. 


That nectar of divinity, eternal and adorable, 
which the ancient sages distilled from the mighty great 
and infinite heaven of light, and which they perceived 
rising for the soul while they sang in adoration, that 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 111 413 
same nectar, O Soma, may shower on us too, we pray. 


अथ यदिमे प॑वमान रोदसी इमा च विश्वा भुवनाभि 
मज्मना । यूथे न निष्ठा gaat वि तिष्ठसे ॥ ९॥ 


ध Adha yadime pavamana rodasi ima ca visva 
bhuvanabhi majmana. Yuthe na nihstha vrsabho 
vi tisthase. 


And then, O pure and purifying Soma, as long 
as these heaven and earth and all these regions of the 
world you wield with your might abide, you abide as 
the master in the centre of the multitude, 


सोमं: पुनानो अव्यये वारे शिशुर्न ्रीव्छन्पव॑मानो अक्षाः | 
सहस््र॑धारः शतवाज इन्दु: ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Somah punano avyaye vare sisurna krilan 
pavamano aksah. Sahasradharah satavaja induh. 


And that long may Soma bless us, pure and 
purifying, vibrant as wind and joyously manifesting 
playfully as a darling spirit in the protective world of 
choice beauty, flowing with a thousand streams and 
commanding a hundred forces of existence, blissful, 
brilliant and gracious as it is. 


एष पुनानो मधुमां ऋतावेन्द्रायेन्दुः पवते स्वादुरूर्मिः । 
वाजसनिंर्वरिवोविद्ध॑योधाः 1220 


11. Esa punano madhuman rtavendrayenduh pavate 
svadururmih. Vajasanir-varivovid vayodhah. 


This Soma, pure and purifying, honeyed 
presence, ruling lord of truth and eternal law, bright and 
beautiful, treasurehold of power and sustenance, master 
of wealth and honour, mighty warrior and victor, 


414 RGVEDA 


pervades and vibrates as the sweetest presence in waves 
of ecstasy. 


स प॑वस्व सह॑मानः पृतन्यून्त्सेधत्रक्षां स्यपं दुर्गहाणि । 
स्वायुधः सांसह्वन्त्सोम श्रन्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Sa pavasva sahamanah prtanyunut-sedhan 
raksamsyapa durgahani. Svayudhah sasahvant- 
soma satrun. 


O Soma, spirit of power, patience and fortitude, 
wielder of mighty arms, flow pure, protect and purify 
us, warding off fighting forces of evil, eliminating 
difficulties, and challenging and defeating enemies. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 111 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Ananata Paruchhepi Rshi 


अया रुचा हरिण्या पुनानो विश्वा द्वेषांसि तरति स्वयुग्व॑ भिः 
सूरो न स्वयुग्वंभिः। धारां सुतस्य॑ रोचते पुनानो अरुषो 
हरिः । विश्वा यद्रूपा प॑रियात्युक्व॑भिः सप्तास्येधित्ऋ - 
क्व॑भिः॥९॥ ` 


1. Aya ruca harinya punano visva dvesamsi tarati 
svayugvabhih suro na svayugvabhih. Dhara 
sutasya rocate punano aruso harih. Visva yadrupa 
pariyatyrkvabhih saptasyebhir-rkvabhih. 


This Soma spirit of the fighting force of divinity, 
protecting and purifying by its own victorious lustre of 
innate powers, overcomes all forces of jealousy and 
enmity as the sun dispels all darkness with its own rays 
of light. The stream of its radiance, realised and 
purifying, shines beautiful and blissful. The lustrous 
saviour spirit which pervades all existent forms of the 


MANDAL - 9/ SUKTA - 111 415 


world, goes forward pure and purifying with seven notes 
of its exalting voice and seven rays of light and seven 
pranic energies expressive of its mighty force. 


त्वं त्यत्प॑णीनां विदो वसु सं मातृभिर्म॑र्जयसि स्व आ दमं 
ऋ तस्य॑ धीतिभिर्दमे । परावतो न साम तद्यत्र रण॑न्ति 
eta: । त्रिधातुशथिररुषीभिर्वयो' दधे रोच॑मानो वयो 
दधे॥२॥ 


2. Tvam tyat paninam vido vasu sam matrbhir- 
marjayasi sva a dama rtasya dhitibhirdame. 
Paravato na sama tadyatra rananti dhitayah. 
Tridhatubhir-arusibhir-vayo dadhe rocamano 
vayo dadhe. 


You win the wealth of advantage over hard 
bargainers in exchange and, in trade and commerce, turn 
deficit into surplus and make it shine with native 
resources in your own home, yes with open, honest, 
yajnic transactions of law and truth as on the vedi of 
yajna. Songs of praise and appreciation from afar are 
heard where expert organisers and workers rejoice in 
action. Bright and brilliant Soma spirit of peace holds 
life and sustenance in hand by shining wealth of matter, 
mind and motion in open peaceable circulation, yes 
Soma holds life and sustenance in hand, under control, 
and provides it freely. 


gates प्रदिशं याति चेकितत्सं रश्मिभिर्यतते दर्शतो रथो 
दैव्यो दर्शतो रथ॑ः । अग्म॑न्ुक्थानि Wad जैत्राय हर्षयन्‌ | 
वज्रश्च यद्धव॑थो अनपच्युता समत्स्वनंपच्युता ॥ ३ ॥ 


416 RGVEDA 


a. Purvamanu pradisam yati cekitat sam rasmi-bhir- 
yatate darsato ratho daivyo darsato rathah. 
Agmannukthani paumsyendram jaitraya harsa- 
yan. Vajrasca yadbhavatho anapacyuta sama- 
tsvanapacyuta. 


Intelligent and well aware, Soma warrior goes 
forward in the line and to the destination in consonance 
and continuation of living tradition of law and custom, 
his glorious divine chariot is directed by rays of light 
and vibrant enthusiasm, thus the glorious chariot goes 
on. Songs of praise in honour of the brave resound, 
exalting Indra, the ruling soul of the order, for the 
victory, when the ruling soul and the fighting force both 
become the one thunderbolt infallible in battles, verily 
one invincible power in battle. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 112 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Shishu Angirasa Rshi 
नानानं ar at धियो वि व्रतानि जनानाम्‌ । तर्षा Ss St 
भिषग्ब्रह्या सुन्वन्तं मिच्छ cia teat परि स्रव ॥ ९॥ 
il, Nananam va uno dhiyo vi vrtani jananam. Taksa 
ristam rutam bhisag brahma sunvantami- 
cchatindrayendo pari srava. 


Different are our thoughts and ways of thinking, 
different are people’s acts, plans and commitments. The 
maker wants to repair the broken, the physician looks 
for the sick, the Vedic scholar loves the maker of soma 
and soma yajna, and you, O Soma, spirit of life’s joy, 
flow for Indra, soul of the system. 


जर॑तीभिरोष॑धीभिः पर्णेभिः शकुनानांम्‌। कमारो अश्म॑भि- 
दयुधिर्हिर॑ण्यवन्तमिच्छ तीन्द्रायेन्दो oR Sa ॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - १ / SUKTA - 112 417 


2. Jaratibhir-osadhibhih parnebhih sakunanam. 
Karmaro asmabhir-dyubhir-hiranyavantam- 
icchatin-drayendo pari srava. 


With ripe herbs, bird’s feathers and with stones 
and flames, the smith makes the arrows and seeks the 
man of gold who can buy. O bright and sparkling Soma, 
you go forward with Indra, ruler of the social order. 


कारुरहं ततो भिषगुंपलप्रक्षिणीं नना । नानाधियो वसूयवोऽ 
नु गांव तस्थिमेन््रायिन्दो परिं स्रव ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. Karuraham tato bhisagupalapraksini nana. 
Nanadhiyo vasuyavo’nu ga iva tasthimendra- 
yendo pari srava. 


I am an artist, maker, craftsman, father, a 
physician, mother, a miller. We are of different mind, 
competence and interests and in search of wealth and 
sustenance we go in different directions like the senses 
and yet stay together. You, O Soma, flow for Indra, 
centre and soul of the system. 


अश्वो doa सुखं रथं हसनामुपमन्त्रिणः । शेपो रोम॑ण्वन्तौ 
भदौ वारिन्मण्डूकं इच्छ तीन्द्रायेन्दो oR स्रव ।॥ ४॥ 


4. Asvo volha sukham ratham hasanamupamantri- 
nah. Sepo romanvantau bhedau varinmanduka 
icchatindrayendo pari srava. 


The motive power needs a smooth carrier, close 
friends in concert love fun, the beautician wants the 
cosmetics of her choice, and the vibrant sensitive loves 
to appreciate and value the subtlest distinctions between 
the seductive sweets and elevating beauties of life in 


418 RGVEDA 


experience. O Soma, spirit of peace and joy of life, you 
flow for the soul’s bliss. (That’s what I am. I am the 
soul. I love Soma.) 


Mandala 9/Sukta 113 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Kashyapa Maricha Rshi 


शर्यणावति सोममिन्द्रः पिबतु वृत्रहा as cals आत्मनि 
herd महदिन्द्रौयेन्दो परिं स्रव ॥ ९॥ 


iB Saryanavati somamidrah pibatu vrtraha. Balam 
dadhana atmani karisyan viryam mahad indra- 
yendo pari srava. 


In the order of power and prosperity, let Indra, 
ruler soul of the order, dispelling darkness and 
destroying evil, wielding the power and creating super- 
strength and lustre in the self, enjoy, protect and promote 
the honour and glory of the order to the heights of 
excellence. O Spirit of cosmic beauty, glory and grace, 
flow and radiate in the service of the glory of divinity 
higher and higher. 


आ प॑वस्व दिशां पत आर्जीकात्सोम dlga: | ऋतवाकेनं 
सत्येनं seen तप॑सा सुत इन्द्र॑येन्दो परिं स्रव ॥ २॥ 


0.0 A pavasva disam pata arjikat soma midhvah. 
Rtavakena satyena sraddhaya tapasa suta indra- 
yendo pari srava. 


O Indu, Soma, spirit of power and glory, master 
ruler and protector of the quarters of space, virile and 
generous, realised with faith and relentless austere 
discipline in pursuance of the Vedic voice, come from 
the depths of nature and simplicity of eternal law, and 


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 113 419 


flow, pure and purifying, for Indra, the ruling soul, in 
the service of divinity. 


पर्जन्य॑वृब्दं महिषं तं सूर्य॑स्य दुहिताभ॑रत्‌। तं गन्धर्वाः 
प्रत्य॑गृभ्णान्‌ तं सोमे रसमाद॑धुरिन्द्र॑येन्दो परि स्रव ॥ ३ ॥ 


3: Parjanyavrddham mahisam tam suryasya 
duhitabharat. Tam gandharvah pratyagrbhnan 
tam some rasamadadhurindrayendo pari srava. 


That Soma, glory of life, growing great as the 
cloud by the cloud, daughter of the sun, the dawn and 
divine faith, brings to the earth. The forces that sustain 
the earth take and fill that glory of soma with beauty 
and joy of life. O Indu, spirit of power and grace of 
glory, flow for the power and majesty of Indra in the 
service of divinity. 


ऋतं Ada सत्यं वदन्त्सत्यकर्मन्‌ seat वद॑न्त्सोम 
राजन्धात्रा सोम परिष्कृत इन्द्रायेन्दो oR स्रव ।॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Rtam vadann-rtadyumna satyam vadant-satya- 
karman. Sraddham vadant-soma rajan dhatra 
soma pariskrta indrayendo pari srava. 


O Soma, spirit of glory and majesty of the order, 
great with the light and lustre of truth, reflecting the 
truth and rectitude of the order, speaking the truth, doing 
things aright, reflecting divine faith in action and policy, 
shining bright and ruling, purified and consecrated by 
the universal divine ordainer, O Soma, flow for Indra, 
soul of the system in the service of divinity. 


सत्यमुग्रस्य बृहतः सं Gata संस्रवाः 1a य॑न्ति रसिनो 
रसाः: पुनानो ब्रह्मणा हर इन्द्र॑येन्दो oR स्रव ॥ ५ ॥ 


420 RGVEDA 


5. Satyamugrasya brhatah sam sravanti samsra- 
vah. sam yanti rasino rasah punano brahmana 
hara indrayendo pari srava. 


Together and in truth flow the laws of infinite 
potent majesty. Beauties and graces of gracious blissful 
divinity flow together delicious sweet. O Indu, saviour 
spirit of beauty and joy, purified and energised by the 
spirit of Infinity, flow for the sake of Indra, ruling soul 
of the system in the service of divinity. 


यत्रं ब्रह्मा प॑वमान च्छन्दस्यां ३ वाचं ae oreo are 
महीयते सोमेनानन्दं जनयन्निन्द्रायेन्दो oR स्रव ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yatra brahma pavamana chandasyam vacam 
vadan. Gravna some mahtyate somenanandam 
jJanayannindrayendo pari srava. 


Where the sage, pure at heart and purifying, 
chanting the sacred word of the Veda grows to spiritual 
dignity by the control of mind and senses, there, creating 
the joy of life by the experience of divine ecstasy, O 
Spirit of glory and majesty, flow for Indra, the ruling 
soul in the service of divinity. 


यत्र ज्योतिरजस्रं यस्पिंल्ल्ोके स्वर्हितम्‌। तस्पिन्मां atte 
पवमानाऽमृते लोके अक्षित इन्द्रायेन्दो oR स्रव ॥ ७॥ 


7. Yatra jyotir-ajasram yasmin loke svarhitam. 
Tasmin mam dhehi pavamana’mrte loke aksita 
indrayendo pari srava. 


Where light is eternal, where divine bliss is 
vested in life itself, in that immortal imperishable haven 
of freedom and bliss place me, O Spirit of beauty, 
majesty and grace, and flow for the sake of Indu, soul 


MANDAL - 9/ SUKTA - 113 421 


of the system I love and admire. 


यत्र राजा वैवस्वतो यत्रावरोधंनं fea: 
यत्रामूर्यहतीरापस्तत्र मामसुतं कृधीन्द्रायेन्दो परिं स्रव ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yatra raja vaivasvato yatravarodhanam divah. 
Yatramuryahvatirapastatra mamamrtam krdhi- 
ndrayendo pari srava. 


Where eternal Time is the ruler supreme, where 
light and bliss is self- contained eternally without 
obstruction of mutability, where those mighty streams 
of bliss flow within constant Infinity, there, O Soma, 
place me immortal. Indu, O spirit of joy, generosity and 
grace, flow for Indra, soul of the system of existence in 
the service of divinity. 


यत्रानुकामं चरणं frie त्रिदिवे fea: 1 ल्लोका यत्र 
ज्योतिंष्मन्तस्तच्र माममृतं कृधीन्द्रायेन्दो UR स्रव ॥ ९॥ 


a, Yatranukamam caranam trinake tridive divah. 
Loka yatra jyotismantas-tatra mamamrtam 
krdhindrayendo pari srava. 


Where you move free as you wish, in the highest 
paradisal bliss, in the highest heavenly light, yourself 
the light of Being itself, where all worlds and all people 
are vested in light divine, there in that heaven of bliss, 
O Soma, place me immortal. O Indu, spirit of light and 
bliss, flow for Indra, the soul that I am, for the soul that 
is supreme. 


यत्र कामां निकामाश्च यत्र ब्रध्नस्य॑ fasdy स्वधा च 
यत्र तृर्िंश्च तत्र॑ माममृतं कृधीन्द्रायेन्दो UR स्रव ॥ ९०॥ 


422 RGVEDA 


10. Yatra kama nikamasca yatra bradhnasya vista- 
pam. Svadha ca yatra trptisca tatra mamamrtam 
krdhindrayendo pari srava. 


Where all desire is beyond desire, where 
knowledge is climactic supreme, where faith, self- 
sacrifice, surrender and the self itself is fulfilment, there 
in that heaven of peace, place me immortal. O Indu, 
spirit of universal eternal peace, flow for Indra, the soul 
of existence. 


यत्रानन्दाश्च मोदाश्च मुद: प्रमुद आसंते। काम॑स्य यत्राप्ताः 
कामास्तत्र माममृतं कृधीन्द्र॑येन्दो UR San ९९॥ 

11. Yatranandasca modasca mudah pramuda asate. 
Kamasya yatraptah kamastatra mamam-rtam 
krdhindrayendo pari srava. 


Where all orders of bliss, all forms of pleasure, 
all delights and ecstasies abide subsistent in bliss divine, 
where all desires and ambitions are subsumed in 
fulfilment, there in that heaven of eternal joy and 
fulfilment, place me immortal. O Indu, flow for Indra, 
ultimate soul of existence. 


Mandala 9/Sukta 114 
Pavamana Soma Devata, Kashyapa Maricha Rshi 


य इन्दोः पव॑मानस्याऽनु धामान्यक्रमीत्‌। तमाहुः सुप्रजा 
इति यस्ते सोमाविंधन्मन इन्द्रायेन्दो oR स्रव ।॥ ९॥ 
il; Ya Indoh pavamanasya’nu dhamanyakramit. 


Tamahuh supraja iti yaste somavidhanmana 
indrayendo pari srava. 


One who rises and lives upto the presence, rules 


MANDAL - १ / SUKTA - 114 423 


and laws of vibrant omnipresent Soma, light of the 
world, they say, he is the man, fulfilled in the self and 
family. O Soma, spirit of light and joy divine, vibrate 
and bless the man who dedicates his mind and sense, 
will and action to your presence and law. 


ऋषे मन्त्रकृतां स्तोमैः कश्य॑पोद्रर्धयण्िरंः। art नमस्य 
राजानं यो जज्ञे वीरुधां पतिरिन्द्र॑येन्दो परिं Sa २॥ 


2. Rse mantrakrtam stomaih kasyapodvardhayan 
girah. Somam namasya rajanam yo jajne viru- 
dham patir-indrayendo pari srava. 


O lord omniscient, cosmic seer, sustainer of life, 
the sage who sublimates and raises his songs of praise 
with hymns realised in the essence by the Vedic seers, 
and, having paid homage to self-refulgent ruling Soma, 
rises in the self-awareness of divinity is divine. O Indu, 
lord of light, sustainer of nature, vibrate and flow in 
your presence for such a soul and bless him. 


सप्त दिशो नानासूर्याः aa होतार ऋत्विजं: । देवा आदित्या 
ये सप्त तेभिः सोमाभि ter न इन्द्रायेन्दो परि स्रव ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. Sapta digo nanasuryah sapta hotara rtvijah. Deva 
aditya ye sapta tebhih somabhi raksa na indra- 
yendo pari srava. 


Seven are the directions, regions of the universe, 
many many suns, seven priests and seasonal yajakas of 
nature, bright divinities, suns and stars, all the seven 
orders of existence that there are, with all these, pray 
protect and promote us. O Soma, let the divine power 
and presence vibrate and flow for Indra, the soul of 
humanity. 


424 RGVEDA 


ad usted हविस्तेन॑ सोमाभि Yer A: 1 अरातीवा Ar 
न॑स्तारीन्मो च॑ नः किं चनाम॑मदिन्द्र॑येन्दो oR स्रव ॥ ४॥ 


4. Yat te rajanchrtam havistena somabhi raksa nah. 
Arativa ma nastarinmo ca nah kim canamamad- 
indrayendo pari srava. 


O Soma, spirit of light and life of the universe, 
whatever your ripest gifts of knowledge and power, with 
those, pray, bless and promote us. Let no enemy oppress 
us. Let none hurt anything of ours. O Indu, spirit of 
light and bliss, may your presence flow for the soul and 
promote the life and spirit of humanity. 


॥ इति नवमं मण्डलकम्‌ ॥ 


425 


MANDALA 10 


Mandala 10/Sukta 1 
Agni Devata, Trita Aptya Rshi 


अग्र बृहन्नुषसामूर्ध्वो अ॑स्थान्निर्जगन्वान्तम॑सो ज्योतिषागात्‌। 
BATT रुशता Lay आ जातो विश्वा सदयान्यप्राः ॥ ९॥ 


if Agre brhannusasamurdhvo asthannirjaganvan 
tamaso jyotisagat. Agnirbhanuna ruSsata svanga 
a jato visva sadmanyaprah. 

There on the eastern horizon, with the first lights 
of the dawn emerging out of darkness, rises up the sun, 
mighty Agni, great and glorious with radiant light, and 
as it rises it covers and lights up all regions of the world. 


स जातो गर्भो असि रोद॑स्योरगरे चारुर्विभरंत ओष॑धीषु । 
चित्रः शिशुः परि तमांस्यक्तून्प्र मातृभ्यो अधि कनिं- 
क्रदद्राः॥ २॥ 


2. Sa jato garbho asi rodasyoragne carurvibhrta 
osadhisu. Citrah sisuh pari tamamsyaktun 
pra matrbhyo adhi kanikradadgah. 


Agni, born of the womb of earth and heaven 
covered in darkness over night, you are beautiful, lovely 
as a child and wonderful, and as you rise over night and 
darkness, you radiate your rays over mother heaven and 
earth proclaiming them bright, and immediately you are 
received and held over them in the herbs and trees for 
life. 


426 RGVEDA 


विष्णुरित्था प॑र ममंस्य विद्वाञ्जातो बृहन्नभि पाति तृतीय॑म्‌। 
आसा यद॑स्य पयो अक्रत स्वं सचेतसो अभ्यर्चन्त्यत्र ॥ २॥ 


Sy Visnurittha paramamasya vidvanjato brhannabhi 
pati trttyam. Asa yadasya payo akrata svam 
sacetaso abhyarcantyatra. 


Omnipresent Agni, Vishnu, thus risen as the sun, 
attains to its third and supreme state of the expansive 
light of infinite divinity which it radiates, protects and 
promotes. Those wide-awake sages who receive this 
divine light energy through direct presence and 
internalise it celebrate it in song and worship it as the 
nectar gift of divinity here on earth. 


अतं उ त्वा पितुभृतो जनित्रीरन्नावृधं प्रति चरन्त्यन्नैः । ता ई 
प्रत्यपि पुन॑र न्यरूपा असि त्वं विक्षु मानुषीषु होता ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Ata u tva pitubhrto janitrirannavrdham prati 
carantyannaih. Ta im pratyesi punaranyarupa 
asi tvam viksu manusisu hota. 


And you, Agni, who bear and augment the food 
for life, life creative and food productive agents of nature 
and humanity, bearing food for you, serve you in 
response to you, and as they feed you, you reach them 
again while they are in different form, and thus you are 
the leading power in the yajnic cycle of life among 
nature and the human people and communities. 


होतारं चित्ररथमध्वरस्य यज्ञस्य॑यन्ञस्य केतं Solr प्रत्यर्धिं 
देवस्यदेवस्य Wat ्चिया त्व थिमतिंथिं जनानाम्‌ ५ ॥ 
5. Hotaram citraratham-adhvarasya yajnasya- 


yajnasya ketum rusantam. Pratyardhim devasya 
devasya mahna Sriya tvagnim-atithim jananam. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 1 427 


Agni, high priest of all non-violent and 
inviolable yajna, all creative and productive activity in 
nature and humanity, moving forward by wondrous 
beautiful chariot, blazing banner-bearer and pioneer of 
progress, cyclic augmenter and promoter of every 
brilliant and generous divinity in nature and humanity, 
is loved, cherished and reverenced of humanity by virtue 
of its divine grandeur, generosity and grace: this Agni 
we worship and serve by yajna. 


सतु वस्त्राण्यध पेछनानि वसानो अथि्नाभां aferea: 1 
अरुषो जातः पद Sala: पुरोहितो राजन्यक्षीह देवान्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sa tu vastranyadha pesanani vasano agnirnabha 
prthivyah. Aruso jatah pada ilayah purohito rajan 
yakstha devan. 


Agni, wearing different manifestations, 
assuming different modes of form and function, holding 
on at the centre hold of the earth, burning in the vedi, 
arising on top of the world, bright and beautiful, at the 
heart of clouds flashing with lights of thunder, present 
in advance of evolution, present all time upfront, high 
priest of cosmic yajna, ruling supreme, pray join all 
divinities of nature and humanity, bring them here and 
bless us. 


आ हि द्यावापृथिवी sig उभे cat पुत्रो न मातरा ततन्थ । 
प्र याह्यच्छोशतो यविष्ठाऽथा de सहस्येह देवान्‌ ॥। ७॥ 
ee A hi dyavaprthivi agna ubhe sada putro na matara 


tatantha. Pra yahyacchosato yavistha’tha vaha 
sahasyeha devan. 


Agni, you always pervade and illuminate both 


428 RGVEDA 


mother earth and heaven as a saviour child illuminates 
both parents at heart with elation. Go forth ever strong, 
ever youthful climactic power and presence bright and 
beautiful, mighty forbearing, come to the loving 
celebrants and bring in all that is divine, here and now. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 2 
Agni Devata, Trita Aptya Rshi 


पिप्रीहि देवां उशतो य॑विष्ठ fast seco aad यजेह | 
ये दैव्या ऋत्विजस्तेभिरगने त्वं होतुंणामस्यायंलजिष्ठः ॥ ९ ॥ 


Ly Piprthi devan uSato yavistha vidvan rtunrr-tupate 
yajeha. Ye daivya rtvijastebhiragne tvam hotrna- 
masayayjisthah. 


Ever youthful Agni, cosmic sun, omnipresent 
all-reaching all pervasive power and presence, ordainer 
and maintainer of the seasons of time and nature, fulfil 
the loving and aspiring seekers, dedicated scholars and 
divine powers, and be with energy they should have. O 
self-refulgent divine energy, light and intelligence, of 
all the divine powers and presences, stars and planets, 
which together carry on the dynamics of cosmic yajna, 
you are the closest, highest and most adorable power 
worthy of attainment. 


वेषिं होत्रमुत पोत्रं जनानां मन्धातासि द्रविणोदा ऋतावा । 
स्वाहा वयं कृणवामा हवीं षि देवो देवान्य॑जत्वथिरर्हन्‌ ॥। २ ॥ 


2. Vesi hotramuta potram jananam mandhatasi 
dravinoda rtava. Svaha vayam krnavama havimsi 
devo devan yajatvagnir-arhan. 


Agni, you produce, procure, energise and 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 2 429 


provide all yajnic inputs, refinements and purifying 
agents of life for humanity at the individual and social 
level for life’s maintenance and promotion. You are the 
harbinger of intelligence and knowledge and giver of 
wealth and honour, and you are the observer and 
presiding power of holy rites, laws and seasons of time 
and nature. We enact the yajna with holy inputs and 
with truth and honey of thought, word and deed, and 
pray may divine and adorable fire carry the fragrance 
to the divinities for human fulfilment. 


आ देवानामपि पन्थामगन्म यच्छक्नवाम तदनु प्रवो्टहुम्‌। 
अभिर्विदान्त्स यजात्सेदु होता सो अ॑ध्वरान्त्स ऋ तून्कल्प- 
याति॥ ३॥ 


६ A devanamapi pantham-aganma yacchaknavama 
tadanu pravolhum. Agnirvidvantsa yajat sedu 
hota so adhvarantsa rtun kalpaydati. 


Let us follow the path of the divinities, sagely 
scholars, stars and planets as far as we can and do that 
in proper order so that we may be able to continue: Agni 
knows, the scholar knows, the sun is the base of 
knowledge in relation to its systemic position, that is 
the high priest of the solar system, that controls the 
harmonious movements of the planets, that ordains the 
pattern of the seasons. 


(Let the sun be the base of our knowledge of 
the stars and planets in our pursuit of yajnic astronomy. 
Similarly let the sagely scholar who knows the science 
of yajna be our guide in our studies and our actions.) 


430 RGVEDA 


यद्वो वयं dare anh विदुषां देवा अविदुष्टरासः | 
अगिष्टद्विशुवमा पुंणाति विद्वान्येभिर्द्वां ऋतुभिः कल्प- 
याति ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Yadvo vayam praminama vratani vidusam deva 
avidustarasah. Agnistad-visvama prnati vidvan 
yebhirdevan rtubhih kalpayadti. 


And if we, being ignorant and deficient, neglect 
or transgress or overstep the laws and disciplines of 
those who know, then, O divinities, Agni, the sun, the 
sage, being abundant and graciously fulfilling, makes 
all that up and saves us by those very powers and actions 
in time and seasons by which it keeps the sages and 
divinities in the systemic order. 


यत्पाकत्रा मन॑सा दीनदक्षा न य॒ज्ञस्य॑ मन्वते vette: 1 
अभिषटन्द्ोतां क्रतुविद्विंजानन्यजिंषठो देवां ऋतुशो य॑जाति ॥ ५ ॥ 


श Yat pakatra manasa dinadaksa na yajnasya man- 
vate martyasah. A gnistaddhota kratuvid-vijanan 
yajistho devan rtuso yajati. 


And if we mortals, either because of immature 
mind or poor faith and want of expertise, do not know 
and do not understand and appreciate the way the divine 
solar yajna is going on, even so Agni, the high priest of 
that yajna, knowing, ordering and conducting that yajna, 
the most adorable pervasive all reaching partner, carries 
on the yajna of heavenly bodies in order according to 
the time and seasons. 


विश्वेषां ह्य॑ध्वराणामनींकं चित्रं केतं जनिता त्वा जजानं। 
स आ य॑जस्व नृवतीरनु क्षाः स्पार्हं sa: श्चुमतीर्विंश्व- 
ज॑न्याः॥ ६॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 2 431 


6. Visvesam hyadhvaranamanikam citram ketum 
Janita tva jajana. Sa ठ yajasva nrvatiranu ksah 
sparha isah ksumatir-visvajanyah. 


The creator of all the stars and planets of the 
universe moving in their orbits created you too, O Agni, 
O sun, wonderful pioneer and commander of the solar 
system. Pray come, join us and give us lands and earths 
blest with noble people, and bring us cherished foods, 
energies and knowledges, and let there be showers of 
rain giving us abundance of food and fertility for the 
life species of the world. 


यं त्वा द्यावापृथिवी यं त्वापस्त्वष्टा यं त्वां सुजनिमा AST | 
पन्थामनु प्रविद्वान्पितूयाणं द्युमद॑गरे समिधानो वि wife ७॥ 


7. Yam tva dyavaprthivi yam tvapas-tvasta yam tva 
sujanima jajana. Panthamanu pravidvan pitrya- 
nam dyumadagne samidhano vi bhahi. 


O Agni, you whom the heavens bear as sun and 
light, the middle regions bear as wind and electricity, 
and the earth bears as fire and magnetic energy, whom 
Tvashta, cosmic maker of all forms of existence, 
fashioned forth and brought into existence, you, O Agni, 
O Sun, knower of the paths of father Time and mother 
Niyati, cosmic intelligence, and of the Karma and fate 
of ancestors, children of time, you, lighted in the vedi 
and blazing in the heavens, pray shine on us and 
illuminate the paths of life for us. 


432 RGVEDA 


Mandala 10/Sukta 3 
Agni Devata, Trita Aptya Rshi 


इनो राजन्नरतिः aficat रौद्रो cata agar अदर्शि । 
चिकिद्धि भाति भासा बुंहताऽसिंक्नीमेति रुशंतीमपा- 
ज॑न्‌॥ ९॥ 


I; Ino rajannaratih samiddho raudro daksaya susu- 
man adarsi. Cikidvi bhati bhasa brhata’ siknimeti 
rusatimapajan. 


Mighty self-refulgent sun, Agni, constant master 
illuminator of heaven and earth, blazing and 
commanding terrible power, abundant with life giving 
energy, is seen on high, energising life for intelligent 
and industrious work on earth and shining with 
boundless light, and then relinquishing the day light 
and projecting the light far away ahead, passes on to 
the area of erstwhile darkness of the night. (Then night 
follows the day here and the day follows night there.) 


कृष्णां यदेनीमभि वर्प॑सा भूज्जनयन्योषां बृहतः पितुजम्‌। 
ऊर्ध्व भानु सूर्यस्य स्तभायन्दिवो वसुभिररतिर्वि भाति॥ २॥ 


pa Krsnam yadenimabhi varpasa bhujjanayan yosam 
brhatah piturjam. Urdhvam bhanum suryasya sta- 
bhayan divo vasubhir-aratirvi bhdati. 


Then again, overcoming the dark passage of the 
night with its illumination of light and manifesting the 
youthful daughter of great and vast heaven bearing the 
light of the sun up above, the same Agni shines with 
heavenly light constantly for the day. 


भद्रो भद्रया सच॑मान आगात्स्वसारं जारो अभ्येति AVAL | 
सु्रकेतेर््युभि र िर्वितिषठचुशद्धिर्वर्णै रभि राममस्थात्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 3 433 


a Bhadro bhadraya sacamana agat svasaram jaro 
abhyeti pascat. Supraketair-dyubhir-agnir- 
vitisthan rusabhir-varnair-abhi ramamasthdat. 


The sun of auspicious light, dispeller of darkness 
of the night, has come up close at the heels of its love, 
the beauteous holy dawn now on the run on its own and 
thus Agni, prevailing with beautiful sun shine of the 
morning holds off the darkness for the day. 


अस्य यामासो बहतो न वगरूनिन्धाना sat: सख्युः foreret । 
ईड्य॑स्य वृष्णो बृहतः स्वासो भामासो यामंन्नक्तव॑ज्चि- 
क्त्रि ॥ ४॥ 


4. Asya yamaso brhato na vagnun-indhana agneh 
sakhyuh Ssivasya. Idyasya vrsno brhatah svaso 
bhamaso yamann-aktavas-cikitre. 


The mighty floods of the solar light version of 
this Agni, bursting forth like thunderous explosions of 
the voice of kindly, friendly, adorable, potent and 
sublime power, are fair and blissful reflections of the 
eternal Spirit, the Purusha, for the man of vision and 
knowledge on way to divinity. 


स्वना न यस्य भामासः पव॑न्ते रोच॑मानस्य बहतः Bea: | 
ज्येष्ठे भिर्यस्तेजिं छः क्रीव्युमद्धिर्वर्षिं हेभिभरनुभिर्नश्च॑ति 
द्याम्‌॥ ५॥ 


39, Svana na yasya bhamasah pavante rocamanasya 
brhatah sudivah. Jyesthebhir-yastejisthaih krilu- 
madbhir-varsisthebhir-bhanubhir-naksati dyam. 


Agni, beauteous and blissful, mighty and 
sublime presence whose brilliant rays and reflections 


434 RGVEDA 


radiate, resound and flow like roaring winds and 
thunderous lightning illumines the heavens with its 
highest lustre and with its sportive and most potent 
splendours reaches the summit of refulgent space. 


अस्य शुष्मासो ददृशानप॑वेर्जेह मानस्य स्वनय्नियुद्धिः। 
प्रलरेभिर्यो रुशद्धिर्देवत॑ंमो वि रेभद्धिररतिभरति विभ्वां ॥ ६॥ 


6. Asya Susmaso dadrsanapaver-jehamanasya 
svanayan niyudbhih. Pratnebhiryo rusadbhir- 
devatamo vi rebhadbhir-aratir-bhati vibhva. 


The mighty radiations of this solar Agni, 
universally vibrant and armed with thunder, roar with 
the winds while this divinest and most refulgent 
universal presence pervades and relentlessly energises 
the universe with its eternal, brilliant and resounding 
reflections and vibrations. 


स आ afar महिन आ च॑ सत्सि दिवस्पुंथिव्योर॑रतिर्यु- 
act: | अभिः सुतुकः सुतुकेभिरश्वै रभ॑स्वद्द्री रभ॑स्वां 
एह ग॑म्याः ॥ ७॥ 


1, Sa a vaksi mahi na @ ca satsi divasprthivyor- 
aratiryuvatyoh. Agnih sutukah sutukebhirasvai 
rabhasvadbhi rabhasvan eha gamyah. 


Agni, bring us great wealth, honour and light 
of the world. Be with us on the yajna vedi, being radiant, 
vibrant and ever on the move between the joint world 
of heaven and earth. Agni, commanding light, 
illumination and instant motion, eloquent by expression, 
come by the waves of energy with the voice of thunder, 
come and bless us here on the vedi. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 4 435 


Mandala 10/Sukta 4 
Agni Devata, Trita Aptya Rshi 


प्रत afar प्र त॑ इयर्मि मन्म भुवो यथा वन्द्यो नो हवेषु । 
धन्व॑न्निव प्रपा असि त्वमग्र इयक्षवे पूरवे Wa राजन्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


I. Pra te yaksi pra ta iyarmi manma bhuvo yatha 
vandyo no havesu. Dhanvanniva prapa asi 
tvamagnan iyaksave purave pratna rajan. 


Agni, eternal, self-refulgent and universal spirit 
of light, I join you in yajnic self surrender, I send up my 
thoughts and prayers to you so that you may be always 
with us, adorable and present, in our yajnas and joint 
battles of life. Just as rain is the shower of bliss in the 
desert, so you are the giver of fulfilment to the yajnic 
celebrant and the needy supplicant. 


यं त्वा जनासो अभि संचरन्ति me sonia asi य॑विष्ठ। 
दूतो देवानामसि मत्यीनामन्तर्महाँश्च॑रसि रोचनेन ।॥ २ ॥ 


2, Yam tva janaso abhi samcaranti gava usnamiva 
vrajam yavistha. Duto devanamasi martyanam- 
antarmahanscarasi rocanena. 


To you, most youthful Agni, people move and 
they join you for bliss as cows move to the warm stall 
to escape the cold outside. You are the saviour and 
vibrant presence at the heart of divinities and mortal 
humanity, and by your radiant presence and grandeur 
you exist and vibrate in every thing. 


शिशुं न त्वा जेन्यं वर्धयन्ती माता बिभति सचनस्यर्माना । 
धनोरधि प्रवता यासि हर्यज्जिगीषसे पशुरिवावसृष्टः ॥ ३ ॥ 


436 RGVEDA 


Di Sisum na tva jenyam vardhayanti mata bibharti 
sacanasyamana. Dhanoradhi pravata yasi harya- 
njigisase pasurivavasrstah. 


Just as a mother nurtures a promising child, 
loving it and raising it, so does mother earth hold and 
bear you, victorious, as fire and magnetic energy, 
augmenting you and loving to be with you, and you, 
radiating through the middle space, rush down, loving 
and ambitious to win and excel, like a captive animal 
set free. 


मूरा अमूर न वयं चिकित्वो महित्वमंग्े wag वित्से । 
रये वत्रिश्चरंति जिह्ययादव्रेरिद्यतें यु वतिं विश्पतिः 
PLUS ॥ 


4. Mura amura na vayam cikitvo mahitvamagne 
tvamanga vitse. Saye vavriscarati Jihvayadan 
rerihyate yuvatim visapatih san. 


O wise one, enlightened presence, light and fire 
of knowledge and energy, we are ignorant, but you know 
and bear your grandeur, dear loving Agni. You pervade, 
vibrate and radiate, lying immanent in various forms, 
touch, lick and consume with your flames and rays 
various assimilative forms of existence, being master 
of the world. 


prasad सन॑यासु नव्यो वने तस्थौ पलितो धूमकेतुः | 
अस्नातापो वृषभो न प्र वेति सचेतसो यं प्र॒णय॑न्त 
मतीः We 

a: Kucijjayate sanayasu navyo vane tasthau palito 


dhumaketuh. Asnatapo vrsabho na pra veti 
sacetaso yam pranayanta martah. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 4 437 


Somewhere it arises and manifests in old and 
dried woods with the banner of smoke or streak of a 
falling star in dead worlds. New, adorable as well as 
ancient bright, it abides unattached in floods of water 
and vibrates and radiates in vapours and clouds like a 
mighty force of energy which intelligent knowledgeable 
people visualise, realise and generate in various ways 
for various uses and purposes. 


तनूत्यजेव तस्क॑रा वनर्गू र॑शानाभिवर्दशभिर्‌ भ्य॑धीताम्‌। 
इयं त अग्ने नव्य॑सी मनीषा युष्ष्वा रथं न SASS: UE ॥ 


6. Tanutyajeva taskara vanargu rasanabhirdasa- 
bhir-abhyadhitam. Iyam te agne navyasi manisa 
yuksva ratham na sucayadbhir-angaih. 


Like dedicated self-insulated researchers in 
pursuit of light and energy scholars study Agni with the 
application of light rays and ten senses and pranas and 
then say: this is the latest new knowledge about you, 
Agni, pray come and join us as a new chariot of 
achievement with brilliant rays of power for energy. 


ब्रह च ते जातवेदो नमश्चेयं च गीः सदमिद्वर्धनी भूत्‌ । 
रक्षा णो अग्रे तन॑यानि तोका रश्ोत न॑स्तन्वोडे अप्र॑यु- 
च्छन्‌ ॥। I 


ध Brahma ca te jatavedo namasceyam ca gih 
sadamidvardhani bhut. Raksa no agne tanayani 
toka raksota nastanvo aprayucchan. 


O Agni, all pervasive, all knowing and born 
anew, this voice of knowledge, this offering is homage 
and this song of adoration may ever be progressive and 
rising for us. Pray protect and promote our children, 


438 RGVEDA 


protect our grand children, and protect and watchfully 
guard our body and mind without relent. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 5 
Agni Devata, Trita Aptya Rshi 


एकः समुद्रो धरूणो। रयीणामस्मन्दूदो भूरिजन्मा वि च॑ष्टे । 
सिषक्त्युधर्निण्योरुपस्थ उत्स॑स्य मध्ये निहितं पदं वेः ॥ ९॥ 


॥ Ekah samudro dharuno rayinamasm-addhrdo 
bhurijamna vi caste. Sisaktyudharninyorupastha 
utsasya madhye nihitam padam veh. 


The one deep oceanic treasure hold of all world’s 
wealth, manifestive in many ways, Agni inspires and 
expands our hearts with light and generosity, fills the 
middle space between heaven and earth with vapours 
of the cloud, and abides at the hidden centre of the 
mystery deep in the cloud. 


समानं ie वृष॑णो वसानाः सं ज॑ग्मिरे महिषा अर्व तीभिः। 
ऋतस्यं पदं कवयो नि पान्ति गुहया नार्मानि दधिरे पराणि ॥ २॥ 


2; Samanam nilam vrsano vasanah sam jagmire 
mahisa arvatibhih. Rtasya padam kavayo ni panti 
guha namani dadhire parani. 


Great, generous, animated and impregnated 
forces such as clouds, bearing the same one inner law 
and spirit of Agni, join with impetuously fast moving 
forces and, open ended, vibrant, expressive and 
expansive, observe the universal dynamics of the law, 
and at their centre continue to bear many other forms 
and forces of water and energy yet to develop and act 
further in evolution. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 5 439 


ऋतायिनीं मायिनी सं द॑धाते मित्वा शिशुं जज्ञतुर्वर्धयंन्ती । 
विश्व॑स्य नाभिं चरतो gael क वेश्चित्तन्तं मन॑सा 
वियन्तः ॥ ३॥ ति ति 

3 Rtayini mayini sam dadhdate mitva sisum jajnatur- 
vardhayanti. Visvasya nabhim carato dhruvasya 
kavescit tantum manasa viyantah. 


The forces of law and change and the forces of 
form and intelligence evolving things together in 
measure of form and time create every new form as a 
lovely baby and thus, with the mind of the cosmic seer, 
designer and maker, extend the genetic thread of Agni, 
the centre seed and centre hold of the entire world of 
moving and non-moving versions of cosmic reality. 


ऋतस्य fe वर्तनयः सुजातमिषो वाजाय प्रदिवः सच॑न्ते । 
अधीवासं रोद॑सी वावसाने घृतैरत्रर्वावृधाते मधूनाम्‌ ॥।  ॥ 


4. Rtasya hi vartanayah sujatamiso vajaya pradivah 
sacante. Adhivasam rodasi vavasane ghrtair- 
annair-vavrdhate madhunam. 


Visionary scholars who know the paths of law 
and change in evolution study and apply the versions 
of Agni evolved and developed in latest form for the 
achievement of new and extended food, energy and 
knowledge of reality which heaven and earth both 
sustaining all forms of life feed for extension with inputs 
and refinements of the honey sweets of water and energy. 


aa स्वसुररुषीर्वावशानो विद्वान्मध्व उज्नभारा दृशो कम्‌। 
अन्तर्येमे अन्तरिश्चे पुराजा इच्छन्वत्रिम॑विदत्पूषणस्य॑ ।॥ ५ ॥ 
a, Sapta svasrrarusirvavasano vidvan madhva 


ujjabhara drse kam. Antaryeme antarikse puraja 
icchan vavrimavidat pusanasya. 


440 RGVEDA 


The sun rising and illuminating the world 
radiates seven rays of bright light and raises them from 
the honey sweets of mists of the morning in order to 
illuminate the world for all to see. The sun, of ancient 
and eternal birth, radiates them across the middle regions 
and, with love for the earth, shines over, meets and 
energises the nutritious forms of things on earth. 


सप्त मर्यादा: क वय॑स्ततक्षुस्तासामेकामिदभ्यंहुरो गात्‌ । 
आयोर्ह" स्कम्भ उपमस्य नीरे पथां विसर्गे धरुणेषु 
तस्थौ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sapta maryadah kavayas-tataksus-tasame- 
kamidabhyamhuro gat. Ayorha skambha upama- 
sya nile patham visarge dharunesu tasthau. 


Seven are the bounds between good behaviour 
and evil set up by the wise. If one violates even one of 
them, he is a sinner. Agni is the pillar and centre hold of 
humanity. At the end of the journey, one, who in life 
has observed these bounds, reaches and rests in the 
shelter of the highest and closest, Agni, and abides in 
the highest states of being. 


अस॑च्य eat परमे व्योमन्दक्षस्य जन्मन्नदिं तेरुपस्थे। 
srg नः प्रथमजा ऋतस्य पूर्वं आयुनि वृष भश्च 
धेनुः ॥ ७ ॥ 

ds Asaccha sacca parame vyoman daksasya jan- 


mann-aditerupasthe. Agnirha nah pratham-aja 
rtasya purva ayuni vrsabhasca dhenuh. 


Being and Becoming, constant and mutable, 
both in the Supreme Absolute mystery, then the seed of 
perfect existence in the womb of Mother Nature, and 


MANDAL - 10 / ऽ <^ - 6 441 


then Agni, self-manifested at the earliest stage of 
creative evolution, all this, our father and mother as one, 
was in the ultimate infinite mystery of Brahma, -the 
Supreme Reality, the Absolute Soul, One with its own 
potential Prakrti. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 6 
Agni Devata, Trita Aptya Rshi 


अयं स यस्य शर्म॑न्नरवोभिरगेरेधंते जरिताभिष्टौ | 
ज्येष्ठैभिर्यो भानुभिं ऋषूणां पर्येति परिवीतो विभावा ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Ayam sa yasya Sarmann-avobhir-agneredhate 
Jaritabhistau. Jyesthebhiryo bhanubhir-rsunam 
paryeti parivito vibhava. 


This is that Agni under whose shelter with all 
protection the celebrant rises towards the attainment of 
total fulfilment and who, self-refulgent and gracious, 
infinitely abundant, transcends all with the highest and 
most blazing lights of divinity. 


यो arafufaerat faurafrdatusiararnsta: | आ यो 
विवाय सख्या सखिभ्योऽ परिहृतो अत्यो न सिः ॥ २॥ 


2. Yo bhanubhir-vibhava vibhatyagnir-devebhir- 
rtavajasrah. A yo vivaya sakhya sakhibhyo ’par- 
ihvrto atyo na saptih. 


Agni who, self-refulgent and gracious, shines 
along with the light of divinities and light of cosmic 
stars, keeps the eternal laws and values of life and nature, 
and who, ever true, inviolable and unviolated, goes on 
with love and friendship with the friends and celebrants 
of divinity like energy itself, constantly. 


442 RGVEDA 


ईशो यो विश्व॑स्या देववीं तेरीशे विश्वायुरुषसो Sst । 
आ यस्मिन्मना हवींष्यग्रावरिं्टरथः स्कभ्नाति शूषैः ॥ ३ ॥ 


Ise yo visvasya devaviterise visvayurusaso vyu- 
stau. A yasmin mana havimsyagnavaristarathah 
skabhnati susaih. 


Agni who rules over all the divine bliss and 
yajnic gifts of the world, who, life of the world, is the 
life giver and rules over lights of the dawn and 
maturation of wisdom, for whom oblations of yajna are 
offered into the fire with heart and soul, that Agni of 
the unviolated cosmic chariot sustains the universe by 
his omnipotent powers. 


शूषेभिर्वृधो aaron shear अच्छा रघुपरत्वां जिगाति । 
मन्द्रो होता स Wats यजिष्ठः संमिश्रो stint जिघर्ति 
देवान्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Sasebhirvrdho jusano arkairdevan accha raghu- 
patva jigati. Mandro hota sa juhva yajisthah 
sammislo agnira jigharti devan. 


Agni, self-exalted by its own powers and 
majesty, loved and adored with Vedic hymns, awakens 
and inspires the divinities at the earliest and fastest. 
Charming and adorable, holy receiver and liberal giver, 
most highly worshipped with heart and soul, universally 
immanent and pervasive, Agni blesses the sages with 
divine gifts of holiness and grace. 


तमुस्रामिन्द्रं न Teta RAAT कणुध्वम्‌। 
आ यं विप्रासो मतिभिररगृणन्तिं जातवेदसं जुं सहानाम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / ऽ <^ - 6 443 


> Tamusram-indram na rejamanam-agnim girbhir- 
namobhira krnudhvam. A yam vipraso matibhir- 
grnanti jatavedasam juhvam sahanam. 


That Agni, giver of prosperity, shining and 
radiating like light energy, you should study, realise and 
exalt with words of adoration and oblations of holy 
offerings. Agni, universally immanent and wakeful giver 
of strength and power, sages and scholars study and 
exalt with high words and application of mind and 
thought. 


सं यस्मिन्विश्वा adh जग्मुवजि नाश्वाः सप्तीवन्त wa: | 
अस्मे ऊतीरिन्द्र॑वाततमा अर्वाचीना sty आ कुणुष्व।॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Sam yasmin visva vasuni jagmurvaje nasvah 
saptivanta evaih. Asme ufirindravatatama arva- 
cina agna व krnusva. 


Agni, brilliant divinity and power, into which 
all wealth, honours and excellences of the world 
concentrate like stormy war horses in close formation 
by swift movements and converge in battle victory, pray 
create and bring us the latest, fastest and most powerful 
means of defence, protection and advancement. 


अधा Ga var निषद्या सद्यो Sart हव्यो बभूथं। 
तं ते देवासो अनु केत॑मायन्नधां वर्धन्त प्रथमास Sat: ॥ ७॥ 
a Adha hyagne mahna nisadya sadyo jajnano havyo 
babhutha. Tam te devaso anu ketamayannadha- 
vardhanta prathamasa umah. 
Agni, leading light and power, instantly ignited, 
enflamed, rising and growing to admirable stature, come 
and abide in our heart and home with grandeur, grace 


444 RGVEDA 


and power. That bright, potent and awful form and nature 
of yours, the first and highest sages, protected and 
protective, take up, develop and exalt. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 7 
Agni Devata, Trita Aptya Rshi 


स्वस्ति al दिवो अंगने पृथिव्या विश्वायुर्धेहि यजथाय देव । 
सचेमहि तव॑ दस्म प्रकतैरुरूष्या ण॑ उरुभिर्देव शंसैः ॥ ९॥ 


iB Svasti no divo agne prthivya visvayurdhehi yaja- 
thaya deva. Sacemahi tava dasma praketairuru- 
sya na urubhirdeva Samsaih. 


Agni, divine power and presence, life of the 
world, bless us with life, health and food of universal 
order and quality, and bring us all round happiness and 
well being for yajnic fulfilment of our life. Protect and 
promote us, Spirit of wondrous powers and 
performance, by your wide, comprehensive and far 
reaching intelligence and open declarations of laws and 
values, and finally let us join you. 


इमा अंगे मतयस्तुभ्यं जाता गोभिरश्वैरभि गणन्ति Tet: | 
यदा ते मतो अनु भोगमानड्वसो दधानो मतिभिः 
सुजात ॥ २॥ 

2: Ima agne matayas-tubhyam jata gobhirasvairabhi 
grnanti radhah. Yada te marto anu bhogamana- 
dvaso dadhano matibhih sujata. 

Agni, Spirit of life and giver of light, these 
hymns of adoration spontaneously arisen in praise of 


your glory, with all our mind and senses, celebrate your 
gifts of success and achievement when, O shelter home 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 7 445 


of life and giver of wealth, the mortal receives his reward 
according to your law, bears and manages it with his 
mind and senses in order and feels the divine awareness 
vibrating in the soul. 


siti मन्ये पितर॑मथिमापिमिं भ्रातरं सदमित्सर्वायम्‌ । 
अगेरनींकं gga: due दिवि शुक्रं य॑जतं सूर्यस्य ॥ ३॥ 


5: Agnim manye pitaram-agnimapim-agnim bhra- 
taram sadamit sakhayam. Agneranikam brhatah 
saparyam divi Sukram yajatam suryasya. 


I always accept and adore Agni as father, Agni 
as my own closest relative, Agni as brother and as 
unfailing friend. I worship the great Agni’s solar 
presence in the heaven of light, adorable, refulgent, 
worthy of love and service. 


सिध्रा अंगने धियो अस्मे सनुत्रीर्य त्राय॑से दम आ नित्यंहोता। 
ऋतावा स रोहिदश्वः पुरुशुरद्यभिरस्मा अहभिर्वाममस्तु i ४ ॥ 


4. Sidhra agne dhiyo asme sanutriryam trayase 
dama ठ nityahota. Rtava sa rohidasvah puruksur- 
dyubhir-asma ahabhir-vamamastu. 


Agni, may our thoughts, prayers and adorations 
be effectual and give us fulfilment. O constant giver of 
light and life, home mate in yajna, whoever you protect 
and promote, grows higher in dedication to truth, divine 
law and yajnic living, blest with holy and bright sense 
and mind, abundance of food, energy and life’s joy. We 
pray may our life be good and prosperous with 
brightness day by day. 


द्युभिरर्हितं मित्रमिव प्रयोगं प्रलमूत्विजमध्वरस्यं जारम्‌ | 
बाहुभ्यामयिमायवोऽ जनन्त विक्षु होतारं न्य॑सादयन्त ॥ ५ ॥ 


446 RGVEDA 


5. Dyubhirhitam mitramiva prayogam pratna- 
mrtvijamadhvarasya jaram. Bahubhya-magnima- 
yavo ’jananta viksu hotaram nyasadayanta. 


Refulgent with lights of life and knowledge, 
helpful and cooperative as a friend, ancient and eternal, 
constant yajaka by seasons, lover and accomplisher of 
yajna, such is Agni. People generate it with dexterity of 
hands, awaken it in the soul with constant practice and 
renunciation, and establish it among people as giver of 
life and sustenance. 


स्वयं य॑जस्व दिवि da देवान्‌ कि ते पाक॑ः कृणवदप्र॑चेताः। 
यथायज ऋतुभिवर्देव देवानेवा य॑जस्व तन्वं सुजात ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Svayam yajasva divi deva devan kim te pakah 
krnavadapracetah. Yathayaja rtubhirdeva deva- 
neva yajasva tanvam sujata. 


O self-refulgent spirit of the universe, by 
yourself you energise the divine forces of nature in the 
higher regions of life and conduct the yajna of evolution. 
What can man, limited in knowledge, accomplish for 
you in this cosmic yajna? O lord omnipotent, as you 
have eternally carried the yajna according to time and 
seasons, similarly, O lord, carry on the yajna of the 
cosmic body. 


भवा नो अग्नेऽ वितोत गोपा भवां वयस्कृदुत at वयोधाः | 
रास्वा च नः सुमहो हव्यदातिं त्रास्वोत न॑स्तन्वोडे 
अप्र॑युच्छन्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


Bhava no agne’vitota gopa bhava vayaskrduta no 
vayodhah. Rasva ca nah sumaho havyadatim 
trasvota nastanvo aprayucchan. 


MANDAL - 10 / ऽ <^ - 8 447 


Agni, pray be our protector and be our preserver 
against external fears and internal weaknesses. Be our 
protector of health and good age and bring us greater 
and higher strength and vigour. O lord of grandeur, give 
us the wealth and competence to carry on our yajnic 
homage to the divinities and humanity in the yajnic 
evolution of the divine cosmos. Save us, protect and 
promote us, without neglecting the well being of our 
physical existence. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 8 
Agni (1-6), Indra (7-9) Devata, Trishira Tvashtra Rshi 


प्र केतुना बहता यात्यथिरा रोद॑सी वृषभो रोरवीति। 
दिवश्चिदन्ती उपमां उर्दानव्छपामुपस्थे महिषो व॑वर्ध ॥ ९ ॥ 


i. Pra ketuna brhata yatyagnira rodasi vrsabho 
roraviti. Divascidantan upaman udanalapamu- 
pasthe mahiso vavardha. 


Agni, mighty abundant power and presence, 
goes forward with lofty lightning force and banner 
roaring over heaven and earth. It goes to the very heights 
and bounds of heaven in all directions and sub-directions 
and pervades in the middle regions in the depth of 
vapours and the mighty one grows mightier there at the 
heart of clouds. 


मुमोद गर्भो वृषभः ककुदयानस्त्ेमा वत्सः शिमीवाँ अरावीत्‌ | 
स देवतात्ुद्य॑तानि कृण्वन्त्स्वेषु aay प्रथमो जिंगाति ॥ २॥ 
2 Mumoda garbho vrsabhah kakudmanasrema 
vatsah simivan aravit. Sa devatatyudyatani 
krnvantsvesu ksayesu prathamo jigati. 


448 RGVEDA 


Agni waxes with joyous energy, all pervasive 
and comprehending, mighty abundant, virile and 
invigorating, lovely as a child yet perfect and powerful 
as accomplisher, and expresses itself loud and bold from 
silence of the night to roar of the winds and thunder of 
the clouds. Thus does Agni go on, the quintessence of 
divine powers, raising and energising all presences, as 
the prime power and presence in its own universal 
dwellings over and across spaces (as agni, fire and 
magnetic force on earth, as vayu, electric energy in the 
middle regions, and as aditya, light in the high heavenly 
regions). 


आ यो मूर्धानं faster न्य॑ध्वरे दधिरे सूरो srt: 1 
अस्य पत्पन्नरुषीरश्वंलुध्ना ऋतस्य योनौ तन्वो! जुषन्त ॥ २ ॥ 


3: A yo murdhanam pitrorarabdha nyadhvare 
dadhire suro arnah. Asya patmannarusirasva- 
budhna rtasya yonau tanvo jusanta. 


In the cosmic yajna of motherly earth and 
paternal heaven, Agni, the sun, enlightens the top 
regions, in the middle regions the oceanic vapours and 
vibrant winds hold it as electric energy, and in its lower 
paths of radiation on earth on the yajna vedi all physical 
forms of existence join its bright flames and radiations 
and benefit from it. 


उषड॑षो हि व॑सो अग्रमेषि त्वं यमयोरभवो faurat 
ऋताय सप्त द॑धिषे पदानि जनयन्मित्रं तन्वे ३ स्वायै ।॥। ८ ॥ 


4. Usauso hi vaso agramesi tvam yamayorabhavo 
vibhava. Rtaya sapta dadhise padani janayan 
mitram tanve svayai. 


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 8 449 


Agni, Vasu, sustainer of life, generating the sun 
for the manifestation of your self, you rise first with 
every dawn, illuminate the day and distinguish both day 
and night, and for conduct of the yajna of existence you 
bear the seven flames of fire and seven rays of light. 


भुवश्चक्षुर्मह ऋतस्य गोपा भुवो वरुणो यदूताय APA । 
भुवो अपां नपाज्नातवेदो भुवो दूतो यस्य॑ हव्यं जुजोषः ॥ ५ ॥ 


Bhuvascaksurmaha rtasya gopa bhuvo varuno 
yadrtaya vesi. Bhuvo apam napajjatavedo bhuvo 
duto yasya havyam jujosah. 


You are the eye and guardian of the mighty 
yajnic order of the cosmos, and when you proceed for 
the dynamics of the order you become the great 
evolutionary force of the process of formative evolution. 
You are the omnipresent power that sustain the waters 
and energies of the cosmic evolution against devolution, 
and you are the inspirer and promoter of the yajamana 
who offers you the holy inputs of the evolutionary 
yajaka. 


yal यज्ञस्य Weta नेता यत्रा Frakes: सच॑से शिवाभिः 1 
दिवि मूर्धानं दधिषे स्वर्षा rere चकृषे हव्यवाहम्‌ ॥। ६ ॥ 


6. Bhuvo yajnasya rajasasca neta yatra niyudbhih 
sacase §ivabhih. Divi murdhanam dadhise 
svarsam jihvamagne cakrse havyavaham. 


Agni, you are the leader and carrier of yajnic 
energies and energiser of the regions through which the 
energies rise and radiate, where you join and conduct 
the holy waves of energy onward. In the regions of light 
you sustain the blissful sun high and on the earth you 


450 RGVEDA 


enjoin your flames of fire to carry the fragrance up and 
around for the world. 


अस्य त्रितः क्रतुना aa अन्तरिच्छन्धीतिं पितुरेवैः ater 
सचस्यमानः पित्रोरुपस्थे जामि ब्रुवाण आयुधानि 
वेति ॥ ७॥ 


7 Asya tritah kratuna vavre antaricchan dhitim 
piturevaih parasya. Sacasyamanah pitroru- 
pasthe jami bruvana ayudhani veti. 


Trita, the human soul, wearing three body covers 
of gross, subtle and causal forms in earthly existence, 
with the desire to win the love of this supreme paternal 
divinity by concentrative meditation, chooses to 
meditate on divinity within the self and, thus nestled in 
the parental presence praying as a child for protection, 
obtains the arms for defence against internal and external 
onslaughts of material involvement. 


स पित्र्याण्यायुंधानि विद्वानिन्द्रैषित आप्त्यो अभ्ययुध्यत्‌ | 
त्रिशीर्षाणं सप्तरश्मिं जघन्वान्त्वाष्ट्स्यं fafa: स॑सृजे त्रितो 
गाः॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sa pitryanyayudhani vidvanindresita aptyo 
abhyayudhyat. Trisirsanam saptarasmim jaghav- 
nan tvastrasya cinnih sasrje trito gah. 


That divinely self-realised soul, having got the 
paternal arms of defence and inspired by Indra, 
omnipotent supreme divinity, fights against the material 
adversaries and, having controlled and subdued the three 
headed seven bridled bondage of sense and mind, gets 
free of the bonds. 


MANDAL - 10 / ऽ <^ - 9 451 


भूरीदिन्द्र उदिनंक्षन्तमोजोऽ वाभिनत्सत्प॑तिर्मन्य॑मानम्‌। 
त्वाष्रस्य॑ चिद्िश्वरूपस्य गोनामाचक्छाणस्त्रीणिं शीर्षा परां 
वर्क ॥ ९॥ 


0. Bhuridindra udinaksantamojo’vabhinat satpa-tir- 
manyamanam. Tvastrasya cidvisvarupasya 
gonam-acakrana-strini Sirsa para vark. 


Indra, protector and saviour of the pious and 
true devotees, destroying the mighty lustrous, rising and 
proud adversaries of the child of cosmic materiality, 
breaks the bonds of seven fold sense-mind complex, 
destroys the three headed cover of physicality and sets 
the soul free. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 9 
Apah Devata, Trishira Tvashtra or Sindhudveepa 
Ambarisha Rshi 
आपो हि st म॑योभुवस्ता न॑ ऊर्जे द॑धातन। 
महे रणाय चक्च॑से।॥ ९॥ 


| Apo hi stha mayobhuvasta na irje dadhatana. 
Mahe ranaya caksase. 


Apah, liquid energies of cosmic space, surely 
you are creators and givers of peace and joy. Pray inspire 
and energise us for the achievement of food and energy 
for body, mind and soul so that we may see and enjoy 
the mighty splendour of divinity. 
यो व॑: शिवत॑मो रसस्तस्य भाजयतेह न॑: | 
उशतीरिव areat: २॥ 

2. Yo vah Sivatamo rasastasya bhajayateha nah. 
USatiriva matarah. 


452 RGVEDA 


Let us share here in body that nectar sweet taste 
of yours which is most blissful, be like loving mothers 
for their children. 


तस्मा अरं गमाम at यस्य arate जिन्व॑थ | 
आपो जनयथा च नः ॥ ३ ॥ 

च Tasma aram gamama vo yasya ksayaya jinvatha. 
Apo janayatha ca nah. 
O holy waters, lovers of peace and pleasure of 
bliss, we come to you without delay for that pleasure, 
peace and enlightenment for the promotion and stability 
of which you move and impel people and powers and 
invigorate us too. Pray bless us with vigour and vitality. 
शं नो देवीरभिष्टय आपो भवन्तु पीतये । 
शां योरभि स्र॑वन्तु A: uv 

4. Sam no devirabhistaya Gpo bhavantu pitaye. 
Sam yorabhi sravantu nah. 


May the divine waters be for our peace and bliss 
for body, mind and soul and bring us showers of peace, 
protection and blessedness. 


ईशाना वार्यीणां क्षयंन्तीश्चर्षणीनाम्‌। 
अपो याचामि भेषजम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 
5: [sana varyanam ksayantis-carsaninam. 
Apo yacami bhesajam. 
Sovereign givers of the cherished gifts of our 
choice, harbingers of peace and settlement to people, I 


pray may waters of peace bring me health, sanatives 
and blessedness. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 9 453 
अप्सु मे ain! अब्रवीदन्तर्विंश्वानि भेषजा | 
अगिं च॑ विश्वशंभुवम्‌ ॥। ६॥ 


Apsu me somo abravid-antarvisvani bhesaja. 
Agnim ca visvasambhuvam. 


Soma in the waters touches and speaks to me: 


All sanatives reside in the waters which also contain 
the vital warmth and fire of Agni for peace and 
blessedness of all. 


आप॑ः पृणीत wast वरूथं तन्वे ३ AA 
ज्योक्च सूर्य" दशो ॥ ७॥ 


Apah prnita bhesajam varutham tanve mama. 
Jyok ca suryam drse. 


O waters, give me peace, stability and sanative 


vitality for my body so that I may see the sun for a long 
long time in life. 


इदर्मापः प्र dea यत्किं च॑ दुरितं at 
यद्वाहमभिदुद्रोह सद्धा शोप उतानुंतम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


Idamapah pra vahata yat kim ca duritam mayi. 
Yadvaham-abhidudroha yadva sepa utanrtam. 


Holy waters, wash off all this negativity and 


whatever is ill or deficient in me, or whatever I 
disapprove and hate, or whatever wrong, false or 
indecent I may speak or do. 


आपो अद्यान्व॑चारिषं रसेन सम॑गस्महि। 
पयस्वानग्न आ ग॑हितं मासं सुज वर्चसा।॥९॥ 


Apo adyanvacarisam rasena samagasmahi. 
Payasvanagra ठ gahi tam ma sam srja varcasa. 


454 RGVEDA 


Today I have enjoyed the touch, taste and 
sanctity of waters in the right spirit. We are all one with 
the spirit of waters. O fire, divine Agni, master of the 
nectar spirit of waters, come, take me on to bless me. 
Consecrate me with valour and lustre into a new life. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 10 


Devata: Yama Vaivasvata (1, 3, 5-7, 17, 13) and Yami 
Vaivasvati (2, 4, 8-10, 12, 14) Rshi: Yami Vaivasvati (1, 3, 
5-7, 11, 13) and Yama Vaivasvata (2, 4, 8-10, 12, 14) 


This sukta is a beautiful poem in the form of a 
dialogue between Yama, the bright day, and Yami, the 
dark night. They are children of Vivasvan, the sun. The 
theme is desire of the night to commingle with the day, 
which is not possible as long as the earth rotates and 
revolves round the sun and the world continues to exist 
as itis. Yama and Yami can commingle only when all 
this variety of existence goes back into the unity of 
absolute essence beyond physicality. The dialogue thus 
is a nature myth which borders on the mysterious 
sublime. 


Yama and Yami are treated as human characters. 
For this reason certain commentators as Sayana and 
others who follow Sayana and popular mythology 
interpret Yama and Yami as twin brother and sister. The 
theme then is reduced to a story of incestuous love 
unfulfilled. This interpretation is not correct because if 
Yama and Yami were brother and sister, the name of the 
sister would be Yama ending with long a, and not Yami. 
Yami can be the name of the female partner of a wedded 
couple (Panini, 1, 4, 48) and not of a twin sister. They 
are interpreted here as complementarities. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 10 455 


It may be further suggested here that Yama and 
Yami on the human plane need not necessarily be 
interpreted as a wedded couple either. They may better 
be interpreted as two close friends in love, Yami 
proposing and soliciting the love of Yama and Yama 
replying that the love possibly cannot be consummated 
because the day and night can never meet except at that 
point of time where meeting and parting are identical 
and simultaneous. And whenever the meeting would 
be possible in remote future, at pralaya, the time of 
dissolution then meeting, parting or separation all would 
have lost their meaning. 


(However, if one insists on interpreting Yama 
and Yami as twins they should be interpreted as the male 
and the female complementary forms of the same one 
human species, children of the same one creator, 
Vivasvana, in which case the question of incest between 
brother and sister does not arise.) 


ओ चित्सखायं सख्या व॑वृत्यां तिरः पुरू चिदर्णवं ज॑गन्वान्‌। 
पितुर्नपातमा द॑धीत वेधा अधि af प्रतरं दीध्यानः ॥ ९॥ 


iF O cit sakhayam sakhya vavrtyam tirah puru cidar- 
navam jaganvan. Piturnapatama dadhita vedha 
adhi ksami prataram didhyanah. 


Yami: With love and desire I come to my friend 
of my own choice, a friend who has crossed the vast 
ocean of life a long long way, and I solicit and pray that 
knowing and thinking of your fulfilment of familial 
obligation on earth, you beget a successor saviour of 
your father’s familial line and (in marriage) bless me 
with a child. 


456 RGVEDA 


न ते सख॑ सख्यं व॑छ्येतत्सत्यक्ष्मा यद्विषुरूपा भर्वाति। 
महस्पुत्रासो असुरस्य वीरा feat धतारं उर्विया परि 
ख्यन्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Na te sakha sakhyam vastyetat salaksma yadvisu- 
rupa bhavati. Mahasputraso asurasya vira divo 
dhartara urviya pari khyan. 


Yama: Your friend accepts not your proposal of 
love, friendship and union since you are not 
homogeneous with him in character and versatility of 
merit and maturity, in fact you are the contrary. Indeed 
the brave progeny of the great lord of life and energy of 
nature, refulgent with light and wisdom, who maintain 
the light of heaven along with the earth take exception 
to such a proposal of union, in fact they watch, wonder 
and rule out such a proposal for union. 


उशन्ति घा ते अमृतास एतदेकस्य चित्त्यजसं मर्त्य स्य । 
नि ते मनो मन॑सि धाय्यस्मे जन्युः पतिस्तन्व१ मा 
विविश्याः ॥ ३ ॥ 


a. Usanti gha te amrtasa etadekasya cit tyajasam 
martyasya. Ni te mano manasi dhayyasme janyuh 
patistanvama vivisyah. 

Yami: The immortal sustainers of earth and 
heaven do wish that every mortal should leave at least 
one descendant child. I have accepted your mind and 
soul as one with me, so pray come and join me in body 
as life giver husband of your child. 


न यत्पुरा च॑कृमा कब्डं नूनमृता वद॑न्तो अनुंतं रपेम । गन्धर्वो 
अप्स्वप्या च योषा सा नो नाभिः परमं जामि तन्नौ ॥। ४॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 10 457 


4. Na yat pura cakrma kaddha nunamrta vadanto 
anrtam rapema. Gandharvo apsvapya ca yosa sa 
no nabhih paramam jami tannau. 


Yama: Having observed the laws of divine 
nature and observing them now, what we have never 
done before how can we do now in violation of the truth 
and law? Gandharva, the sun, sustainer of the earth, is 
there in the middle region, the moon too is there, so are 
you, youthful night, as I am. But the earth is the common 
axis between you and me both, and that is the extreme 
opposition between you and me. (We cannot possibly 
meet while the earth is in orbit.) 


गर्थे नु नौ जनिता दम्प॑ती कर्दूवस्त्वष्टा सविता विश्वरूपः | 
नकिरस्य प्र मिनन्ति व्रतानि वेद॑ नावस्य fered उत 
द्यौः ॥ ५॥ 


Garbhe nu nau janita dampati kardevastvasta 
savita visvarupah. Nakirasya pra minanti vratani 
veda navasya prthivi uta dyauh. 


Yami: Our generator Savita, creator of the 
universe, Tvashta, maker of forms and Kah, sustainer 
of created forms, made us a couple in nature’s womb of 
generation itself as keepers of this earthly home. None 
can now violate the rules of the lord’s discipline, they 
don’t. Mother earth and father heavenly sun know of 
this complementarity of ours. 


को अस्य वेद प्रथमस्याह्वः क ई' ददं क इह प्र वोचत्‌ । 
बृहन्मित्रस्य वरुणस्य धाम॒ कदु, ब्रव आहनो वीच्या 
नृन्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


458 RGVEDA 


6. Ko asya veda prathamasyahnah ka im dadarsa 
ka tha pra vocat. Brhanmitrasya varunasya 
dhama kadu brava ahano vicya nrn. 


Who knows of this complementarity created at 
the dawn of creation? He alone knows. As of now, who 
witnessed it? Who can vouchsafe it now? Vast is the 
distance between east, the house of Mitra, sun and the 
day, and west, house of Varuna, presiding deity of the 
night. O wanton dear, having seen the people now, who 
can say anything about that? 


यमस्य॑ मा यम्यं4 काम sini=aa योनौ सहशेय्याय । 
जायेव पत्ये तन्वं रिरिच्यां वि चिद्‌ वृहेव रथ्येव चक्रा ॥ ७॥ 


7. Yamasya ma yamyam kama agantsamane yonau 
sahaSeyyaya. Jayeva patye tanvam riricyam vi 
cidvrheva rathyeva cakra. 


I, the night, feel stricken with desire to share 
life with you, Yama, in one house and one bed and wish 
I should surrender my body as a wife does to the husband 
so that we may carry on the business of life like the two 
wheels of a chariot. 


न fisaa नि मिषन्त्येते देवानां east इह ये चरन्ति। 
अन्येन मदाहनो याहि तूयं तेन वि वुं ह रथ्येव चक्रा ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Na tisthanti na ni misantyete devanam spaSa tha 
ye caranti. Anyena madahano yahi tuyam tena vi 
vrha rathyeva cakra. 


Yama: These watchful lights of divinities which 
sojourn here around in space neither stop nor deviate 
from their path, nor do they wink their eye. O love-lorn 
maiden, go soon to one of these, other than me and with 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 10 459 


him carry on the business of life like a chariot wheel. 


रात्रीभिरस्मा अहंभिर्दशस्येत्सूर्यस्य चश्षमुंहुरुम्मिंमीयात्‌। 
दिवा पृथिव्या मिथुना सब॑न्धू यमीर्यमस्यं विभूयाद- 
जामि॥ ९॥ 


2 Ratribhirasma ahabhirdasasyet suryasya caksur- 
muhurunmimiyat. Diva prthivya mithuna saba- 
ndhu yamiryamasya bibhryadajami. 


If for a moment the lord of existence were to 
reduce the earth to the axis and its centre point and the 
light of the sun were exhausted along with days and 
nights, then like heaven and earth together we too may 
be together and the night may enjoy conjugal union with 
the day without any obstruction 


आ घा ता ग॑च्छानुत्तरा युगानि यत्र॑ Saad: कृणवन्नजामि । 
उप॑ बर्बृहि वृषभाय बाहुमन्यमिच्छस्व सुभगे पतिं मत्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. A gha ta gacchanuttara yugani yatra jamayah 
krnavannajami. Upa barbrhi vrsabhaya bahum- 
anyamicchasva subhage patim mat. 

But O night, those times would follow long long 
ages hence when contraries would lie together and 
coexist without contradictions. Therefore for the time, 
O sweet and debonair, extend your hand of love to 
someone other than me, a real virile husband. 


किं भ्रातासद्यदनाथं भवाति किमु स्वसा यत्निऋतिर्निं- 
Test काम॑मूता बहवे ३ तद्र॑पामि तन्वा मे तन्वं सं 
पिंपुण्धि॥ ९९॥ 


11. Kim bhratasadyadanatham bhavati kimu svasa 
yannirrtirnigacchat. Kamamuta bahvetadrapami 
tanva me tanvam sam piprgdhi. 


460 RGVEDA 


Yami: What? then have you become as a brother 
to me? And I, deprived of love and care, become a sister, 
bereft, going away elsewhere in search of another? 
Lovelorn, I am babbling so much, pray join me, body 
with body. (Are you just a complementary support and 
I just a complementary way farer, nothing more?) 


न वा ॐ ते तन्वां तन्वं सं प॑पृच्यां पापमाहुर्यः स्वसारं 
निगच्छात्‌। अन्येन मत्प्रमुदः कल्पयस्व न ते भ्राता सुभगे 
ABUT ९२ ॥ 


12. Nava u te tanva tanvam sam paprcyam papa- 
mahuryah svasaram nigacchat. Anyena mat 
pramudah kalpayasva na te bhrata subhage 
vastyetat. 


Yama: No, I would never touch your body with 
my body. The wise say that to go and meet a sister like 
that is a sin, to meet a corresponding way farer in orbit 
is a violation of the law of nature. O dear and fortunate 
one, go, be happy with another other than me and make 
it possible if you can. Your brother way farer does not 
love this proposal, no he cannot. 


लतो ल॑तासि यम्‌ नैव ते मनो हृद॑यं चाविदाम | अन्या fens 
त्वां कक्ष्येव युक्तं UR ष्वजाते लिबुजेव gar ९३॥ 


13. Bato batasi yama naiva te mano hrdayam cavi- 
dama. Anya kila tvam kaksyeva yuktam pari sva- 
jate libujeva vrksam. 


Yami: Sorry Yama, O day, it is a pity I did not 
know your mind and heart this way of nature. May be 
some one other than me too may join you like a girdle 
round your waist and embrace you like a creeper 
clinging by a tree. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 11 461 


अन्यमू षु त्वं यम्यन्य उ त्वां UR ष्वजाते fasta वृक्षम्‌। 
तस्य॑ वा त्वं मन॑ इच्छा स वा तवाऽधां कृणुष्व संविदं 
सुभद्राम्‌ ॥ ९४॥ 


14. Anyamu su tvam yamyanya u tvam pari svajate 
libujeva vrksam. Tasya va tvam mana iccha sa 
va tavadha krnusva samvidam subhadram. 


Yama: Some other may embrace you too and 
you embrace him like a creeper by the tree. Love you 
the other man and his heart, may he too love you and 
yours. Thus may you create and achieve a happy union 
in love and good fortune. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 11 
Agni Devata, Angi Havirdhana Rshi 


वृषा वृष्णे दुदुहे दोह॑सा दिवः पयांसि यहयो अदि तेरद।भ्यः। 
विश्वं स वेद्‌ वरुणो यथां धिया स यज्ञियो यजतु य्या 
ऋतून्‌ ॥ ९॥ 

0 Vrsa vrsne duduhe dohasa divah payamsi yahvo 
aditeradabhyah. Visvam sa veda varuno yatha 
dhiya sa yajniyo yajatu yajniyan rtun. 


Generous, omnipotent and indomitable Agni, 
self-refulgent ruling Spirit of life in the systemic order 
of existence, with its natural art and intelligence and 
creativity, creates and showers the waters of growth and 
sustenance from the divine infinity of inexhaustible 
plenty of light, life and joy for the yajnic and generous 
powers of nature and humanity. The Spirit is Varuna, 
omniscient intelligence with universal discrimination, 
knowing the world as it is and the way it behaves. May 
the lovable and adorable Agni worshipped at yajna love, 


462 RGVEDA 


join and bless the yajnic celebrants of life divine 
according to the seasons and its own love and 
judgement. 


रपंद्रन्धर्वीरिप्यां च योष॑णा नदस्य॑ नादे परि पातु मे मन॑ः। 
इष्टस्य मध्ये अदितिर्नि धातु नो भ्राता नो ज्येष्ठः प्र॑थमो वि 
वोंचति॥ २॥ 


2. Rapadgandharvirapya ca yosana nadasya nade 
pari patu me manah. Istasya madhye aditirni 
dhatu no bhrata no jyesthah prathamo vi vocati. 


May the spirit and power of Agni blazing in the 
sun, thundering in the clouds, vibrating in vapours, 
flashing in lightning, burning in the vedi and roaring in 
rivers, protect, promote and inspire my mind. May 
imperishable Infinity, indomitable nature and inviolable 
policy establish us all at the heart of what we love to 
do, accomplish and worship in life and society, and may 
our chief, eldest, supportive and sustaining brother, 
speak to us and enlighten us in matters of Dharma, artha, 
kama and moksha. 


सो fag भद्रा क्षुमती यशस्वत्युषा sara मन॑वे स्वर्वती । 
यदींमुशन्त॑मुषटातामनु क्रतुं मिं होतारं विदथाय जीजं- 
नन्‌॥ ३॥ 


a So cinnu bhadra ksumati yasasvatyusad uvasa 
manave svarvati. Yadimusantam-usatamanu 
kratum-agnim hotaram vidathaya jijanan. 


Instantly does that blessed, blissful, inspiring 
and elevating dawn, light of life, vision of wisdom, 
harbinger of honour, excellence and divine virtue, arise 
and shine in response to dedicated action bearing the 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 11 463 


bliss of heaven for all humanity when, in pursuit of 
corporate creative living and search for total freedom, 
people light the yajna fire for Agni, lover of the lovers 
of divinity and chief high priest of the yajna of life. 


अध त्यं द्रप्सं विभ्वे विचक्चणं विराभ॑रदिषितः श्येनो अध्वरे । 
यदी विशो वृणते दस्ममायौ sift होतर्‌ मध धीर॑ 
जायत NY UI 


4. Adha tyam drapsam vibhvam vicaksanam 
virabharadisitah syeno adhvare. Yadi viso vrnate 
dasmamarya agnim hotaramadha dhirajayata. 


When noble and dynamic people, lovers of life 
dedicated to yajna fire, choose to worship the potent 
and gracious Agni, chief of cosmic yajna and harbinger 
of infinite gifts, then the celebrant soul of the individual, 
or society or the ruler of the social order, with flying 
super-intelligence inspired by the spirit of divinity, 
achieves that same great and ecstatic power and 
enlightenment of universal order both on earth and in 
the spirit by social yajna and spiritual meditation, and 
by that Agni itself, omniscient, omnipotent and 
omnificent, becomes the inviolable foundation of human 
karma, and all possible faculties of thought and action 
arise for the achievement of success. 


सदासि रण्वो यव॑सेव Gata Sart AAS: स्वध्वरः | 
विप्र॑स्य वा यच्छशमान उक्थ्यं वाजं waar उपयासि 
भूरिंभिः॥५॥ 

>. Sadasi ranvo yavaseva pusyate hotrabhiragne 


manusah svadhvarah. Viprasya va yacchasama- 
na ukthyam vajam sasavan upayasi bhuribhih. 


464 RGVEDA 


Agni, just as food is dear and auspicious to the 
robust lover of health, so are you dear, exciting and 
inspiring for humanity, being the holiest presiding power 
of social and spiritual yajna served with hymns of 
invocation and adoration, you who, pleased with the 
sage’s songs of adoration, sharing and fulfilling the 
yajnic homage of devotees, visit and bless the celebrants 
with plenty and immensities of gifts of enlightenment 
as well as powers. 


sah fret जार आ भगमियंश्चति हर्यतो हत्त इ॑ष्यति। 
विव॑क्ति वद्धिः स्वपस्यते मखस्तविष्यते असुरो वेप॑ते 
मती ॥ ६॥ 


6. Udiraya pitara jara a bhagamiyaksati haryato 
hrtta isyati. Vivakti vahnih svapasyate makhas- 
tavisyate asuro vepate mati. 


Agni, raise and augment the parental powers of 
heaven and earth and extend the honour and excellence 
of humanity there like the sun, stealer of the night, which 
spreads its light in space. The yajamana performs yajna 
in honour of the divinities of nature and humanity and 
loves the divinities and yajna with his heart and soul. 
The ruler, burden bearer of the life of humanity, is up 
and active and adores and exalts you. The fire is rising 
and blazing bright, the high priest is inspired, and the 
life giving energies vibrate with action and intelligence. 


यस्त अगे सुमतिं मर्तो starcada: सूनो अति स प्र tue | 
इषं दधानो वह॑मानो अश्वैरा स द्युमाँ अमवान्भूषति 
द्यून्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 11 465 


7. Yaste agne sumatim marto aksat sahasah suno 
ati sa pra Srnve. Isam dadhano vahamano aSsvaira 
sa dyuman amavan bhusati dyun. 


Agni, creator and augmenter of power, patience 
and fortitude, the mortal who reaches and internalises 
your divine favour of knowledge and wisdom rises to 
immortal honour and fame and, having abundant food, 
energy and life’s graces of his choice and enjoying 
equipment of horses and fast transport, rises in light, 
lustre and splendour of life day by day. 


adn एषा समितिर्भवाति देवी देवेषु यजता य॑जत्र tat 
च यद्विभजासि स्वधावो भागं नो अत्र वसुमन्तं वीतात्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yadagna esa samitirbhavati devi devesu yajata 
yajatra. Ratna ca yadvibhajasi svadhavo bhagam 
no atra vasumantam vitat. 


Adorable Agni, when this holy assembly of your 
yajnic powers and virtues honoured among the divines 
meets and, O lord self-refulgent and self-sufficient, you 
distribute the jewels of life among them, then pray bless 
us too with our share of the honour and excellence of 
life. 


श्रुधी नो अग्ने सर्द॑ने सधस्थे year रथ॑ममृतस्य द्रविलनुम्‌। 
आनो वहु रोद॑सी देवपुत्रे माकिर्देवानामप भूरिह 
स्याः ॥ ९॥ 

व Srudhi no agne sadane sadhasthe yuksva ratha- 


mamrtasya dravitnum. A no vaha rodasi deva- 
putre makir-devanamapa bhuriha syah. 


Listen to our prayer, Agni, in this hall of yajna, 
harness your chariot replete with the nectar of 


466 RGVEDA 


immortality, bring us the wealth of earth and light of 
heaven both divine, let none of the divinities forsake 
us. Pray abide in our heart here and ever. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 12 
Agni Devata, Angi Havirdhana Rshi 


द्यावा ह arat प्रथमे ऋतेनाऽभिश्रावे भ॑वतः सत्यवाचा । 
देवो यन्मतीौन्यजथांय कृण्वन्त्सीदन्द्ोतां प्रत्यङ्‌ स्वमसुं 
यन्‌॥ ९॥ 


il. Dyava ha ksama prathame rtena’bhisrave 
bhavatah satyavaca. Devo yanmartan yajathaya 
krnvant-sidaddhota pratyan svamasum yan. 


Heaven and earth are the first and closest 
divinities by virtue of the cosmic order to listen to the 
holy chant and proclaim their response with light and 
generosity, when Agni, refulgent spirit of life and light 
of the world, chief priest and inspirer of cosmic yajna, 
calling mortals to the altar, settles in the vedi itself 
upfront, generating and accelerating the radiation of its 
own energy in the yajnic process being enacted. 


देवो देवान्प॑रिभू ऋतेन वहां नो हव्यं प्र॑थमणश्चिंकित्वान्‌। 
धूमकेतुः समिधा भाक्जीको मन्द्रो होता नित्यो वाचा 
यजीयान्‌ ॥ २॥ 


De Devo devan paribhur-rtena vaha no havyam 
prathamas-cikitvan. Dhumaketuh samidha 
bharjiko mandro hota nityo vaca yajtyan. 


May Agni, supreme power and presence of the 
spirit over divinites of heaven and earth, first and instant 
cognizant of our invocation and prayers, radiate and 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 12 467 


carry our homage and oblations to the divinities of 
nature by the laws of its cosmic order, Agni, the power 
with the banner of light and fragrance, blazing with the 
flames of fuel fire, adorable sublime, divine call for 
action and creative evolution, eternal and imperishable, 
loving and companionable by words of sincere 
adoration. 


स्वावृग्देवस्यामृतं यदी गोरतो जातासो! धारयन्त उर्वीं । 
विश्वे देवा अनु तत्ते aide ae दिव्यं घृतं वाः ॥ ३ ॥ 


>: Svavredevasyamrtam yadi gorato jataso dhara- 
yanta urvi. Visve deva anu tat te yajurgurduhe 
yadeni divyam ghrtam vah. 


When the celestial nectar of this refulgent 
power’s own essence radiates, then the energies 
generated by it support and sustain both earth and 
heaven, and all divinities of nature and humanity receive 
and celebrate these gifts of Agni, the divine beauty, 
radiance and liquid energies which the light divine 
showers on them. 


अचीमि वां वर्धायापो घृतस्त्र द्यावाभूमी spore रोदसी F 
अहा यद्‌ द्यावोऽ सुंनीतिमयन्मरध्वां नो अत्र॑ पितरा शिशी- 
ताम्‌॥ ४॥ 


4. Arcami vam vardhayapo ghrtasnu dyavabhumi 
srnutam rodasi me. Aha yad dyavo’ sunitimayan 
madhva no atra pitard sisitam. 


Listen both heaven and earth my words of 
adoration : I celebrate you both heaven and earth as 
father and mother, givers of the liquid energies of life 
for the growth and progress of humanity and the 


468 RGVEDA 


environment, which, may the brilliant geniuses of 
humanity, taking forward the energy projects and 
policies of the world, promote day and night incessantly, 
and which, may the parental powers and leadership of 
mankind refine and augment to further the light and 
sweetness of life here on earth. 


किं स्विन्नो wet जगृहे कदस्याऽतिं व्रतं च॑कृमा को fa 
वेद । मित्रश्चिदि wat जुहुराणो देवाञ्छ्लोको न यातामपि 
वाजो अस्तिं & a 


2; Kim svinno raja jagrhe kadasya 1 vratam cakrma 
ko vi veda. Mitrasciddhi sma juhurano devan- 
chloko na yatamapi vajo asti. 


Does the ruling and refulgent Agni receive and 
accept our homage? Do we sometime overstep its laws 
and limits of benediction and experimentation? Who 
knows this secret we ought to know? Agni after all is a 
friend. Invoked and served with excess or remiss, it 
would still accept our homage and adoration and convey 
it to the divinities, and we pray let there be success and 
ultimate victory. 


दुर्मन्त्व्रामृत॑स्य नाम सत्कक्ष्मा यद्विषुरूपा भवाति। 
यमस्य यो मनवते सुमन्त्वग्ने ages पाह्यप्रयुच्छन्‌ । ६ ॥ 


6. Durmantvatramrtasya nama salaksma yadvi- 
surupa bhavati. Yamasya yo manavate suma- 
ntvagne tamrsva pahyaprayucchan. 


Incomprehensible is this mystery of immortal 
Agni and its power, for sure, since arising from the same 
one origin and being homogeneous, it grows to 
boundless variety of forms, which, nevertheless, for the 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 12 469 


man who knows the One Supreme, Agni, ordainer and 
controller of this existential variety, is simple and clearly 
understood. This man, O lord great and gracious, protect 
and promote without relent. 


यस्मिन्देवा विदथे मादयंन्ते विवस्व॑तः सद॑ने धारयंन्ते। 
सूर्ये ज्योतिरद॑धुमस्यिशक्तन्परि द्योतनिं च॑रतो अज॑स्रा ॥ ७॥ 


a Yasmin deva vidathe madayante vivasvatah 
sadane dharayante. Surye jyotir-adadhur-masya- 
ktun pari dyotanim carato ajasra. 


In whose being the divinities of nature and 
humanity rejoice in the yajnic order of existence, carry 
on their assigned tasks in the regions of light and in the 
heart and mind of humanity, and vest light in the sun 
and the dark tinge in the moon, that self-refulgent Agni, 
the sun and moon and all other divinities constantly 
adore and serve. 


ohaan मन्म॑नि संचरन्त्यपीच्ये न ards विद्य । मित्रो 
नो अत्रादिंतिरनागान्त्सविता देवो वरुणाय वोचत्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yasmin deva manmani samcarantyapicye na 
vayamasya vidma. Mitro no atraditiranagantsa- 
vita devo varunaya vocat. 


In whose illuminative yet mysterious being all 
divine powers exist and act, we know not well. May the 
same self refulgent Agni, the divine powers reveal to 
us, simple, sincere and conscientious seekers of divinity, 
so that we may distinctly and intelligently know and 
serve the divine power. May Mitra, universal spirit of 
divine love, Aditi, imperishable Mother Nature, self- 
refulgent Savita, the sun, reveal the mysterious power 


470 RGVEDA 
and presence to us. 


श्रुधी नो अग्ने सर्द॑ने सधस्थे year रथ॑ममृतस्य द्रविलनुम्‌ | 
आ नो वहु रोद॑सी cada माकिर्देवानामप भूरिह स्याः ॥ ९ ॥ 


9, Srudhi no agne sadane sadhasthe yuksva ratham- 
amrtasya dravitnum. A no vaha rodasi devaputre 
makir-devanamapa bhiuriha syah. 


Listen to our invocation and exhortation, Agni, 
in this spatial hall of cosmic yajna. Harness the chariot 
replete with the nectar of immortality, bring us the 
wealth of earth and light of heaven both divine. Let 
none of the divinities forsake us. Pray abide in our heart 
and soul here and for ever. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 13 


Havirdhane Devata, Angi Harvirdhana or 
Vivasvan Aditya Rshi 


युजे वां wet पूर्व्य नमोधिर्विं शलोकं एतु पथ्येव a: | 
श्रुण्वन्तु विश्वे अमृत॑स्य पुत्रा आ ये धामानि दिव्यानिं 


तस्थुः UU 


in Yuje vam brahma purvyam namobhirvi Sloka etu 
pathyeva sureh. Srnvantu visve amrtasya putra a 
ye dhamani divyani tasthuh. 


For you, O heaven and earth, men and women, 
bride and bride groom, bearers of the holy materials of 
yajna, I chant the holy Vedic voice of divinity with 
fragrant oblations into the vedi in honour of Agni, lord 
self-refulgent. May this voice spread around like the 
spirit of light and joy of the enlightened. Let all children 
of immortality across the world listen, and listen all those 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 13 471 


too who abide in the celestial regions of light and divine 
yajna. 


यमेडव यत॑माने यदैतं प्र वां भरन्मानुंषा देवयन्त॑ः। 
आ सीदतं स्वमु लोकं विदानि स्वासस्थे भ॑वतमिन्दवे 
नः॥ २॥ 


2 Yame iva yatamane yadaitam pra vam bharan 
manusa devayantah. A sidatam svamu lokam 
vidane svasasthe bhavatamindave nah. 


Living and working together like a pair of twins 
in this home, when you perform this yajna, then the 
people around dedicated to divinity would accept and 
honour you as a holy couple. Abide in your own 
beautiful place as an enlightened couple and, happy and 
healthy in your own joint life, live on for the peace and 
joy of yourselves and all of us and for self-fulfilment in 
the service of divinity. 


ual पदानि रुपो sade चतुष्पदीमन्वेमि act । 
sana प्रति मिम एतामृतस्य नाभावधि सं पुनामि॥ २३॥ 


Panca padani rupo anvaroham catuspadima- 
nvemi vratena. Aksarena prati mima etamrtasya 
nabhavadhi sam punami. 


By the discipline of body mind and soul, I would 
cover the five stages of earthly existence from the 
annamaya kosha through pranamaya, manomaya, 
vijnanamaya kosha to the anandamaya state of divine 
joy. I would cover the four stages of brahmacharya, 
grhastha, vanaprastha and sanyasa to total freedom. By 
meditation on Aum I would cover the physical, psychic 
and spiritual stages to the fourth stage of turiya, the 


472 RGVEDA 


state of transcendent happiness. Thus would I reach and 
abide in the centre of the divine order of existence in 
the state of absolute purity of the spirit. 


देवेभ्यः कम॑वृणीत मृत्युं प्रजायै HAT नावुंणीत। 
ब्रहस्पति" यज्लम॑कृण्वत ऋषिं प्रियां यमस्तन्वं4 प्रारि - 
रेचीत्‌॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Devebhyah kamavrnita mrtyum prajayai kama- 
mrtam navrnita. Brhaspatim yajnamakrnvata 
rsim priyam yamastanvam prarirecit. 


Which death does Brhaspati or Yama choose for 
the divines? What immortality does he not choose for 
ordinary humans? Choose Brhaspati, universal divine 
Seer as the high priest as well as the object of yajna, 
self-sacrifice, and Yama would either strengthen the dear 
body vestment of the soul, or, otherwise empty it out of 
life energy. 


ae क्षरन्ति शिश॑वे veda पित्रे पुत्रासो अप्य॑वीवतन्नृतम्‌। 
उभे इदस्योभयस्य राजत उभे य॑तेते उभयस्य पुष्यतः ॥ ५॥ 


त Sapta ksaranti sisave marutvate pitre putraso 
apyavivatannrtam. Ubhe idasyobhayasya rajata 
ubhe yatete ubhayasya pusyatah. 


As children for the parent, seven poetic 
compositions of the Veda shower the light and bliss of 
eternal truth on the soul, master of pranic energies and 
abiding within at the heart in the body. Both thought 
and speech, heaven and earth inspire and elevate both 
divines and humans, both exercise both to rise and both 
strengthen and refine both orders of life, both coexist 
with the Law. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 14 473 


Mandala 10/Sukta 14 


Yama (1-5, 13-16), Lingokta (6), Lingokta or Pitarah (7- 
9), Shvanau (10-12) Devatah, Yama Vaivasvata Rshi 


परेयिवांसं प्रवतो महीरनु बहुभ्यः पन्थामनुपस्पशानम्‌। 
वैवस्वतं संगमनं जनानां यमं राजानं हविषां दुवस्य ॥ ९॥ 


it Pareyivamsam pravato mahiranu bahubhyah 
pantham-anupaspasanam. Vaivasvatam samga- 
nam jananam yamam rajanam havisa duvasya. 


Know Yama, cosmic Time, refulgent, all ruling 
all comprending Time, pervading all that moves forward, 
stars and planets all, watching, showing the paths of 
movement for all and outlasting them all. Temporal 
correspondent dimension of Vivasvan, Savita, ultimate 
light and supreme spirit, immanent and transcendent, 
eternal and infinite, ordainer and controller of the world, 
ultimate end and destination of all that is born, it is the 
creator, mover and consumer all in one. Worship it with 
service and homage of yajna (if you wish to survive as 
spirit through the flux). 


Note: In Surya Siddhanta time is Cosmic Time 
and, secondly, it is temporal which is the temporal 
correspondent of things in flux. One is called Lokanam- 
anta-krt-Kala which comprehends all things in 
existence, and the other is time in respect of calculation, 
‘Kalanatmaka’. Yama in this hymn is not the god of 
death, it is the child of the sun, Vivasvan. Therefore 
Yama should be interpreted as time, in both aspects, 
i.e., temporal aspect and beyond the temporal in its 
eternal aspect which is the space-time continuum of 
eternity. 


414 RGVEDA 


यमो नो गातुं प्र॑थमो विवेद नैषा vet farderar उ 1 यत्रा 
नः पूर्वे पितरः परे युरे ना ज॑ज्ञानाः पथ्या ३ अनु स्वाः ॥ २ ॥ 


2 Yamo no gatum prathamo viveda naisa gavyutira- 
pabhartava u. Yatra nah purve pitarah pareyu- 
rena jajnanah pathya anu svah. 


Time, first and highest of existence, knows as it 
comprehends our course of life, and that course no one 
can avoid, escape, alter or alternate, and that same is 
the path by which our earlier forefathers went their way, 
and that is the path by which all who are born go their 
way, knowing according to their Dharma and choice. 
Honour that time with homage. 


adet कव्यैर्यमो अङधिरोधिर्बहस्पतिऋक्व॑भिर्वावृधानः। 
यांश्च॑ देवा वावृधुर्ये च॑ दे वान्त्स्वाहान्ये स्वधयान्ये 
dean ३॥ 


ai Matali kavyairyamo angirobhir-brhaspatir- 
rkvabhir-vavrdhanah. Yansca deva vavrdhurye ca 
devantsvahanye svadhayanye madanti. 


Terrestrial fire and bodily heat grow by food 
and fuel, Yama, life time and life energy, grows by pranic 
energy, and Brhaspati, spirit and enlightenment, grows 
by Vedic words and divine joy. These capacities which 
divinities of earth and heaven and divine enlightenment 
augment, and the divinities of the environment on earth 
and above, which humans augment, grow mutually, the 
divinities by svaha oblations, and humans by svadha 
offerings of food, and thus they rejoice. 


इमं य॑म प्रस्तरमा fe सीदाऽद्धिरोभिः पितृभिः संविदानः। 
आ त्वा मन्त्राः कविशस्ता वहन्त्वेना राजन्हविष। माद- 
यस्व ॥ ४ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 14 475 


4. Imam yama prastarama hi sida’ngirobhih pitr- 
bhih samvidanah. A tva mantrah kavisasta vahan- 
tvena rajan havisa madayasva. 


O Yama, happy life time of health and joy, come 
in union with nourishing and protective energies of 
nature and vest those energies in my yajnic body system. 
Let the thoughts and health mantras of the sages come 
with you here with exhilarating and inspiring poetic 
voices, and then, shining and ruling in the system within 
with all these gifts, rejoice and make me happy too. 


अद्धिंरोभिरा ग॑हि aba वैरूपैरिह मादयस्व | 
विवस्वन्तं हुवे यः पिता तेऽ स्मिन्यज्ञे बर्हिष्या निषद्य ॥। ५ ॥ 


9, Angirobhira gahi yajniyebhiryama vairupairiha 
madayasva. Vivasvantam huve yah pita te’smin 
yajne barhisya nisadya. 


O Yama, life time of health and age, come with 
pranic energies of nature of various and versatile sort 
worthy of union and assimilation according to time and 
seasons, be happy and rejoice with me. I invoke the 
refulgent Sun also, your generative father, and pray 
come and be seated in the holy heart core of this life 
yajna of mine for a full age of good health and joy. 
(Reference may be made to Atharva Veda 3, 8, 1: May 
the sun come with its rays joining and entering the earth 
and energising it according to the seasons. Rgveda 1, 
71, 2 throws further light on the science of health and 
solar rays in relation to the earth and global atmosphere.) 


अद्धिःरसो नः पितरो नव॑ग्वा अथर्वाणो भृग॑वः सोम्यासः | 
तेषां वयं सुमतौ यज्ञियानामपि भद्रे सौमनसे स्याम ॥ ६ ॥ 


476 RGVEDA 


6. Angiraso nah pitaro navagva atharvano bhrgavah 
somyasah. Tesam vayam sumatau yajniyana-mapi 
bhadre saumanase syama. 


May the pranic energies radiated by the sun in 
the seasons of summer, rains, autumn, early winter, peak 
of winter and spring be good for us for body, mind and 
spirit. Lovable, companionable and promotive they are, 
worthy of reverence. May they be agreeable to us and 
give us a healthy environment, pleasant, benevolent and 
exhilarating. 


प्रेहि प्रेहि पथिभिः पूर्व्येभिर्यत्रा नः पूर्वे पितरः परेयुः। 
उभा राजाना स्वधया मद॑न्ता यमं पश्यासि वरुणं च 
देवम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


Prehi prehi pathibhih purvyebhiryatra nah purve 
pitarah pareyuh. Ubha rajana svadhaya madanta 
yamam pasyasi varunam ca devam. 


Go forward, O man, move on by the ancient 
paths of life universally carved for you, by which the 
forefathers too went forward to complete their course 
of life. Intelligent you are and you see both the divine 
sun and the divine night, the all comprehending time 
and the spirit of cosmic judgement, the solar region and 
the cosmic waters, divine, brilliant, ruling mighty in 
terms of their own powers and agreeable by your service 
to them and to the environment. 


सं ग॑च्छस्व पितृभिः सं यमेनेष्टापूर्तेन पर मे eal | 
हित्वायावद्यं पुनरस्तमेहि सं ग॑च्छस्व तन्वां Garett: ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Sam gacchasva pitrbhih sam yamenestapurtena 


parame vyoman. Hitvayavadyam punarastamehi 
sam gacchasva tanva suvarcah. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 14 477 


O soul, join with pitr pranic energies and go 
forward, join with another life time for future existence 
and go forward, join with your acts of obligation and 
dharmic choice and go forward to the highest spaces, 
having left this exhausted body, go to a new home, join 
with a vigorous bright body full of fresh life again. (This 
is the journey from one life time to another.) 


अपेत dla वि च॑ सर्पतातोऽ स्मा एतं पितरों ated | 
अहोभिरद्धिर क्तुथिर्व्यक्तं यमो द॑दात्यवसानंमस्मै॥ ९॥ 


ध Apeta vita vi ca sarpatato’sma etam pitaro loka- 
makran. Ahobhir-adbhir-aktubhir-vyaktam yamo 
daddatyavasanamasmai. 


Pitr pranic energies of solar radiation which have 
carried this soul, departed, gone away, carried around 
by sun rays, have prepared this new home for it, and 
Yama, cosmic order of time, with days, nights, dawns 
and liquid energies, has provided this another stage of 
its existential being. 


अतिं xa सारमेयो var चतुरक्षौ शबल्टौ साधुना पथा । 
अथां पितृन्त्सुविदच्रां उपेहि यमेन ये स॑धमादं मद॑न्ति ॥ १०॥ 


10. Ati asadrameyau svanau caturaksau sabalau 
sadhuna patha. Atha pitrntsuvidatran upehi 
yamena ye sadhamadam madanti. 


O soul, by paths of divine law and rectitude, go 
forward to a life of day-night cycle, each being of twelve 
hour duration of colourful beauty, both children of 
dynamic energy, alert and on the move, lighted by the 
sun and moon. Then enjoy the auspicious rays of the 
sun which always rejoice with the passage of time. 


478 RGVEDA 


at ते vari! यम रश्चितारौ चतुर क्षौ प॑थिरक्चीं नृचक्षसौ । 
anaes परि देहि राजन्त्स्वस्ति चास्मा अनमीवं चं 
धेहि॥ ९९॥ 


11. Yau te काव yama raksitarau caturaksau 
pathiraksi nrcaksasau. Tabhyamenam pari dehi 
rajantsvasti casma anamivam ca dhehi. 


O time, those two day and night are your 
guardian sentinels of twelve hour duration each, all 
watching, protective companions of humanity on way. 
O ruling lord of light, to their care entrust this soul. Let 
there be peace and well being for it all round, bless it 
with good health and freedom from sin and ailment. 


sara at उदुम्बलौ aaa दूतौ च॑रतो जनाँ अनु | 
तावस्मभ्यं दुशये सूयय पुनदातामसुं मद्योह भद्रम्‌ ॥ VA 


12. Urunasavasutrpa udumbalau yamasya dutau 
carato janan anu. Tavasmabhyam drsaye suryaya 
punardatam-asum-adyeha bhadram. 

Those two night and day are the most perceptive, 
abundant and alert, mighty strong and relentless watch- 
dogs of time immediately close ahead and on the heels 
of people. Let them now again give us happiness and 
well being full of bubbling energy so that we may see 
the light of the sun anew, giver of life and enlightenment. 


यमाय सोमं सुनुत यमाय॑ जुहुता हविः । 
यमं ¢ यज्ञो ग॑च्छत्ययिदुतो अरंकृतः ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Yamaya somam sunuta yamaya juhuta havih. 
Yamam ha yajno gacchatyagniduto aramkrtah. 


Prepare the soma for Yama, lord of the light and 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 14 479 


life of cosmic order, offer the homage of soma oblations 
to Yama, the holy soma-yajna goes to Yama, with all its 
beauty and power conducted by the holy fire, divine 
messenger between the devoted yajakas and the sun. 


यमाय॑ घृतवद्धविर्जुहोत प्र च॑ तिष्ठत। 
स नो देवेष्वा य॑मदीर्घमायुः प्र जीवसे ॥ ex il 


14. = Yamaya ghrtavaddhavir-juhota pra ca tisthata. 
Sano devesva yamad dirghamayuh pra jivase. 


Offer holy homage full of ghrta to Yama for 
harmony between your life and the cosmic order of time 
and nature, and abide in that mood and state of karma. 
And may the lord vest strength and efficiency in our 
body, senses and mind for a long life of good health. 


यमाय मधुमत्तमं राज्ञे हव्यं जुं होतन । 
इदं नम ऋषिभ्यः पूर्वजेभ्यः पूर्वेभ्यः oferta: ॥ ९५ ॥ 
15. Yamaya madhumattamam rajne havyam juho- 


tana. Idam nama rsibhyah purvajebhyah 
purvebhyah pathikrdbhyah. 


Offer the sweetest and holiest honeyed oblations 
to Yama, Lord of time and refulgent sovereign of the 
cosmic order. This homage is in honour of the sagely 
seers, the forefathers, the ancients who carved the paths 
of life for us. 


Rega: पतति षव्युवीरेकमिद्‌ ged 
reenact छन्दांसि सर्वा ता यम आहिता ॥ १६ ॥ 


16. Trikadrukebhih patati salurvir-ekamid-brhat. 
Tristubgayatri chandamsi sarva ta yama ahita. 


The great one, supreme, infinite, omnipotent, is 


480 RGVEDA 


One, pervading the variety of existence by three 
dimensions of time, present, past and future, and by six 
seasons of the year, three lokas of space, earth, sky and 
the heavens, and six directions, rules alone. Trishtubh, 
Gayatri and all other Chhandas abide in the One Word, 
Aum. All these orders of omniscience, omnipresence 
and omnipotence abide in One, emerge from That and 
converge into That, Yama, Time. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 15 
Pitarah Devata, Shankha Yamayana Rshi 


Pitaras in this hymn means nature’s life giving, 
life preserving and life promoting pranic energies, 
especially the sun rays which start an invigorating yajna 
with the dawn and continue it upto sun set. It also means 
the flames and fragrances of yajna rising from the vedi 
and joining the natural energies to enhance the efficacy 
of nature’s recuperative power for life. On the human 
plane it means the seniors, the enlightened, the teachers 
and social workers, men of experience, vision and 
judgement who contribute to the welfare and progress 
of society with, their actions and ideas. It does not, 
however, rule out pitaras of human tradition and history 
who continue to live by their ideas and ideals they 
contributed for the progress of society, to whom we feel 
grateful for their living guidance even after their 
departure. 


उदीरतामव॑र उत्परास उन्म॑ध्यमाः frat: सोम्यासंः। 
असुं य ईयुरं वृका ऋतज्ञास्ते नोऽ वन्तु पितरो हवेषु ॥ ९॥ 


i, Udiratamavara ut parasa unmadhyamah pitarah 
somyasah. Asum ya tyuravrka rtajnaste no’vantu 
pitaro havesu. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 15 481 


May the sun rays of the morning, mid-day and 
evening time which radiate and inspire vital soma energy 
into the things they touch rise in power and efficacy 
and promote the strength and joy of life. May the wise 
seniors of the average, high and middle order, harbingers 
of peace and joy, friendly, dynamic scholars and 
scientists of yajna who know the cosmic order and the 
laws of nature and living truths of life rise, inspire us 
with energy and enthusiasm for life, and may all these 
saviour and protective powers of nature and humanity 
strengthen us to defend and promote ourselves in 
internal and external challenges of life and the 
environment. 


इदं पित॒भ्यो sal अस्त्वद्य ये geltar य उप॑रास ईयुः 1 

ये पार्थिवे रजस्या निष॑त्ता ये at नूनं सुवृजनासु विक्षु ॥ २॥ 
2. Idam pitrbhyo namo astvadya ye purvaso ya upa- 

rasa tyuh. Ye parthive rajasya nisatta ye va nunam 

suvrjanasu viksu. 


Let this yajnic homage today be for the sun rays 
and pranic energies radiating from the east and west, 
for the energies which abide in the earthly sphere and 
in space and skies, and for the energy which vibrates in 
the living forms of nature anywhere and in humanity. 


आहं पितृन्त्सु विदर््रौ अवित्सि नर्पातं च विक्रमणं च 
विष्णोः । बर्हिषदो ये स्वधय। सुतस्य भज॑न्त पित्वस्त 
इहागमिष्ठाः ॥ ३॥ 7 

3 Aham pitrntsuvidatran avitsi napadtam ca 
vikramanam ca visnoh. Barhisado ye svadhaya 
sutasya bhajanta pitvasta ihagamisthah. 


482 RGVEDA 


I know and join the holy, wise, generous and 
parental powers of humanity. I know the stable, radiative 
and expansive power and presence of yajna and its 
creative effects. O scholars and scientists of yajna who 
join the creative science here on the vedi with your 
inputs of knowledge and expertise, come and partake 
of the freshness and fragrance of fruits produced and 
given by yajna. 


बर्हिषदः पितर Hea वांगिमा वो! हव्या च॑कृमा जुषध्वम्‌ | 
तआ गताव॑सा शन्त॑मेनाऽथां नः शं योर॑र॒पो द॑धात ue 


4. Barhisadah pitara utyarvagima vo havya cakrma 
jusadhvam. Ta a gatavasa santame-na’tha nah 
Samyorarapo dadhata. 


O parental powers of humanity, scholars of the 
science of atmospheric and environmental management 
of the globe, for all round peace and protection of life 
here and hereafter, we have prepared these yajnic 
materials for you for homage which please accept and 
use with love and faith. O masters, come always with 
peaceful modes of universal protection, bear and bring 
us showers of peace and freedom from sin, violence 
and fear. 


उप॑हूताः पितरं: सोम्यासो! बर्हिष्येषु निधिषु प्रियेषु । 
त आ ग॑मन्तु त इह श्रुवन्त्वधि Gard ds वन्त्वस्मान्‌॥ ५ ॥ 
9, Upahutah pitarah somyaso barhisyesu nidhisu 


priyesu. Ta a gamantu ta tha Sruvantvadhi bru- 
vantu te’vantvasman. 


Senior venerable sages eminent in the science 
of soma and yajnic production of the dearest valuable 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 15 483 


wealth forms for peace and progress, invoked and 
invited with reverence, pray, come here to the yajna, 
listen to our ideas and words, speak, consider and 
discuss, and protect and promote us with knowledge. 


आच्या जानुं दक्षिणतो निषद्येमं यज्ञमभि गुंणीत fave 
मा हिंसिष्ट पितरः: केन॑ चिन्नो ag आग॑ः पुरुषता 
कराम ।॥ ६॥ 


6. Acya janu daksinato nisadyemam yajiiamabhi 
grnita visve. Ma himsista pitarah kena cinno 
yadva agah purusata karama. 


O saviour sages of the world, with knees bent 
in honour of the vedi, please sit on our right, accept and 
accomplish the yajna with specific words, and if we 
happen to transgress some manners or ritual, or are 
impertinent to you because, after all, we are human, 
pray be kind and do not in any way hurt or punish us. 


आसीनासो SRST HATE रयिं ध॑त्त दाशुषे AAS | 
पुत्रेभ्यः पितर स्तस्य वस्वः प्र य॑च्छत त इ होर्ज' दधात U9 

a. Asinaso aruninam-upasthe rayim dhatta dasuse 
martyaya. Putrebhyah pitarastasya vasvah pra 
yacchata ta thorjam dadhata. 


The radiations of sun rays in the lights of the 
dawn bear wealth and energy for the man of charity, 
and wealth and comfort for his children too. May the 
sages seated on the vedi realise and bring that wealth 
and energy for us and our future generations. 


ये नः ud पितरः सोम्यासोऽनूहिरे सोमपीथं वसिष्ठाः 1 
तेभिर्यमः संरराणो हवींष्युशन्नुशद्धिः प्रतिकाममत्तु ॥ ८ ॥ 


484 RGVEDA 


8. Ye nah purve pitarah somyaso’nuhire somapi- 
tham vasisthah. Tebhiryamah samrarano havim- 
syusannusadbhih pratikamamattu. 


Those eastern lights of the dawn which awaken 
and inspire us bear pranic energies radiant and replete 
with life energy of the sun, treasure source of living 
soma. May the sun shining and rejoicing with those very 
bright rays accept and revitalise our oblations offered 
into the holy fire at dawn. 


ये तातुषुर्दे वत्रा जेह॑माना होत्राविदः स्तोम॑तष्टासो अकैः | 
ama याहि सुविदत्रेभिरर्वाङ्‌ सत्यैः कव्यैः पित्भिर्घ्म- 
सद्धिः॥९॥ 


9. Ye tatrsur-devatra jehamana hotravidah stoma- 
tastaso arkaih. Agne yahi suvidatrebhir-arvan 
satyaih kavyaih pitrbhir-gharmasadbhih. 


Those bright rays of the dawn, divine, sharp and 
inspiring, invigorating, which come to earth thirsting 
for holy food and water, with those very rays, generous, 
truly divine, poetically sublime and soul satisfying, 
conveying pranic energies with morning, mid-day and 
evening warmth and heat of the day, O yajna fire, come 
and bless our yajna for the gift of rain. 


ये सत्यासो हविरदो हविष्पा s-sur देवैः सरथं दधानाः | 
आगे याहि सहस्रं देववन्दैः ut: पूर्वैः पितृभिर 
are: ॥ ९०॥ 

10. = Ye satyaso havirado havispa indrena devaih 
saratham dadhanah. Agne yahi sahasram 


devavandaih paraih purvaih pitrbhir-gharma- 
sadbhih. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 15 485 


O yajnic fire, arise and come with those true 
and pervasive, oblation consuming, water promoting, 
electric energy borne eastern and western sun rays along 
with divine forces of nature which are laden with pranic 
energies of a thousand mind and sense inspiring 
sanatives pervasive in the light of the sun from dawn to 
dusk. 


अ्थिंष्वात्ताः पितर एह ग॑च्छत॒ सद॑-सदः सदत Gaui: | 
अत्ता हवींषि प्रय॑तानि बर्हिष्य्था रयिं सर्ववीरं दधा- 
ATTN VV 


11.  Agnisvattah pitara eha gacchata sadah sadah 
sadata supranitayah. Atta havimsi prayatani 
barhisyatha rayim sarvaviram dadhatana. 


O senior sages and scientists of solar energy and 
yajnic production committed to policies of positive and 
creative technology, come here, take your positions 
assigned and reserved in the programme, accept the 
homage and yajnic materials offered and, by the conduct 
of yajna, bless us with wealth, power and honour worthy 
of brave humanity for generations. 


wana diet जातवेदोऽ atgent सुरभीणि कृत्वी । 
प्रादाः पितृभ्यः स्वधया ते अक्षन्नद्धि त्वं देव प्रय॑ता 
हवीं षिं॥ ९२॥ 

12. Tvamagna ilito jatavedo’vaddhavyani surabhini 
krtvi. Pradah pitrbhyah svadhaya te aksannad- 
dhi tvam deva prayata havimsi. 


O divine fire present in everything born, lighted, 
raised and developed to flaming power, you catalyse 
refine and energise the holy materials to tremendous 


486 RGVEDA 


power and fragrance. O brilliant divinity, consume the 
materials offered, feed them to the sun rays, and may 
they too further refine, energise and spread them all 
around in space for creative purposes of nature for life 
on earth. 


ये चेह पितरो ये च नेह यांश्च॑ विदा याँ ॐ च न प्र॑विदा । त्वं 
वेत्थ यति ते जातवेदः स्वधाभिर्यज्ञं सुकुतं जुषस्व ।॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Yeceha pitaro ye caneha yansca vidma yan u ca 
na pravidma. Tvam vettha yati te jatavedah 
svadhabhiryajnam sukrtam jusasva. 


O Jataveda, all pervasive all knowing Agni, 
those sun rays which are here, those which are not here, 
those which we know of and those which we do not 
know of, you know them all and, as far as you pervade 
and know, pray accept our oblations of yajna with 
pleasure, make them good, and turn them to universal 
power and goodness by radiant rays of the sun for the 
benefit of all humanity and all life on earth. 


ये stitraren ये अन॑गरिदग्धा मध्ये fea: स्वधयां मादयंन्ते। 
तेभि: स्वराव्छसुंनीतियेतां य॑थाव॒शं तन्वं कल्पयस्व ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Ye agnidagdha ye anagnidagdha madhye divah 
svadhaya maddayante. Tebhih svaralasunitime- 
tam yathavasam tanvam kalpayasva. 


Those rays of the sun which carry the heat of 
fire, in summer, and those which do not carry the heat 
of fire, in winter, all these which radiate in the spaces 
between the solar region and the earth and bring joy to 
people by showers of rain, by all these, O self-refulgent 
Agni, strengthen to the utmost, energise and refine this 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 16 487 


body which is the seat of life energy. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 16 
Agni Devata, Damana Yamayana Rshi 


मेन॑मगरे fa द॑हो माभि शोचो मास्य त्वचं Fafarat मा 
शरीरम्‌। यदा श्तं कृणवो! जातवेदोऽथेमेनं प्र हिंणुता- 
त्पित॒भ्य॑ः।॥ ९॥ 


0 Mainamagne vi daho mabhi 50८0 masya tvacam 
ciksipo ma Sariram. Yada Srtam krnavo jatavedo 
*themenam pra hinutat pitrbhyah. 


Agni, do not burn it off wholly, do not consume 
it entirely, do not cast away its form, do not cast away 
its body entirely. When its gross body is reduced to ash, 
then, O Jataveda, all pervasive, all knowing Agni, 
deliver it to the sun rays. 


श्रतं यदा करसि जातवेदोऽथेमेनं परिं दत्तात्पितुभ्यंः। 
यदा गच्छात्यसुंनीतिपेताम्थां देवानां वानीर वाति ॥ २॥ 


Zi Srtam yada karasi jatavado’ themenam pari dattat 
pitrbhyah. Yada gacchatyasunitimetama-tha 
devanam vasanirbhavati. 


O Jataveda, when you have reduced its gross 
body to ash and delivered it to the sun rays, when it 
comes to the process of transmigration to higher 
constituent elements, then it is subjected to the laws of 
other divinities. 


सूर्य चक्षुर्गच्छतु वात॑मात्मा द्यां च॑ tres पृथिवीं च धर्म॑णा | 
अपो at गच्छ यदि at ते हितमोषधीषु प्रति तिष्ठा 
शरीरैः ॥ ३ ॥ 


488 RGVEDA 


a Suryam caksurgacchatu vatamatma dyam ca 
gaccha prthivim ca dharmana. Apo va gaccha 
yadi tatra te hitamosadhisu prati tistha sartraih. 


Let the eye go the sun. Let the soul go to the 
wind or to the region of light or to the earth in 
consequence of its dharmic performance, or, if such be 
its interest and desire, let it go to the water or reach in 
herbs and trees there to stay in mere body form. 


अजो भागस्तपसा तं त॑पस्व तं ते शोचिस्त॑पतु तं ते अर्चिः। 
ard शिवास्तन्वो जातवेद स्ताभिर्वहेनं सुकृतामु 
THA ॐ ॥ 


4. Ajo bhagastapasa tam tapasva tam te Socistapatu 
tam te arcih. Yaste sivastanvo jatavedastabhir- 
vahainam sukrtamu lokam. 


O Jataveda, that part of human personality which 
is unborn and eternal is the soul, purify and season it to 
its original purity by the heat of your divine discipline. 
May your light and fire purify and shine it to its purity 
and lustre beyond the dross. And by those divine natural 
potentials of yours which are holy and blissful, pray 
carry this soul to noble body forms in blessed regions 
of life. 


अव॑ सृज Waa पितृभ्यो यस्त आहं तश्चरति स्वधाभिः । 
आयुर्वसान so वेतु शेषः सं ग॑च्छतां तन्वां जातवेदः ॥ ५ ॥ 

>: Ava srja punaragne pitrbhyo yasta ahutascarati 
svadhabhih. Ayurvasana upa vetu sesah sam 
gacchatam tanva jatavedah. 


O Agni, Jataveda, form and shape out once again 
from material elements and energy what, having been 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 16 489 


offered to you in the fire, roams around vested with its 
own potentials. The soul that remained alive after giving 
up its material vestments in the fire may, we pray, assume 
a life time of earthly existence and go about with the 
body once again doing its karmic business as earlier. 


aa कृष्णः कुन आतुतोद पिपीलः ad उत वा varda: | 
अगिष्टद्धिश्वादगदं puna सोम॑श्च यो ब्राह्मणां 
आविवेश ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yat te krsnah sakuna atutoda pipilah sarpa uta 
va Svapadah. Agnistadvisvadagadam krnotu 
somasca yo brahmanan avivesa. 


O soul, in the course of life, whatever fear, harm 
or injury darkness, dark ones, birds, beasts, insects or 
reptiles may do to your body, may Agni and Soma and 
Soma science known to experts heal that and restore 
you back to good health. 


stad परि गोभिर्व्ययस्व सं प्रोर्ण॒ष्व पीव॑सा मेद॑सा च। 
नेत्त्वा धृष्णुर्हरसा Se ATU दधृण्विंधक्ष्यन्पंर्यद्धयांते ॥ ७॥ 


re Agnervarma pari gobhirvyayasva sam prornusva 
pivasa medasa ca. Net tva dhrsnurharasa jarhr- 
sano dadhrgvidhaksyan paryankhayate. 


O soul, from fire itself, from the flames 
themselves, get another body form anew and cover it 
with flesh and marrow, and let not this fire, bold and 
crackling with blaze of power, embrace you and burnt 
you out. 


saan चमसं मा वि fier: प्रियो देवानामुत सोम्यानाम्‌ । 
एष यश्चमसो देवपानस्तस्मिन्देवा अमृतां मादयन्ते ॥ ८ ॥ 


490 RGVEDA 


8. Imamagne camasam ma vi jihvarah priyo deva- 
namuta somyanam. Esa yaScamaso devapa- 
nastasmin deva amrta madayante. 


O Agni, do not disturb and dislodge this new 
body form which is a darling of the divines and the sun 
rays of light and bliss, this body in which the immortal 
divinities rejoice and find their fulfilment with yajnic 
food and drink. 


mearenht प्र हिणोमि दूरं यमराज्ञो गच्छतु रिप्रवाहः | 
इटैवायमित॑रो जातवेदा देवेभ्यो हव्यं व॑हतु प्रजानन्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Kravyadamagnim pra hinomi duram yamarajnio 
gacchatu ripravahah. Ihaivayamitaro jataveda 
devebhyo havyam vahatu prajanan. 


I set in motion the fire which consumes the 
corpse, and may it, carrier of the material body, go up 
with it and reach the regions of life consuming spirit of 
Time. And here itself the other fire, Jataveda, all 
pervasive fire of life, all aware, may bring in the food 
for life for the sustenance and satisfaction of the 
divinities. 
यो अगिः क्रव्यात्प्र॑विवेश at गृहमिमं uvafaat 
जातवेदसम्‌। तं ह॑रामि पित॒यज्ञाय॑ देवं स घर्ममिन्वात्परमे 
सधस्थे 11 ९०॥ 

10. Yoagnih kravyat pravivesa vo grhamimam pasya- 
nnitaram jatavedasam. Tam harami pitryajnaya 
devam sa gharmaminvat parame sadhasthe. 


The fire that turns away from the corpse 
consuming fire enters your homes and, watching this 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 16 491 


other all pervasive fire, I give up that and take to this 
brilliant fire for honour to ancestors and the 
environment. May it carry our yajna to the sun in the 
highest heaven. 


यो अगिः क्रव्यवाहनः पितून्यक्षदु तावृध॑ः। 
प्रेदु हव्यानिं वोचति देवेभ्यश्च पितृभ्य आ ॥ ९९॥ 
11. Yoagnih kravyavahanah pitrn yaksadrtavrdhah. 
Predu havyani vocati devebhyasca pitrbya a. 
The fire, participant of natural law, which carries 
the elements of the corpse to nature, pervades in senior 
humanity and vibrates in natural energies too. The same 
fire carries the yajnic homage and proclaims the gifts 
for the ancestors, for the divines and for nature. 
उशन्तस्त्वा नि धीमह्युशन्तः समिंधीमहि। 
Brag आ व॑ह पितृन्ह विषे अत्तवे॥ ९२॥ 
12. USantastva ni dhimahyuSsantah samidhimahi. 
UsannuSata a vaha pitrn havise attave. 


With love and passion we hold you at heart for 
thought and reflection. With love and faith we light you 
together and celebrate. You too with love and longing 
come and bring our loving seniors and blissful energies 
to receive our offerings and universally disperse them. 


यं want समदं हस्तमु निर्वौपया पुनं: । 
कियाम्ब्वत्र रोहतु पाकदूर्वा व्य॑ल्कशा ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Yam tvamagne samadahastamu nirvapaya punah. 
Kiyambvatra rohatu pakadurva vyalkasa. 


O fire, leave the place, extinguish the heat, let it 


492 RGVEDA 


cool where you scorched and burnt it, and let it be fresh 
with the growth of watery plants, luxuriant grass and 
leafy herbs. 


शीतिके शीतिकावति eitdes हादिंकावति। 
मण्डूक्या सु सं ग॑म इमं स्वभ हर्षय ॥ ९४॥ 


14. Sitike Sitikavati hladike hladikavati. 
Mandidya su sam gama imam svagnim harsaya. 


O cool grass, O refreshing land, growing with 
luxuriant grass, O delightful spot covered with delightful 
flowers, rejoice with beauty and grace, let this place of 
holy fire be renewed, joyous and gracious. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 17 
Saranyu (1-2), Pusha (3-6), Sarasvati (7-9), Apah (10, 
14), Apah or Soma (11-13), Devatah, Devashrava 
Yamayana Rshi 


wast दुहित्रे dad कुणोतीतीदं विश्वं भुव॑नं समेति। 
यमस्य॑ माता पर्युह्यमाना महो जाया विव॑स्वतो ननाश ॥ ९ ॥ 


1 Tvasta duhitre vahatum krnotitidam visvam 
bhuvanam sameti. Yamasya mata paryuhyama- 
na maho jaya vivasvato nand§a. 


Tvashta, cosmic maker of forms of existence, 
for the fulfilment of the creative urge of nature, Prakrti, 
initiates the process of evolution and the entire universe 
comes into being in cosmic time. While Prakrti, consort 
of the self-refulgent creator Savita (Tvashta Being its 
forming faculty) and mother origin of the order of 
evolution, is fertilised and moved on to its generative 
function, it disappears, that is, it converts from its 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 17 493 


original and intangible essence into the tangible creative 
form and power in existence. 


अपागूहन्नमृतां मर्त्येभ्यः कृत्वी सव॑णमिददुर्विवंस्वते | 
उताश्विनावभर द्यत्तदासीदजंहादु द्वा मिथुना स॑र॒ण्यूः ॥ २॥ 


2. Apaguhannamrtam martyebhyah krtvi savarna- 
madadurvivasvate. Utasvinavabharadyat tada- 
stdajahadu dva mithuna saranyuh. 


Transforming the original immortal constant 
Prakrti in favour of mutable mortal forms of existence, 
the evolutionary power of divinity, creative and dynamic 
Prakrti, offers this form of itself to self-refulgent creator 
and master, and then in that dynamic state as it is then, 
it bears a twin pair of evolved existence, the Ashvins, 
positive-negative complementarities of the evolutionary 
circuit of nature’s dynamics, and produces procreative 
couples such as Agni and Soma, energy and matter, 
prana and rayi, male and female, presence and absence 
(as the two may be described from different points of 
view). 


पूषा त्वेतश्च्यावयतु प्र विद्वानन्॑टपशुर्थव॑नस्य गोपाः । स 
त्वैतेभ्यः UR ददत्पित॒भ्योऽ भिर्देवेभ्य॑: सुविदत्रियेभ्यः ॥ ३ ॥ 


Pusa tvetasScyavayatu pra vidvananastapasur- 
bhuvanasya gopah. Sa tvaitebhyah pari dadat 
pitrbhyo ’gnirdevebhyah suvidatriyebhyah. 


O man, may Pusha, lord of life and nourishment, 
omniscient sustainer and pervasive protector of the 
world, whose light and life of forms never goes out of 
existence, inspire you and lead you on the right path 
from here. May he, leading lord self-refulgent Agni, 


494 RGVEDA 


dedicate you to noble parents and brilliant generous 
teachers. 


sre favarg: परि पासति त्वा पूषा त्वा पातु प्रपथे 
पुरस्तात्‌। यत्रासते सुकृतो यत्र ते ययुस्तत्र त्वा देवः सविता 
dard us 


4. Ayurvisvayuh pari pasati tva pusda tva patu pra- 
pathe purastat. Yatrasate sukrto yatra te yayu- 
statra tva devah savita dadhatu. 


Pusha, life of the world and giver of life and 
nourishment, may protect you all round and inspire and 
promote you on the path forward, and may Savita, self- 
refulgent lord of light and vision, guide you where men 
of noble action reach, and stabilise you where they 
abide. 


पूषेमा आशा अनु वेद्‌ सर्वाः सो अस्माँ अभ॑यतमेन नेषत्‌ । 
स्व स्तिदा आघूणिः सर्ववीरोऽ प्र॑युच्छन्पुर एतु प्रजा- 
FLUNG 


5. Pusema asa anu veda sarvah so asman abha- 
yatamena nesat. Svastida aghrnih sarvavi- 
ro’prayucchan pura etu prajanan. 


Pusha knows all these paths and directions of 
life and he fulfils all our hopes and ambitions too. May 
he lead us on the most fearless path of progress. May 
he, giver of all round good and well being, refulgent 
and vigilant, all mighty, all knowing, be our pioneer 
and path maker without neglect or relent. 


प्रप॑थे gases पूषा प्रप॑थे दिवः प्रप॑थे पृथिव्याः । उभे 
अभि प्रियतमे सधस्थे आ च परा च चरति प्रजानन्‌ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 17 495 


6. Prapathe pathamajanista pusa prapathe divah 
prapathe prthivyah. Ubhe abhi priyatame 
sadhasthe a ca para ca carati prajanan. 


Pusha inspires, strengthens and guides humanity 
to know and follow the best paths of life and reach the 
goal, the paths to heaven and the paths over earth. He 
pervades the dearest paths of progress here and the paths 
to freedom there and, all knowing and emerging in 
consciousness, guides us here and beyond. 


सर॑स्वतीं caged! हवन्ते सरस्वतीमध्वरे aaa | 
सर॑स्वतीं सुकृतो stead सर॑स्वती दाशुषे aT’ दात्‌॥ ७॥ 


7. Sarasvatim devayanto havante sarasvatima- 
dhvare tayamane. Sarasvatim sukrto ahvayanta 
sarasvati dasuse varyam dat. 


Aspirants to knowledge and the light of divinity 
invoke Sarasvati, voice of divinity, they offer homage 
of faith and devotion in psychic and spiritual yajna 
which expands their intelligence and vision. Men of 
noble action invoke Sarasvati, ever flowing Spirit of 
Knowledge, for strength of will and direction. May 
Sarasvati grant cherished gifts of knowledge, will and 
vision to the generous yajakas. 


सर॑स्वति या सरथं ययाथ॑ स्वधाभिर्देवि पितुभिर्मद॑न्ती । 
आसद्यास्मिन्बर्हिषि मादयस्वाऽनमीवा इष आ धेह्यस्मे ॥ ८ ॥ 


ne Sarasvati ya saratham yayatha svadhabhirdevi 
pitrbhirmadanti. Asadyasmin barhisi madayas- 
va’namiva isa a dhehyasme. 


O divine Sarasvati, cosmic voice of divinity, 
who radiate and expand on the rays of light and rejoice 


496 RGVEDA 


with homage of faith and devotion and the inner 
vibrations of mind and soul, pray come, abide in this 
inner seat of mind and consciousness, bless us with 
divine joy and bring us food and energy free from sin 
and pollution for the enlightenment of mind and soul. 


सर॑स्वतीं यां पितरो हव॑न्ते दक्षिणा यज्ञम॑थिनक्षमाणाः। 
सहस्त्रार्घयिव्ो अत्र॑ भागं रायस्पोषं यज॑मानेषु धेहि।॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Sarasvatim yam pitaro havante daksina yajnama- 
bhinaksamanah. Sahasrarghamilo atra bhagam 
rayasposam yajamanesu dhehi. 


O divine Sarasvati, whom venerable sages 
dedicated to meditative yajna in mind and soul invoke 
and serve in right earnest, we pray, bless the yajamanas 
with their share here of food and nourishment, wealth, 
honour and excellence, and the vision and voice of 
divinity loved and sought for by thousands of seekers. 


आपो अस्मान्मातरः शुन्धयन्तु घृतेन॑ नो Fata: पुनन्तु । 
विश्वं हि रिप्रं प्रवह॑न्ति देवीरुदिद।भ्यः शुचिरा पूत 
UU ९०॥ 


10. Apo asman matarah gundhayantu ghrtena no 
ghrtapvah punantu. Visvam hi ripram prava-hanti 
devirudidabhyah Sucira puta emi. 


May the fluid and vibrant currents of cosmic 
energy, original mother source of nature’s dynamics of 
evolution, which, divine and inviolable, soaked in 
goodness and grace, wash away the entire sin, evil and 
pollution of life, purify and sanctify us with sweetness 
and beauty of manners and culture. Thus purified and 
sanctified, I rise and go on in life. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 17 497 


द्र प्सश्च॑स्कन्द प्रथमां अनु द्यूनिमं च योनिमनु यश्च पूर्वीः । 
समानं योनिमनु संचरन्तं द्रप्सं जुहोम्यनु aa होत्राः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Drapsascaskanda prathaman anu dyunimam ca 
yonimanu yasca purvah. Samanam yonimanu 
samcarantam drapsam juhomyanu sapta hotrah. 


The elixir of life showers on the earliest 
refulgent worlds by the dawn of days, on this world 
and this life also as did ever before. The same elixir of 
life, the same radiant sun, the same soma element of 
divine nature, vibrant in this world and this life, I invoke 
and celebrate with all my seven faculties in honour of 
the spectrum of its beauty and divinity. 


यस्ते द्रप्सः स्कन्दति ae अंशुबाहिच्युतो धिषणाया 
उपस्थात्‌। अध्वर्योर्वा परि वा यः पवित्रात्तं तै जुहोमि मन॑सा 
वष॑ट्कृतम्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Yaste drapsah skandati yaste amsurbahucyuto 
dhisanaya upasthat. Adhvaryorva pari va yah 
pavitrat tam te juhomi manasa vasatkrtam. 


O Savita, lord giver of life and light of the world, 
the soma nectar of life that showers ever from divinity, 
that vigour and inspiration which is released from your 
hands and from the loving heart of exuberant Mother 
Nature filtered through her pure sattvic elements in the 
cosmic yajna, that nectar received at heart in the soul, I 
offer in homage with prayer. 


यस्ते द्रप्सः स्कन्नो यस्ते अंशुर वश्च यः परः SAT | 
अयं देवो बृहस्पतिः सं तं सिञ्चतु Taegu ९३॥ 


498 RGVEDA 


13. Yaste drapsah skanno yaste amSuravasca yah 
parah sruca. Ayam devo brhaspatih sam tam 
sincatu radhase. 


O Soma, lord of life, giver of light and bliss, 
your nectar of divinity that vibrates every where, the 
radiations of light and spiritual awareness expansive 
here in existence and existent there in absolute time and 
space, that very nectar of life and light of existence, 
may Brhaspati, this generous spirit of infinite knowledge 
and speech, shower upon us by the Word and vibrations 
of divinity for our fulfilment of life here and hereafter. 


पय॑स्वतीरोष॑धयः पय॑स्वन्मामकं aed: | 
अपां पय॑स्वदित्पयस्तेनं मा सह vera ९४॥ 


14. = Payasvatirosadhayah payasvanmamakam vacah. 
Apam payasvadit payastena ma saha sundhata. 


May the oshadhis, herbs and trees, which receive 
the sap and sweetness of their sustenance from sun light 
and moon rays, be full of exuberant Soma nectar of life. 
May this fluent song and speech of mine be full of love 
and sweetness of life’s joy. May this inspiring essence 
of the liquid flow of natural energies be full of universal 
nectar, and may all these with that nectar energise, purify 
and sanctify me. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 18 
Mrtyu (1-4), Dhata (5), Tvashta (6), Pitrmedha or 
Prajapati (7-14) Devatah, Sankusuka Yamayana Rshi 
परं मृत्यो अनु परेहि पन्थां यस्ते स्व sad! देवयानात्‌। 
चक्षुष्मते श्युण्वते ते ब्रवीमि मा न॑: प्रजां रीरिषो मोत 
वीरान्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 18 499 


५. Param mrtyo anu parehi pantham yaste sva itaro 
devayanat. Caksusmate 5110141८ te bravimi ma nah 
prajam ririso mota viran. 

O Death, go off to that other path that’s yours, 
of mutability other than the path of divinity. You have 
eyes to see and ears to hear, and to you I say: Do not 
hurt our people, do not destroy our brave. 


मृत्योः पदं योपयन्तो यदैत द्राघीय आयुः प्रतरं दर्धानाः। 
आप्यायमानाः प्रजया धनेन शुद्धाः पूता भ॑वत यज्ञि- 
aa: २॥ 


2. Mrtyoh padam yopayanto yadaita draghiya ayuh 
prataram dadhanah. Apyayamanah prajaya 
dhanena suddhah puta bhavata yajniyasah. 


O travellers on the path of divinity, dedicated 
performers of yajna, as you go forward effacing the onset 
of death and living a long life of high order of happiness 
and virtue, may you be blest with wealth and noble 
progeny, may you be pure and sanctified at heart and in 
the soul. 


इमे जीवा fa मुतैराव॑वु aay ear cag तिर्नो अद्य । प्राञ्चो 
अगाम नृतये हसाय द्राघीय आयुः प्रतरं दधानाः ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Ime jiva vi mrtairavavrtrannabhudbhadra deva- 
hutirno adya. Pranco agama nrtaye hasaya drag- 
hiya ayuh prataram dadhanah. 


May these living people, (we all), be free from 
the shades of death in life. May our dedication and 
service to divinity be auspicious and fruitful today. May 
we go forward living a long life of high order of virtue 
full of the joy of song and dance and laughter. 


500 RGVEDA 


इमं जीवेभ्यः परिधिं द॑धापि मैषां नु गादप॑रो अर्थपेतम्‌। 
शतं जीवन्तु शरद॑: पुरूचीर न्तर्मृत्युं द॑धतां पर्व तेन ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Imam jivebhyah paridhim dadhami maisam nu 
gadaparo arthametam. Satam jivantu saradah 
purucir-antarmrtyum dadhatam parvatena. 


I set this border line of order for these people. 
May none of these trespass this into the other territory 
of death. May they live a long age of full hundred years, 
bearing though the fact of death within with adamantine 
walls of resistance by the discipline of health. 


यथाहान्यनुपूर्वं भवन्ति यथ॑ तवं ऋतुभिर्यन्ति साधु | 
यथा न पूर्वमपरो जहात्येवा धातरायूंषि कल्पयैषाम्‌ ॥ ५५ ॥ 


= Yathahanyanupurvam bhavanti yatha rtava rtu- 
bhiryanti sadhu. Yatha na purvamaparo jahdatye- 
va dhatarayumsi kalpayaisam. 


Just as days follow in succession, the latter 
following the former and the former living on in the 
latter, just as seasons go on by order of the seasons of 
the year, just as the successor does not and cannot 
forsake the predecessor, so in the same order, O lord 
ordainer and sustainer of humanity, order and sustain 
the life line of these people. 


आ रोहतायुर्जरसं वृणाना अनुपूर्व यत॑माना यति 81 इह 
त्वष्टा सुजनिमा सजोषा दीर्घमायु: करति जीवसे वः ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. A rohatayurjarasam vrnana anupirvam yata- 
mana yati stha. Tha tvasta sujanima sajosa dirgha- 
mayuh karati jivase vah. 


Go forward high on course of life choosing a 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 18 501 


full age unto completion and fulfilment in the order of 
succession and renewal from former to latter, living in 
discipline actively, all of you, as many as you are. Nobly 
born here in life, living together in piety with love and 
devotion as you are, Tvashta, the cosmic maker, ordains 
a full life of long years for you to live in joy. 


इमा नारीरविधवाः सुपलीराञ्जनेन सर्पिषा सं विशन्तु | 
अनश्रवोऽ नमीवाः GLA आ रोहन्तु जन॑यो योनिमग्रे ॥ ७ ॥ 


oe Ima nariravidhavah supatniranjanena sarpisa 
sam visantu. Anasravo’namivah suratna ठ roha- 
ntu Janayo yonimagre. 


Let these women, noble wives living with their 
husbands, enter and live in their homes, and let them, 
decked with jewels with beauty aids, creams and 
unguents, free from sorrow and ill health and blest with 
noble children, move forward high in life. 


उदीर्ष्व नार्यभि जीवलोकं गतासुमेतमुप शोष ue 
हस्तग्राभस्य दिधिषोस्तवेदं पत्युर्जनित्वमभि सं ब॑भूथ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Udirsva naryabhi jivalokam gatasumetamupa 
sesa ehi. Hastagrabhasya didhisostavedam pat- 
yurjanitvamabhi sam babhutha. 


Rise, O woman, to a new phase of life, your 
husband is now dead and gone. Come take the hand of 
this man from among the living who offers to take your 
hand and maintain you, and live in consort with this 
other and new husband of yours for a life time. 


धनुर्हस्तादादर्दानो मृतस्याऽस्मे AAS वर्चसे AHA | अत्रैव 
त्वमिह वयं सुवीरा विश्वाः स्पृधो अभिमातीर्जयेम ॥ ९॥ 


502 RGVEDA 


9. Dhanurhastadadadano mrtasya’sme ksatraya 
varcase balaya. Atraiva tvamiha vayam suvira 
visvah sprdho abhimatirjayema. 


Taking the arms from the hand of the dead 
warrior for the sake of our social order and its strength 
and glory, here itself and now, you and we all blest with 
brave heroes shall overcome all our rivals and enemies 
of the world. 


उप॑ सर्पं मातरं भूमिंमेतासुंरुव्यच॑सं पृथिवीं सुशेवाम्‌ 
ऊर्णम्रदा यु वतिर्दक्षिणावत एषा त्वा पातु निऋतेरुप- 
स्थात्‌ ॥ Qo ul 


10. Upa sarpa mataram bhumim-etamuruvyacasam 
prthivim susevam. Urnamrada yuvatirdaksina- 
vata esa tva patu nirrterupasthdat. 


O man, go to this land, this motherly earth wide 
and expansive, kind and gracious. Soft, generous and 
youthful for the man of generosity and yajnic dedication, 
she would protect you from the clutches of adversity 
and premature death and promote you with prosperity. 


उच्छु ञ्चस्व पृथिवि मानि बाधथाः सूपायनास्मै भव 
सूपवञ्चना । माता पुत्रं यथां सिचाऽरभ्येनं भूम ऊर्णुहि।॥ ९९॥ 


11. Ucchvancasva prthivi ma ni badhathah supa- 
yanasmai bhava supavancana. Mata putram 
yatha sica’bhyenam bhuma urnuhi. 


O mother earth, receive this soul with elation, 
stop it not, hurt it not. Be a nursing mother for this child, 
be soft and caressing with love and affection. Just as 
mother covers the child with the hem of her sari, so, O 
mother earth, cover, caress and protect it to maturity. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 18 503 


उच्छञ्चंमाना पृथिवी सु तिंखतु सहस्रं मित॒ उप fe 
श्रयन्ताम्‌ । ते गृहासो घ तश्चुतो भवन्तु विश्वाहास्मै शरणाः 
सन्त्वत्र ।॥। ९२॥ 


12. Ucchvancamana prthivi su tisthatu sahasram mita 
upa hi Ssrayantam. Te grhaso ghrtascuto bhavantu 
visvahasmai Saranah santvatra. 


May the earth stay abundant, generous and 
prosperous, giving life sustenance and shelter to 
uncountable souls which may live in here with peace 
and joy. O mother, may your homes be full of love and 
abound in food and delicacies, and may they always 
provide peace, pleasure and comfort for humanity. 


उत्त स्तभ्नामि पृथिवीं त्वत्परीमं त्ोगं निदधन्मो अहं रिषम्‌। 
एतां स्थूणां पितरो! धारयन्तु तेऽत्र यमः सादना ते 
मिनोतु ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Ut te stabhnami prthivim tvat parimam logam 
nidadhanmo aham risam. Etam sthunam pitaro 
dharayantu te’tra yamah sadana te minotu. 


O man, for you I sustain this earth up in space, 
for you I place this global atmosphere around, and this 
I would not hurt or dislodge. This well pillared, well 
sustained planet of clay the rays of the sun would sustain, 
and the sun would sustain and vitalise the homes of 
life. 


प्रतीचीने मामहनीष्वाः पर्णपिवा de: | 
प्रतीची जग्रभा वाचमश्वं रश॒नया यथा ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Praticine mamahanisvah parnamiva dadhuh. 
Praticim jagrabha vacamasvam rasanaya yatha. 


504 RGVEDA 


In the days ahead, as the archers fix feathers on 
the arrow to hit the target, so may I concentrate my 
attention with the arrow-like chant of Aum to reach the 
target of Divinity and, like a horse controlled by bridle 
reins, direct my voice of prayer in focus on the deity. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 19 


Apah or Gavah Devata, Mathita Yamana or Bhrgu 
Varuni or Chyavana Bhargava Rshi 


नि व्॑तध्वं art गाताऽ स्माच्त्सिंषक्त रेवतीः | 
अग्नीषोमा पुनर्वसू अस्मे धारयतं रयिम्‌॥ ९॥ 


ls Ni vartadhvam manu gata’smantsisakta revatth. 
Agnisoma punarvasu asme dharayatam rayim. 


O cows, fluent energies, flowing waters and 
radiant rays of light, O dynamic people, all treasure 
holds of wealth, go round and come, go not elsewhere, 
come bearing wealth of life. Bring us showers of 
abundant food and energy. Agni and Soma, fire and 
water energy, Punarvasu, wealth in circulation, bring 
in wealth for us from all round. 


पुनरेना नि ada पुन॑रेना न्या कुरु । 
इन्द्र॑ एणा नि य॑च्छत्वगिरेना उपाजतु ॥ २॥ 


2, Punarena ni vartaya punarena nya kuru. 
Indra ena ni yacchatvagnirena upajatu. 


O ruler, keep the dynamics in motion and 
circulation, control them back and forth. Let Indra, the 
controller, keep them in controlled circulation. Let Agni, 
the enlightened, keep them in radiation, watch them and 
keep them in ordered motion. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 19 505 


पुन॑रे ता नि वर्तन्तामस्मिन्पुंष्यन्तु गोप॑तौ । 
gear नि धारयेह तिष्ठतु या chau an 


a: Punareta ni vartantamasmin pusyantu gopatau. 
Thaivagne ni dharayeha tisthatu ya rayih. 


Let these dynamic forces in circulation come 
back again, grow and rise in this social system governed 
by the ruling power. Here itself, O Agni, keep their reins 
on hold, and let the wealth centre here in the soul of the 
system. 


यन्नियानं न्यय॑नं संज्ञानं aerator 
आवर्तनं निवर्तनं यो गोपा अपि तं ga uv 


4. Yanniyanam nyayanam samjnanam yat para- 
yanam. Avartanam nivartanam yo gopa api tam 
huve. 


Of the people in the society, of the dynamics of 
wealth in the socio-political system, of the fluctuations 
of mind and sense in the individual personality, the 
movement outward, movement inward, conscious 
balance and equilibrium, the expense out again, 
withdrawal, release and hold, I watch, and I invoke and 
call up whoever is the keeper, ruler and master. 


य उदानड्‌ व्यय॑नं य sare पराय॑णम्‌। 
आवर्तनं निवर्तनमपिं गोपा नि ddan ५॥ 

9 Ya udanad vyayanam ya udanat parayanam. 
Avartanam nivartanamapi gopa ni vartatam. 


Whatever the expense out, whatever the 
investment out, revolvement of wealth, energy and 
assets, whatever the total state of economy in action, 


506 RGVEDA 
let the managing powers constantly watch and control. 


आ fad नि dda gat इन्द्र गा देहि। 
जीवाभिर्भुनजामटे ।। ६ ॥ 


6. A nivarta ni vartaya punarna indra ga dehi. 
Jivabhirbhunajamahai. 


Indra, ruler and controller of life and the world, 
come, come constantly, keep life constantly in motion, 
give us the wealth and energy of life again and again. 
Pray let us enjoy life with living wealth, bubbling energy 
and creative ambition. 


uk वो विश्वतो दध ऊर्जां घृतेन पय॑सा । 
ये देवाः के च॑ यज्ञियास्ते रय्या सं संजन्तु नः ॥ ७॥ 
des Pari vo visvato dadha urja ghrtena payasa. 
Ye devah ke ca yajniyaste rayya sam srjantu nah. 


I hold, maintain and sustain you all round with 
energy, water, milk, ghrta and the delicacies of manners 
and graces of culture. 


May those who are divines worthy of yajnic 
service and association refresh, rejuvenate and advance 
us with wealth, honour and excellence. 


आ निवर्तन ada नि निवर्तन वर्तय । 
भूम्याश्चतस्रः प्रदिशस्ताभ्य॑ एना नि वर्तय ui ८ ॥ 

8. A nivartana vartaya ni nivartana vartaya. 
Bhumyascatasrah pradisastabhya ena ni vartaya. 


O constant, vibrant, ever present lord, turn to 
us. O lord ever vigilant, inspire us to turn to you. Four 
are the directions of the earth. From all these, let the 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 20 507 


wealth of the world, the energies of nature, the 
fluctuations of our mind and senses turn to us, revolve, 
concentrate and vibrate there and here. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 20 
Agni Devata, Vimada Aindra or Prajapatya, or 
Vasukrt Vasukra Rshi 
भद्रं नो अपि वातय Aa: ॥ ९॥ 
1. Bhadram no api vataya manah. 
O Agni, lord of light, inspire and enlighten our 
mind to turn to divinity and concentrate there. 
shia भुजां afas शासा मित्रं दुर्धरीतुम्‌ । 
यस्य धर्मन्त्स्व१रेनींः सपर्यन्ति मातुरूधः ॥ २॥ 
2. Agnimile bhujam yavistham Sasa mitram durdha- 
ritum. Yasya dharmantsvarenth saparyanti matu- 
rudhah. 


I invoke, celebrate and worship Agni, ever most 
youthful and powerful of the divine givers of life’s joys, 
friend, irresistible in law and justice, in whose order 
and Dharma all earthly people and divine forces of light 
serve, live and enjoy life as on the mother’s breast. 


यमासा कृपनींव्ठं भासाकेतुं वर्ध॑य॑न्ति। 
भ्राजं ते श्रेणिदन्‌ 3 ॥ 


2: Yamasa krpanilam bhasaketum vardhayanti. 
Bhrajate srenidan. 


Agni, refulgent giver of light and sustenance, 
profound abode of love, power and kindness, source of 
light and knowledge, whom people exalt with prayer 


508 RGVEDA 
and adoration shines in glory. 


अर्यो विशां गातुरे ति प्र यदान॑ड्‌ दिवो अन्तान्‌। 
कविरभ्रं दीद्यानः ux 


4. Aryo visam gatureti pra yadanad divo antan. 
Kavirabhram didyanah. 


Master and ruler of the people, mainstay of life 
like the earth, Agni pervades and vibrates upto the 
bounds of heaven. Omniscient poet and universal 
visionary, he gives the light of lightning to thunder and 
the clouds of rain. 


wage मानुंषस्योर्ध्वस्तस्थावृभ्वां यज्ञे | 
मिन्वन्त्सद्य पुर एति ॥ ५ ॥ 


= Jusaddhavya manusasyordhvastasthavrbhva 
yajne. Minvantsadma pura eti. 


Accepting with love the homage of humanity, 
Agni abides in yajna and shines high by flames of fire 
and, transcending the hall of yajna, goes on vibrating 
across the spaces. 


स fe क्षेमो हविर्यज्ञः श्रुष्टीद॑स्य गातुरेति। 
अगिं देवा वाीमन्तम्‌॥। ६ ॥ 


6. Sa hi ksemo haviryajnah Ssrustidasya gatureti. 
Agnim deva vasimantam. 


Agni is the source of peace and well being, 
receiver of yajnic homage, adorable in yajna. 
Unimpeded is his course, instant his motion, infinite 
the ways he goes by and ultimate his light and voice to 
which the divines reach for bliss. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 20 509 


यज्ञासाहं दुव॑ इषेऽ यिं पूर्व स्य शोव॑स्य। 
अद्रेः सूनुमायुमाहुः ॥ ७॥ 


Ts Yajnasaham duva ise’gnim purvasya Sevasya. 
Adreh sunum-ayum-ahuh. 


I love and adore Agni, the refulgent power that 
conducts the spiritual and social yajna of the highest 
order. A celebrity worthy of worship, inexhaustible 
treasure of eternal joy, inspirer of dedicated devotees, 
life giver, indeed the very life of existence as they call 
him. 


नरो ये के चास्मदा विश्वेत्ते वाम आ et: 
अगिं हविषा वर्धन्तः॥ ८ ॥ 


ne Naro ye ke casmada visvet te vama a syuh. 
Agnim havisa vardhantah. 


Those leading lights of humanity among us who 
serve and exalt Agni with yajnic offerings of homage 
may, we pray, enjoy your love and favour. 


कृष्णः vadis रुषो यामो अस्य ब्रध्न ऋज उत शोणो 
यशस्वान्‌ हिरंण्यरूपं जनिता जजान ॥ ९ ॥ 


2 Krsnah Sveto'ruso yamo asya bradhna rjra uta 
Sono yasasvan. Hiranyarupam janita jajana. 


Black, white and red is the order of this Agni 
moving the world forward, great bond maker, simple 
straight and fast, rich in food, wealth and honour, grand 
and glorious, which the lord creator has adorned with 
golden beauty and grace. 


510 RGVEDA 


एवा a अग्ने विमदो म॑नीषामूर्जो नपादमृतेभिः सजोषाः । 
गिर॒ आ वक्षत्सुमतीरियान इषमूर्ज" सुक्षितिं विश्व- 
ATM: UW ९०॥ 


10. Eva te agne vimado manisamurjo napadamrte- 
bhih sajosah. Gira a vaksat sumatiriyana isamur- 
jam suksitim visvamabhah. 

Thus does the celebrant in ecstasy of adoration, 

O Agni, Spirit of universal light and life, inspirer and 
sustainer of cosmic energy, offer you homage in 
immortal words of love and faith. O refulgent spirit of 
life divine, bearing holy vision and wisdom for the 
devotee, bless us with food and energy for body, mind 
and soul, give us a happy home with wealth and honour 
of universal order. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 21 


Agni Devata, Vimada Aindra or Prajapatya, or 
Vasukrt Vasukra Rshi 


sufi न स्ववुक्तिथिर्होतारं त्वा auine | यज्ञाय स्तीर्णबंर्हिषि 
fa वो मदे शीरं पावकशोचिषं विवक्षसे i ९॥ 


le Agnim na svavrktibhirhotaram tva vrnimahe. 
Yajnaya stirnabarhise vi vo made Siram pdava- 
kaSocisam vivaksase. 


Like fire for comfort, with our own holy chant 
for the internal yajna of our spiritual purification and 
your joy, O fellow yajakas, we choose Agni, high priest 
of cosmic yajna, all pervasive purifier by the white heat 
of his divine radiance. Verily the lord is great and 
glorious for you. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 21 511 


त्वामु ते स्वाभुवः शुम्भन्त्यश्व॑राधसः । वेति त्वामु पसेच॑नी 
वि वो मद्‌ ऋजींतिरगर आहुतिर्विवक्षसे ॥ २ ॥ 


2 Tvamu te svabhuvah sumbhantyasvaradhasah. 
Veti tvamupasecani vi vo mada rjitiragna ahutir- 
vivaksase. 


Those self-radiant self reliant men of strength 
and success adore and exalt you. Their simple, honest 
and natural homage of oblations reaches you for your 
pleasure and satisfaction. Verily you are great for the 
devotees. 


त्वे धर्माणं आसते जुहूभिः सिञ्चतीरिव । कृष्णा रूपाण्य- 
रजुना fa at मदे विश्वा अधि श्रियो धिषे विवक्षसे ॥ ३ ॥ 


117८ dharmana asate juhubhih sincatiriva. Krsna 
rupanyarjuna vi vo made visva adhi sriyo dhise 
vivaksase. 


Devotees dedicated to your Dharma serve and 
feed you with profuse ladlefuls of ghrta, you who for 
your pleasure and excitement bear white and dark flames 
and fumes and assume all the beauties and graces of 
life. Verily you are great for your devotees. 


aay मन्य॑से रयिं सहसावन्नमर्त्य । तमा नो वाज॑सातये वि 
वो मदे यज्ञेषुं चित्रमा भ॑रा विवक्षसे ॥ ४॥ 


4. Yamagne manyase rayim sahasavannamartya. 
Tama no vajasataye vi vo made yajnesu citrama 
bhara vivaksase. 

Agni, immortal power of strength and fortitude, 


the wealth, honour and excellence you hold and believe 
is great, that very wondrous wealth bear and bring us in 


512 RGVEDA 


yajnas with your pleasure and magnificence for our 
victory in our struggle for progress. Surely you are great 
and glorious for the devotees. 


अभिजातो अथर्वणा विदद्विश्वानि creat भुवंदूतो 
विवस्व॑तो वि वो मदे प्रियो यमस्य काम्यो विवक्षसे ॥ & ॥ 


a: Agnirjato atharvana vidadvisvani kavya. Bhuva- 
dduto vivasvato vi vo made priyo yamasya kamyo 
vivaksase. 


Agni, light of divinity, realised by the man of 
constant mind, would enable him to know all knowledge 
of the world, being the messenger of the spirit of 
omniscience and love of the man of divine discipline. 
Agni you are great in your own light and joy for your 
devotees. 


त्वां यज्ञेष्वीक्छतेऽ ग प्रयत्य॑ध्वरे । त्वं वसूनि काम्या fa at 
मदे fagat दधासि दाशुषे विवक्षसे ।॥ & ॥ 


6. Tvam yajnesvilate’gne prayatyadhvare. Tvam 
vasuni kamya vi vo made visva dadhasi dasuse 
vivaksase. 


Agni, light, energy and power of life, people 
value and adore you in their corporate programmes of 
creation and development at every stage of the noble 
creative process. You, indeed, bear and bring for the 
people of creativity and generosity all the wealth and 
power they desire, since in all matters of joy and 
celebration for yourself and for them you are always 
waxing great and glorious. 


त्वां यज्ञेष्वृत्विजं चारुमग्ने नि षेदिरे । घृतप्र॑तीकं ater वि 
वो मदे शुक्रं चेति्ठमश्चभिर्विवंक्षसे ॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 22 513 


(९ Tvam yajnesvrtvijam carumagne ni sedire. Ghrta- 
pratikam manuso vi vo made sukram cetistham- 
aksabhir-vivaksase. 


People set, establish and celebrate you in yajnas, 
Agni, charming, shining with oblations of ghrta, bright 
and pure, most illuminative accomplisher of yajna 
according to the seasons and your vision of the world. 
Agni, you are waxing great for your devotees. 


अगर शुक्रेण शोचिषोरु प्र॑थयसे बृहत्‌। अभिक्रन्द॑न्वृषायसे 
वि वो मदे गर्भ' दधासि जामिषु विव॑क्षसे ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Agne Sukrena socisoru prathayase brhat. Abhi- 
krandan vrsayase vi vo made garbham dadhasi 
jamisu vivaksase. 

Agni, with pure and powerful flames you shine 
and expand infinitely in many many various ways. 
Roaring and thundering, you love to shower on earth 
from heaven and inspire life forms with new energy 
and vitality for your own joy and for joy of the people. 
Agni, you are always waxing great and glorious. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 22 
Indra Devata, Vimada Aindra or Prajapatya, or Vasukrt 
Vasukra Rshi 
कुं श्रुत इन्द्रः Has जने मित्रो न श्रयते । 
ऋषीणां वा यः क्षये wet वा चर्कुषे गिरा॥ ९॥ 
॥ Kuha 71/14 indrah kasminnadya jane mitro na 
Sruyate. Rsinam va yah ksaye guha va carkrse 
gira. 


Where is Indra heard of today? Where like a 


514 RGVEDA 


friend, among what people, is he heard of? Indra who 
is exalted by words of prayer, in the homes of sages and 
realised in their mind? 


इह श्रुत इन्द्रो अस्मे अद्य स्तवे वच्युचींषमः। 
पित्रो न यो जनेष्वा यश्चक्रे असाम्या ॥ २॥ 

De Tha sruta indro asme adya stave vajryrcisamah. 
Mitro na yo janesva yasascakre asamya. 


Indra, lord of justice and thunder is renowned 
and sung here among us, most adorable worthy of 
worship for us, who is glorified among people, perfect 
and absolute and kind as a friend. 


महो यस्पतिः शव॑सो असाम्या महो नृम्णस्य तू तुजिः। 
भर्तां वच्र॑स्य धृष्णोः पिता पुत्रमिव प्रियम्‌ ॥३॥ 

Maho yaspatih 5414050 asamya maho nrmnasya 
tutujih. Bharta vajrasya dhrsnoh pita putramiva 
priyam. 

Mighty master, commander and giver of great 
strength is he, perfect, unequalled and great giver of 
wealth and power, wielder of the awful thunderbolt and 
father protector and promoter of humanity as of his own 
children. 

युजानो अश्वा वातस्य eit देवो dard विवः | 

स्यन्ता पथा विरुक्मता सृजानः स्तोष्यध्व॑नः॥४॥ 
4. Yujano asva vatasya dhuni devo devasya vajrivah. 

Syanta patha virukmata srjanah stosyadhvanah. 


O wielder of the thunderbolt and adamantine 
will, harnessing commander of cosmic energy mightier 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 22 515 


than the roaring winds, generous self-refulgent lord of 
divinities, guide of the travellers of the paths of light 
and creator of new paths of advancement open for 
humanity, you are adored as the master, protector and 
promoter of life and its possibilities. 


त्वं त्या चिद्धातस्याश्वागां Seat त्मना वहंध्ये । 
ययो्दवो न मर्त्योः यन्ता नकिर्विदाय्यः ॥ ५॥ 


Tvam tya cidvatasyasvaga rjra tmana vahadhyai. 
Yayordevo na martyo yanta nakirvidayyah. 


You by yourself impel those two straight and 
natural currents of cosmic energy of which there is no 
other impeller divine or human, nor is any one else who 
really knows. (The energies may be interpreted as prana 
and apana of the body system too.) 


अध ग्मन्तोशनां पृच्छते वां कदर्था न आ गृहम्‌ । 
आ wag: पराकाददिवश्च ग्मश्च मर्त्य॑म्‌ ६ ॥ 
6. Adha gmantosana prcchate vam kadartha na a 


grham. A gagmathuh parakad divasca gmasca 
martyam. 


The lover of life, the human soul, asks you both, 
currents of prana and apana energies, for what purpose 
did you come to this mortal home of ours, this body 
system, from the far off region of heavenly light and 
from the earth? 


आ न॑ इन्द्र पृक्षसेऽ स्माकं ब्रह्मोद्य॑तम्‌ । 
तत्त्वां याचामहेऽ वः शुष्णं यब्दन्न्मानुषम्‌।॥। ७॥ 


४ A na indra prksase’smakam brahmodyatam. Tat 
tva yacamahe’vah Susnam yaddhannama-nusam. 


516 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord omnipotent of cosmic energy and 
pranic vitality, pray join us and accept our homage of 
adoration by which we pray of you that great strength 
and protection of divinity which may repel and destroy 
inhuman and evil onslaughts of our mortal enemies. 


अकर्मा दस्युरभि नो अमन्तुरन्यव्रतो अमानुषः 1 
त्वं तस्यामित्रहन्वधंदासस्य दम्भय neu 


8. Akarma dasyurabhi no amanturanyavrato ama- 
nusah. Tvam tasyamitrahan vadhardasasya 
dambhaya. 


Whoever or whatever be negative, incorrigible, 
corrosive, without commitment or ill-committed, anti- 
human and anti-life, that negative and destructive force, 
O destroyer of the unfriendly, saboteurs and destroyers, 
control, suppress and eliminate. 


त्वं न॑ इन्द्र शूर शरैरुत त्वोतासो बर्हणा । 
पुरुत्रा ते वि पूर्तयो नव॑न्त क्षोणयों यथा ॥ ९॥ 


9. Tvam na indra Sura Surairuta tvotaso barhana. 
Purutra te vi purtayo navanta ksonayo yatha. 


O lord most potent, Indra, protect and promote 
us by the brave so that even in terrible crises we may 
survive and prevail. Infinite are your gifts of fulfilment 
that abound all round, and multitudes of people over 
earth sing and celebrate your generosity. 


त्वं aed त्रहत्ये चोदयो नृन्कार्पाणे शुर ata: | 

गुहा यदीं कवीनां विशां नक्षत्रशवसाम्‌ gon 
10. Tvam tan vrtrahatye codayo nrn karpane sura 

vajrivah. Guha yadi kavinam visam naksatra- 

Savasam. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 22 517 


Indra, lord most potent, wielder of thunder and 
justice who abide inspiring at the heart of visionary poets 
and thinkers, general people and those commanding the 
imperishable power of light and social order, pray 
inspire, and energise those heroic leaders, pioneers and 
leading lights who are engaged in decisive battle against 
darkness and evil, ignorance, want and injustice. 


मक्ष ता d इन्द्र दानाप्र॑स आक्षाणे शुर विवः। 
यद शुष्ण॑स्य दम्भयो जातं विश्वं स॒याव॑भिः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Maksu ta ta indra danapnasa aksane sura 
vajrivah. Yaddha susnasya dambhayo jatam 
visvam sayavabhih. 


Indra, ruler most potent and wielder of the 
thunderbolt, adamantine will and justice, most generous 
giver, instant are your gifts of protection, charity and 
advancement in matters of success, achievement and 
fulfilment, since with your assistant cooperative forces 
you destroy all evils of darkness, ignorance and want 
of the world created by demonic forces of negativity 
and destruction. 


माकुश्य॑गिन्द्र शूर वस्वीरस्मे भुंवन्नभिष्टयः। 
वयंव॑यं त आसां सुम्ने स्याम विवः ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Ma kudhryagindra sura vasvirasme bhuvanna- 
bhistayah. Vayam vayam ta asam sumne syama 
vajrivah. 


O lord most potent, wielder of the thunderbolt 
and justice, may our desires, aims and ambitions, and 
achievements of wealth and victory never be fruitless. 
May we always be favoured with the blissful presence 


518 RGVEDA 


and joy of all these fulfilled ambitions and cherished 
desires. 


अस्मे ता त॑ इन्द्र सन्तु सत्याऽदहि'सन्तीरूपस्पु्शः | 
विद्याम यासां भुजो धेनूनां न व॑चिवः ॥९३॥ 


13. Asme ta ta indra santu satya *himsantirupasprsah. 
Vidyama yasam bhujo dhenunam na vajrivah. 


Indra, wielder of thunderbolt and justice, may 
all our prayers, adorations and yajakas, full of love and 
faith without violence, reaching you in service and 
worship, be true and fruitful, and may we be blest with 
pleasing fruits of these like delicious cow’s milk and 
delicacies. 


अहस्ता यदपदी वर्धत क्षाः शचींभिर्वेद्यानाम्‌। 
शुष्णं परि प्रदक्षिणिद्धिश्वायवे नि शिश्नथः ॥ ९४॥ 


14. Ahasta yadapadi vardhata ksah sactbhir- 
vedyanam. Susnam pari pradaksinid visvayave ni 
sisnathah. 

The earth grows and expands without hands or 
feet by the Sama showers of nature’s existential forces 
worth knowing, since for the sake of world life you, 
Indra, repel and destroy the negative forces circumam- 
bulating the earth. 


frattrate-s शूर ard मा रिषण्यो वसवान वसुः सन्‌। 
उत त्रायस्व गृणतो मघोनो! महश्च रायो रेवतस्कृधी 
नः ॥ ९९५ ॥ 

15. Pibapibedindra Sura somam ma risanyo vasavana 
vasuh san. Uta trayasva grnato maghono maha- 
$ca rayo revataskrdhi nah. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 23 519 


Indra, omnipotent lord of the world, mighty 
ruler, pray accept our soma homage of worship. O shelter 
home of life, giver of peace, wealth, power and 
excellence, pray fail us not, protect and promote the 
celebrant blest with power and honour, O lord of wealth 
and magnificence, help us rise to great wealth of life 
and attain to mastery of that wealth and power for moral 
and spiritual grandeur. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 23 


Indra Devata, Vimada Aindra or Prajapatya, or Vasukrt 
Vasukra Rshi 


यजामह इन्द्रं वज्र॑दक्षिणं हरीणां रथ्यं4 विव्र॑तानाम्‌। प्र 
श्मश्रु दोधुंवद्र्ध्वथा भूद्वि सेनाभिर्दय॑मानो वि राध॑सा ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Yajamaha indram vajradaksinam harinam 
rathyam vavratanam. Pra smasru dodhuva- 
durdhvatha bhud vi senabhir-dayamano vi 
radhasa. 


We join and adore Indra, lord of cosmic energy, 
who wields the thunder in his right hand and controls 
the versatile potentials of complementary currents of 
cosmic energy in the universal circuit, who with energy 
shakes the earthly vegetation, rises high, and with his 
forces and implicit potentials acts as catalytic agent and 
vests us with natural power and success in achievement. 


हरी न्व॑स्य या वने विदे वस्विन्द्रो मधेर्मघवां वृत्रहा भुंवत्‌। 
ऋभुर्वाज ऋभुक्षाः पत्यते शवोऽ वं क्ष्णौमि दासस्य नामं 
चित्‌॥ २॥ 

2 Hari nvasya ya vane vide vasvindro maghair- 


maghava vrtraha bhuvat. Rbhurvaja rbhuksah 
patyate Savo’ va ksnaumi dasasya nama cit. 


520 RGVEDA 


The wealth of energy which the currents bring 
into the solar rays are universal whereby Indra becomes 
powerful with natural forces to break the dark clouds 
of rain. Master of spiritual and physical strength, Indra 
rules and protects the wealth, power and honour of the 
world, under that protection I too wish to eliminate even 
the last trace of negativity and force of destruction. 


यदा वचं हिर॑ण्यमिदथा रथं हरी यम॑स्य वहतो वि GRA: | 
आ fasfa मघवा सनश्रुत इन्द्रो वाज॑स्य दीर्घश्र॑व- 
सस्पतिंः ॥ ३ ॥ 


3 Yada vajram hiranyamidatha ratham hari yama- 
sya vahato vi suribhih. A tisthati maghava sana- 
Sruta indro vajasya dirghasravasaspatih. 


When Indra, glorious lord ruler of the world 
rides his golden chariot of state which complementary 
forces draw on the course with the energy of solar rays 
in nature and the light and loyalty of leading citizens in 
society, then he is celebrated as universal master of the 
common wealth and the ruler and protector of lasting 
power, prosperity and honour of the world. 


सो fag वृष्टिर्यूथ्या ई स्वा सचाँ इन्द्रः श्मश्रणि हरिताभि 
dua अव॑ वेति सुक्षयं सुते मधूदिन्दंनोति वातो यथा 
वन॑म्‌ ४ ॥ 


4. So cinnu vrstiryuthya sva sacan indrah smasruni 
haritabhi prusnute. Ava veti suksayam sute 
madhiudiddhunoti vato yatha vanam. 


The real shower is that when with his own 
essential lustre and with his complementary forces Indra 
sprinkles and fills the waving greenery on earth with 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 118 521 


life energy, when the divine presence pervades happy 
homes and weaves them into a happy web of life on 
earth with sweets of life, vibrates with power and shakes 
contradictory forces as the storm shakes the forest. 


यो वाचा विवाचो मृध्रवाचः पुरू सहस्राशिवा जघानं | 
तत्तदिदस्य पौस्यं गृणीमसि पितेव यस्तविषीं वावृधे 
शव॑ः ॥ ५॥ 


Yo vaca vivaco mrdhravacah puru sahasrasiva 
jJaghana. Tattadidasya paumsyam grnimasi 
piteva yastavisim vavrdhe savah. 


Who with one united forceful voice silences and 
eliminates many many hundreds of contradictory and 
confrontationist voices of manly violence, sabotage and 
destruction, that power and voice of this mighty Indra 
we admire and celebrate, the ruler who, like a parent 
power, promotes and elevates our strength, lustre and 


glory. 
स्तोमं त इन्द्र विमदा अजीजनन्नपूर्व्यं पुरूतमं सुदानवे | 
विद्या ह्य॑स्य भोज॑नपिनस्य यदा पशुं न गोपाः करामहे ।। ६ ॥ 


6. Stomam ta indra vimada ajijanannapurvyam 
purutamam sudanave. Vidma hyasya bhojana- 
minasya yada pasum na gopah karamahe. 


Free from pride and passion, we have created 
and offer you, O lord of divine charity, Indra, an ancient, 
unique and most copious song of celebration. We know 
the gifts of protection and promotion of this mighty lord, 
and, masters of our senses and mind, we keep his divine 
presence at heart as the all-seeing master of our life and 
karmic performance. 


522 RGVEDA 


माकिर्न एना स॒ख्या वि यौषुस्तव चेन्द्र विमदस्य च ऋषेः | 
विद्या fe a प्रम॑तिं देव जामिवदस्मे ते सन्तु सख्या 
frat ie 


a Makirna ena sakhya vi yausustava cendra vima- 
dasya ca rseh. Vidma hi te pramatim deva jami- 
vad-asme te santu sakhya Sivani. 


Indra, mighty ruler of life and the world, let not 
this bond of friendship between you and the sage free 
from the shackles of pride and passion ever sever. O 
generous lord of light and life, we know your good will 
and kindness toward us and we enjoy it too. May this 
bond of friendship and the gifts of the bond be good 
and blissful for us like the filial bond of parent and child. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 24 


Indra (1-3), Ashvins (4-6) Devata, Vimada Aindra or 
Prajapatya, or Vasukrt Vasukra Rshi 


इन्द्र सोम॑मिमं a wend चमू सुतम्‌। अस्मे रयिंनि 
धारय वि वो मदे सहस्रिणं पुरूवसो विवक्षसे ii ९॥ 


ly Indra somam-imam piba madhumantam camu 
sutam. Asme rayim ni dharaya vi vo made saha- 
srinam puruvaso vivaksase. 


Indra, lord of infinite wealth, power, honour and 
excellence, accept and bless this soma homage of love 
and faith, honey sweet, distilled and offered in the ladle 
of yajna, protect and promote this joyous world of honey 
sweets extending from earth to the skies, bear and bring 
us wealth of the world as you in your own divine joy 
carry the thousandfold burden of this world. You are 
great, lord of glory. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 24 523 


त्वां यज्नेभिंरुक्थेरुपं gafutiae शचीपते शचीनां वि 
वो मदे श्रेष्ठं नो धेहि वार्य विव॑क्षसे ॥ २॥ 


2. Tvam yajnesbhir-ukthairupa havyebhirimahe. 
Sacipate Sacinam vi vo made srestham no dhehi 
varyam vivaksase. 


With yajnas, mantras and oblations of holy 
fragrances we adore and worship you, O lord of 
omniscience and omnipotence, and we pray that in the 
ecstasy of your own self and generosity, bear and bring 
us the best and choicest of your grand gifts for us. O 
lord, you are ever waxing great and glorious. 


यस्पतिर्वायीणामसिं tera चोदिता । इन्द्र स्तोतुणामंविता 
वि at मदे द्विषो न॑ः पाह्यंहसो विव॑क्षसे ॥ ३ ॥ 


Yaspatir-varyanamasi radhrasya codita. Indra 
stotrnamavita vi vo made dviso nah pahyamhaso 
vivaksase. 


Indra, you are the master and protector of the 
best of wealth, beauty and glory of the world, inspirer 
of the obedient devotee, and saviour and promoter of 
the celebrants. O lord, in the ecstasy of your own bliss 
and omnipotence, pray protect us from sin and jealousy. 
You are ever waxing great and glorious. 


युवं शक्रा मायाविना समीची निरमन्थतम्‌ | 
विमदेन यदीद्ठिता नास॑त्या निरम॑न्थतम्‌॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Yuvam sakra mayavina samici niramanthatam. 
Vimadena yadilita nasatya niramanthatam. 


Ashvins, complementary powers of nature and 
humanity, currents of energy, teacher and preacher, 


524 RGVEDA 


scientist and engineer, men and women, powerful, 
miraculous, you are always working together, and when 
you are invoked and prayed together by the sage free 
form passion and pride, O powers ever true and 
committed, you come into action and generate the fire 
of life. 


विश्वे देवा अकृपन्त समीच्योर्निष्पत॑न्त्योः। 
नास॑त्यावल्रुवन्देवाः पुनरा व॑हतादिति।॥ ५॥ 


2. Visve deva akrpanta samicyor-nispatantyoh. 
Nasatyavabruvan devah punara vahataditi. 


All divinities of nature and humanity shower 
love and kindness on the complementary powers 
working together in unison without relent or remiss on 
their commitment, and as the work goes on, O divinities 
ever true and never false or failing, the powers of the 
world exclaim: Go on, go on, that way success lies. 


मधुमन्मे परायणं wep area I 
तानो देवा देवत॑या युवं मधुमतस्कृतम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Madhumanme parayanam madhumat punara- 
yanam. Ta no deva devataya yuvam madhu- 
mataskrtam. 


Ashvins, complementary divinities of nature and 
humanity, let the way beyond be honey sweet for me. 
Let the way back on return be honey sweet for me. O 
divines, with your blessings, pray both of you make 
our life here, hereafter and here again full of honey 
sweets and joy. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 25 525 


Mandala 10/Sukta 25 


Pavamana Soma Devata, Vimada Aindra or Prajapatya, 
or Vasukrt Vasukra Rshi 


us नो अपिं वातय मनो दक्च॑मुत क्रतुम्‌। अधा ते सख्ये 
अन्ध॑सो वि at मदे रणन्गावो न यव॑से विवक्षसे ॥ ९॥ 


1. Bhadram no api vataya mano daksamuta kratum. 
Adha te sakhye andhaso vi vo made ranan gavo 
na yavase vivaksase. 


O Soma, lord of peace and bliss, inspire our 
mind, skill and wisdom, and our yajnic actions to move 
in the direction of goodness and piety, so that, living in 
your love and friendship, we may enjoy food and life’s 
delicacies like cows enjoying their favourite grass and 
thus partake of your divine joy in life here itself. O Soma, 
you are great and glorious indeed. 


हृदिस्पृरशंस्त आसते विश्वेषु ara धाम॑सु । अधा कामां 
इमे मम वि at मदे वि तिं्ठन्ते वसूयवो विवक्षसे ॥ २॥ 


2. HArdisprsasta asate visvesu soma dhamasu. Adha 
kama ime mama vi vo made vi tisthante vasuyavo 
vivaksase. 


O Soma, all over the world in all places, all these 
devoted seekers of wealth and all these heart felt desires 
and ambitions of mine worship you and concentrate and 
abide in your divine peace and joy. O Soma, you are 
great and glorious indeed. 


उत व्रतानि सोम ते प्राहं मिनामि पाक्या। अर्धां पितेवं 
सूनवे वि वो मदे Wort at अभि चिंद्॒धाद्विवंश्षसे ui 3 ॥ 


526 RGVEDA 


>. Uta vratani soma te praham minami pakya. Adha 
piteva sunave vi vo made mrla no abhi cidva- 
dhad-vivaksase. 


And O Soma, with a mature mind and 
intelligence, I follow the rules of your discipline. Then 
O Soma, as father for the child, pray bless us to partake 
of your divine joy, be kind and save us from death and 
deprivation all round. O lord, you are great for the good 
of all. 


समु प्र य॑न्ति धीतयः सगीसोऽवताँ sa । क्रतुं नः सोम जीवसे 
वि at मदे धारयां चमरसोँडइ॑व विवक्षसे ni ४॥ 


4. Samu pra yanti dhitayah sargaso’vatan iva. 
Kratum nah soma jivase vi vo made dharaya 
camasan iva vivaksase. 


Just as showers of rain and streams of water flow 
down and rush to the sea, so all our thoughts, prayers, 
acts and adorations move and reach you, ultimate 
destination of holy works. Pray accept us and our 
adorations like ladlefuls of yajnic homage into the joy 
of your divine presence. O lord you are great for the joy 
of all. 


तव त्ये सोम रक्तिभिर्निकामासो व्युण्विरे। गृत्सस्य 
धीरास्तवसो वि वो मदे व्रजं गोमन्तमश्विनं faders ॥ ५ ॥ 


= Tava tye soma Sktibhir-nikamaso vyrnvire. 
Grtsasya dhirdstavaso vi vo made vrajam 
gomantam-asvinam vivaksase. 


Those devotees with a balanced mind, lovers of 
divinity, inspired with devotion to the loved and potent 
Soma, with all their power of concentration in 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 25 527 


meditation reach the state of joy in your presence, O 
Soma, wherein they find a settled haven with 
enlightened mind and senses and a vibrant will here 
itself. O lord you are really great for all. 


पशुं न॑: सोम tafe gear विष्ठितं जग॑त्‌। समाकुणोषि 
जीवसे वि वो मदे favat संपश्यन्भुव॑ना विवक्षसे ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Pasum nah soma raksasi purutra visthitam jagat. 
Samakrnosi jivase vi vo made visva sampasyan 
bhuvana vivaksase. 


O Soma, you protect and elevate our enlightened 
soul. You generate, protect and promote the settled world 
of vast variety as well for our holy and joyous living 
for a full life in the presence of your divine bliss. 
Watching the entire world of existence, you wax great 
in your glory. 


त्वं न॑: सोम विश्वतो गोपा अदाभ्यो भव । सेध॑ राजन्नप 
Reet fa at ag ar al दुःशंसं ईशता विवक्षसे ie 


५ Tvam nah soma visvato gopa adabhyo bhava. 
Sedha rajannapa sridho vi vo made ma no 
duhsamsa [वात vivaksase. 


O Soma, be our guide and dauntless guardian 
and protector all round in the world. O ruler of the world, 
ward off all errors, failures, violence and foemen far 
from us. Let none wicked and malicious boss over us. 
O lord, you are waxing great in your glory for the joy of 
all. 


त्वं न॑ः सोम सुक्रतुंर्वयोधेर्याय जागृहि । श्चे ्रवित्तरो मनुषो 
वि वो मदे get न॑ः पाह्यंहसो विव॑क्षसे ॥ ८ ॥ 


528 RGVEDA 


8. Tvam nah soma sukratur-vayodheyaya jagrhi. 
Ksetravittaro manuso vi vo made druho nah 
pahyamhaso vivaksase. 


Soma, lord of all knowledge and holy action, 
pray let us awake for living a full life of age and 
enthusiasm. You know the microcosm and the 
macrocosm of existence, none other knows. Pray protect 
us from evil men and from sin and jealousy. O lord you 
are waxing great in your glory for the joy of all. 


त्वं नो वृत्रहन्तमेन्द्र॑स्येन्दो शिवः rat । यत्सीं हव॑न्ते सपिथे 
वि वो मदे युध्य॑मानास्तोकसातौ विवक्षसे ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Tvam no vrtrahantamendrasyendo Ssivah sakha. 
Yat sim havante samithe vi vo made yudhya- 
manas-tokasatau vivaksase. 


O Soma, greatest dispeller of darkness and want 
and deprivation, our gracious friend as well as gracious 
friend of Indra, the ruler, people all round, struggling 
in their battle of life for the advancement of their future 
generations, call upon you for help, protection and 
success since, then, you are waxing great and glorious 
in your joy for the good of all. 


अयं घ स तुरो मद्‌ इन्द्रस्य वर्धत foe: | अयं कक्चीव॑तो 
महो वि वो मदे मतिं विप्र॑स्य वर्धयद्विवक्षसे i ९०॥ 


10. Ayam ghasa turo mada indrasya vardhata priyah. 
Ayam kaksivato maho vi vo made matim viprasya 
vardhayadvivaksase. 


This Soma, instant fast, dear happy friend of 
Indra, the soul, is great, advances the wisdom and vision 
of the great sage dedicated to assiduous thought and 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 26 529 


work with concentration. Surely, O Soma, you are 
waxing great and glorious in your joy for the good of 
all. 


अयं विप्राय दाशुषे areil इयर्ति गोम॑तः | अयं सप्तभ्य आ 
at वि वो मदे प्रान्धं श्रोणं च॑ तारिषद्धिवक्षसे ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Ayam vipraya dasuse vajan tyarti gomatah. Ayam 
saptabhya व varam vi made prandham sronam 
ca tarisad-vivaksase. 


This Soma moves, inspires and brings immortal 
vision and food, energy and the joy of victory for the 
sage who has wholly surrendered himself to the divine 
presence. He saves the blind and the lame and brings 
the highest learning, wisdom and freedom to the seven 
sagely yajakas. O Soma, you are ever waxing great and 
glorious in bliss for the joy of all. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 26 


Pusha Devata, Vimada Aindra or Prajapatya, or, Vasukrt 
Vasukra Rshi 


प्र ह्यच्छां मनीषाः corel यन्ति Frat: 1 
प्र दस्रा नियुद्रथः पूषा sifag माहिनः ॥ ९॥ 


ie Pra hyaccha manisah sparha yanti niyutah. 
Pra dasra niyudrathah pusa avistu mahinah. 


With love and faith do our cherished thoughts, 
prayers and adorations well directed in meditation reach 
Pusha, lord of health and fulfilment. Great, beatific and 
blissful, his chariot of ultimate freedom of moksha is 
ever in readiness, may the lord ever protect and promote 
us to that ultimate freedom. 


530 RGVEDA 


यस्य त्यन्म॑हित्वं वाताप्य॑मयं जन॑ः 1 
विप्र आ वंसब्दीतिथिज्चिकेत सुष्टुतीनाम्‌॥ २॥ 

pA Yasya tyanmahitvam vatapyamayam janah. 
Vipra a vamsad-dhitibhis-ciketa sustutinam. 


Pusha, whose grandeur of that order, that food 
for the soul, may this humanity, this vibrant sage, attain 
by noble thoughts and actions. The lord knows of our 
sincere prayers and adorations. 


सवेद सुष्टुतीनामिन्दुर्नं पूषा वृषा । 
अभि war: प्रुषायति व्रजं न आ प्रुषायति ॥ २॥ 
3. Sa veda sustutinamindurna pusa vrsa. 
Abhi psurah prusayati vrajam na ठ prusayati. 


Pusha, like Soma, the moon, giver of showers, 
knows of our prayers and adorations. Assuming and 
pervading all forms of life, he showers his favours of 
grace on us, he also showers his kindness and favours 
on our foods, pastures and cows as well. 


मंसीमहि त्वा वयमस्माकं देव पूषन्‌। 
मतीनां च साध॑नं विप्राणां चाधवम्‌॥ ४॥ 

4. Mamsimahi tva vayam-asmakam deva pusan. 
Matinam ca sadhanam vipranam cadhavam. 


We know and adore you, divine Pusha, sustainer 
of life, giver of success to our intelligentsia, pioneer 
guide and purifier of our vibrant sages. 


प्रत्यर्धिर्यज्ञानामश्व हयो र्थानाम्‌ । 
ऋषिः स यो मनुर्हितो विप्र॑स्य यावयत्सरवः ॥ ५ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 26 531 


a. Pratyardhiryajnanamasvahayo rathanam. Rsih sa 
yo manurhito viprasya yavayatsakhah. 


Pusha is the promoter and accomplisher of 
yajnas, energy, power and mover of the shining stars, 
all seeing creator of joy, well wisher of humanity and 
inspiring guide and friend of the sages. 


आधीषंमाणायाः पतिं: शुचायाश्च rae च। 
वासोवायोऽ वीनामा वासांसि मर्मृजत्‌ neu 


6. Adhisamanayah patih Sucaydsca Sucasya ca. 
Vasovayo’vinama vasamsi marmrjat. 

Pusha is the sustainer of immaculate Prakrti and 
of the pure intelligent soul, and just as the weaver 
weaves a cloth of wool, so does he weave out the 
structure and texture of the physical web of the world 
and create the bodies of form and adorns them with 
beauty. 


इनो वाजानां पतिरिनः dstat सखा । 
प्र श्मश्रु हर्यतो दूधोद्वि वृथा यो अदाभ्यः ॥ ७॥ 


7. Ino vajanam patirinah pustinam sakha. 
Pra smasru haryato dudhod vi vrtha yo adabhyah. 


Mighty Pusha is the master controller of energies 
and powers of the world, generous friends of growth 
and progress, spontaneous energises and inspirer of 
rising youth, and he is the unchallengeable supreme 
power over all. 


आ ते रथ॑स्य पूषन्नजा धुरं ववृत्युः । 
विश्वस्यार्थिनः सख। सनोजा अन॑पच्युतः ॥ ८ ॥ 


532 RGVEDA 


8. A te rathasya pusannaja dhuram vavrtyuh. 
Visvasyarthinah sakha sanoja anapacyutah. 


O Pusha, unborn, eternal and undiminishing 
forces move your chariot wheels on and on, friend of 
all supplicants of the world, eternal, unborn and 
infinitely manifestive, imperishable. 


अस्माकमूजां रथं पूषा अविष्टु artes: | 
भुवद्वाजानां वृध इमं न॑ः श्रृणवब्धव॑म्‌ ॥ ९॥ 

9. Asmakamurja ratham pusa avistu mahinah. 
Bhuvad-vajanam vrdha imam nah srnavaddha- 
vam. 

May the mighty Pusha power and protect our 
chariot of life with divine energy, may the lord be 


promoter and augmenter of our food, energy and onward 
progress, and may he listen and grant this prayer of ours. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 27 
Indra Devata, Vasukra Aindra Rshi 


असत्सु मे जरितः साभिवेगो यत्सुन्वते यज॑मानाय शिक्षम्‌ | 
अनाशीदिहम॑स्मि प्रहन्ता सत्यध्वृतं वृजिनायन्त- 
माभुम्‌॥ ९॥ 


Ly Asat su me jaritah sabhivego yat sunvate yaja- 
manaya Siksam. Anasirdam-ahamasmi prahanta 
satyadhvrtam vrjinayantam-abhum. 


O dedicated celebrant, the divine nature and 
power is good and true, it is this: I grant the prayer and 
give the desired object to the dedicated creative Soma 
yajaka. But I punish and strike down the ungenerous, 
selfish violator of eternal truth and law persistently 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 27 533 


addicted to sin, evil and falsehood. 


यदीदहं get संनयान्यदेवयून्तन्वा ३ शूशुजानान्‌ | अमा 
ते तुम्रं वृषभं प॑चानि तीव्रं सुतं पञ्चदशं नि षिंञ्चम्‌॥ २॥ 


2 Yadidaham yudhaye samnaydnyadevayun tanva 
Susujanan. Ama te tumram vrsabham pacani 
fivram sutam pancadasam ni sincam. 


If I were to collect forces to fight out the selfish, 
ungenerous and audacious who are such by their sheer 
physical prowess and brute force in this house of yours, 
O divine Ruler of existence, I would train a mighty, 
generous, enlightened leader, warrior and protector, feed 
him on distilled essences of fourteen branches of 
knowledge, application and practice being the fifteenth, 
and thus perfect the ruler. 


नाहं तं de य इति ब्रवीत्यदेवयून्त्समर॑णे जघन्वान्‌ | 
यदावाख्यत्समरंणमूघावदादिन्द मे वृषभा प्र Aaa ॥ ३॥ 


2: Naham tam veda ya iti bravityadevayuntsamarane 
jJaghanvan. Yadavakhyat samaranam-rghava- 
dadiddha me vrsabha pra bruvanti. 


I know not one who says: I have defeated and 
destroyed the evil and ungenerous in the battle between 
right and wrong by myself; instead, when the battle 
between good and evil is won, then the brave warriors 
declare that they attribute the victory only to me. 


यदज्ञातेषु वृजनेष्वासं विश्वे सतो मघवानो म॒ आसन्‌ । 
जिनायि aera आ सन्तमाभुं प्र तं fatort पर्व॑ते पाद्‌- 
Tal usu 


534 RGVEDA 


4. Yadajnatesu vrjanesvasam visve sato maghava- 
no ma asan. Jinami vet ksema a santamabhum 
pra tam ksinam parvate padagrhya. 


When I am in regions and battles unknown, all 
existent holy powers are around me. Then in the interest 
of the good of the world I defeat all negative powers 
and, catching them by the root, I throw them on the 
rocks. 


Tats at वृजने वारयन्ते न पर्व॑तासो यदहं म॑नस्ये । ममं 
स्वनात्कध्ुकर्णो भयात एवेदनु दयून्किरणः समे जात्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


2: Na va u mam vrjane varayante na parvataso 
yadaham manasye. Mama svanat krdhukarno 
bhayata evedanu dyun kiranah samejat. 


When I decide to do what I want to do, no 
powers can obstruct me on the way, not even powers 
insurmountable as mountains otherwise. At my roar even 
persons of faintest ear shake with fear. And the sun, 
commanding boundless light rays goes on way day and 
night at my command. 


दरश्वत्र शृतपाँ अ॑निन्दरान्बाहुश्चदः शर॑वे पत्य॑मानान्‌। 
घृषुं वा ये निनिदुः सखायमध्यू न्वेषु पवयो! ववृत्युः ॥ & ॥ 


6. Darsannvatra srtapan anindran-bahuksadah 
Sarave patyamanan. Ghrsum va ye niniduh 
sakhayam-adhyu nvesu pavayo vavrtyuh. 


When I see forces which oppose, contradict or 
deny Indra, presiding power of world order, people who 
wrest the food and drink prepared for honest labour, 
who twist others’ arm for extortion, who pounce upon 
the innocent to kill, or those who revile a friend for his 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 27 535 


candid but unflattering warmth, over all such the strokes 
of the thunderbolt of justice and punishment would fall 
and ultimately crush them. 


अभूर्वौक्षीर्वयु १ आयुरानड ade gat अप॑रो नु दर्षत्‌ । 
दे पवस्ते परि तं न भरतो यो अस्य पारे रज॑सो विवेष ॥। ७ ॥ 


7. Abhurvauksirvyu ayuranad darsannu purvo 
aparo nu darsat. Dve pavaste pari tam na bhito 
yo asya pare rajaso vivesa. 


Indra, unborn and eternal, the seed, the sower 
and nursing mother and the very life of the world, you 
destroy the anti-life forces of the earliest times and, later, 
of the others too. Both earth and heaven comprehend 
you not, you who transcend these and pervade the 
infinity beyond. 


गावो यवं Waar अर्यो star-ar अपश्यं सहगोपाश्चरन्तीः | 
हवा इदर्यो अभितः समायन्कियदासु स्वप॑तिश्छन्द- 
याते॥ ८ ॥ 


8. (4170 yavam prayuta aryo aksan ta apasyam 
sahagopascarantih. Hava idaryo abhitah sama- 
yan kiyadasu svapatis-chandayate. 


The cows ranged together in the pasture graze 
and enjoy the grass. I, the master, watch them along 
with the cowherd. When they are called back they come 
and stand round the master. The master rejoices in them. 
Similarly Indra, the master, sees the life around as his 
cows, rejoices in all life forms, and in the evening of 
the created world calls them back, and they all abide by 
and abide in his presence. 


536 RGVEDA 


सं aga यवसादो जनानामहं यवाद उर्व अन्तः 1 अत्रा 
युक्तोऽ वसातारमिच्छादथो अयुक्तं युनजद्ववन्वान्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Sam yadvayam yavasdado jananamaham yavada 
urvajre antah. Atra yukto’vasataram-icchadatho 
ayuktam yunajad-vavanvan. 


Here in the pasture, in the midst of the vast world 
of experience and pleasure, we live and enjoy together 
with all those living beings which enjoy the grass and 
experience the things they love and find as the result of 
their karma, and I too among humans enjoy my share 
of karmic bhoga. Here then, joined to the lord giver of 
life, experience and ultimate freedom and peaceful 
abode, let the soul love and meditate on the master, 
Indra, and may the loving master accept the devotee, 
earlier separated, now joined. 


sig मे मंससे सत्यमुक्तं द्विपाच्च यच्यतुष्पात्संसृजानिं । 
स्त्रीभिर्यो अत्र वृष॑णं पृतन्यादयुद्धो अस्य fa भ॑जानि 
वेद॑: ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Atredu me mamsase satyamuktam dvipdcca 
yaccatuspat samsrjani. Stribhiryo atra vrsanam 
prtanyad-ayuddho asya vi bhajani vedah. 


And here in the world, take it as my own word of 
truth that it is I who generate the biped humans and the 
quadruped animals, and whoever aspires to win as a 
virile warrior but with indulgence with women, I take off 
their share of the desired attainment even before or 
without the interaction between their ambition and 
nature. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 27 537 


यस्यानक्षा दुहिता जात्वास कस्तां fast अभि म॑न्याते 
अन्धाम्‌। कतरो मेनिं प्रति तं मुचाते य ई वहाते aH ar 
वरे यात्‌॥ ९१॥ 


11. Yasyanaksa duhita jatvasa kastam vidvan abhi 
manyate andham. Kataro menim prati tam mucdte 
ya im vahate ya im va vareyadt. 


Who is the sage and scholar who knows that 
blind force, that eyeless generative power, Prakrti, 
mother womb of existence that was there in the pre- 
existence state of divinity in absolute time and space? 
Indra, whose consort it was, the Shakti of divinity to 
generate the various forms of life in historical time and 
space. Who would wield that mighty force for himself 
as consort, as Word, as thunder? Who would release 
her? Who takes her on and controls? Who chooses and 
loves her? Who except Indra? 


किय॑ती योषा मर्यतो deat: परिप्रीता पन्य॑सा वार्येण । 
भद्रा वधूर्भवति यत्सुपेशाः स्वयं सा मित्रं वनुते जनें 
चित्‌॥ ९२॥ 


12. Kiyatt yosamaryato vadhiyoh pariprita panyasa 
varyena. Bhadra vadhurbhavati yat supesah 
svayam sa mitram vanute jane cit. 


Some maiden feels pleased and satisfied with 
the dear lovable wealth and speech of the man wooing 
her for a wife or she is herself pleasing and accepted 
for her speech and riches. But in reality, that wife is 
good and fortunate who, noble in person and manners, 
loves and chooses her friend and husband by herself 
from amongst the youth. 


538 RGVEDA 


पत्तो ज॑गार प्रत्यञ्च॑मत्ति शीर्ष्णा शिरः प्रति दधौ वरूथम्‌। 
आसीन ऊर्ध्वामुपसि क्षिणाति न्य॑ङ््‌ङ्त्तानामन्वेति 
भूमिंम्‌।॥ ९३॥ 


13. Patto jagara pratyancamatti sirsna Sirah prati 
dadhau variutham. Asina urdhvamupasi ksina-ti 
nyannuttanam-anveti bhumim. 


Indra emanates and manifests the generated 
world step by step, then he withdraws it also step by 
step at the end. The top light of Prakrti, he places and 
holds up on high as head and heaven. All present and 
pervasive, the next high form of it he holds in his lap as 
the middle region, and the lowest of the high he forms 
as the earth and pervades it. 


बृहन्नच्छायो अंपत्छाशो stat तस्थौ माता विषिंतो अत्ति 
गर्भ: | अन्यस्यां वत्सं रिहती मिमाय कयां भुवा नि द॑धे 
धेनुरूधः ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. = Brhannacchayo apalaso arva tasthau mata visito 
atti garbhah. Anyasya vatsam rihati mimaya kaya 
bhuva ni dadhe dhenurudhah. 


Infinitely great, imperishable beyond mutability 
and sufferance, all mover, all moving constant, beyond 
bonds and bounds, he is the all bearing mother womb of 
existence. Loving and pervading the living forms of the 
other, Prakrti, as a mother, like his own progeny, he forms 
and sustains the world with divine peace and bliss of 
existence as the mother cow holds the milk for her calf. 


सप्त वीरासो अधरादुर्दायन्नष्टोत्तरात्तात्सम॑जग्मिर न्ते । 
नव॑ पश्चात।स्स्थिविमन्त॑ आयन्दश प्राक्सानु वि 
तिरन्त्यश्नः 1 ९५ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 27 539 


15.  Sapta viraso adharadudayann-astottarattat 
samajagmirante. Nava pascatat sthivimanta adyan 
dasa prak sanvi tirantyasnah. 


Seven off-springs came up from the deepest of 
Prakrti (they are five subtle elements, mind and senses), 
eight sprang from the upper part (they are eight vasus, 
sustainers of life, 1.e., earth, water, fire, air, space, moon, 
sun and stars), from behind came nine well placed in 
position (they are nine planets and nine sense organs), 
and ten pranas arise from the front and move high up in 
air. 


दशानामेकं कपिलं संमानं तं हिन्वन्ति क्रतवे पायीय। गर्भ 
माता सुधितं वक्षणास्ववेनन्तं तुषयन्ती बिभर्ति ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Dasanamekam kapilam samanam tam hinvanti 
kratave paryaya. Garbham mata sudhitam 
vaksanasvavenatam tusayanti bibharti. 


One is the darling of all the ten equally, which 
they energise and serve for fulfilment of the ultimate 
purpose of life. Mother Nature bears the soul as its baby 
well placed in the currents and atomic dynamics of 
existence, nourishing and pleasing it, though the baby 
at this stage is unaware of it, but still loves to stay on in 
the womb. 


पीवानं मेषम॑पचन्त वीरा न्युंसा अक्षा अनुं दीव आसन्‌। 
द्वा धनुं बृहतीमप्स्वन्तः पवित्रवन्ता चरतः पुनन्तां ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Pivanam mesamapacanta vira nyupta aksa anu 
diva asan. Dva dhanum brhatimapsvantah 
pavitravanta caratah punanta. 


Ten pranas together with the senses, positioned 


540 RGVEDA 


in the holy body for nature’s purpose, mature the living 
body of the soul. Two of these pranas, i.e., prana and 
apana, active in the vital waters with warm energy, 
mature, purify and perfect the growing body for the soul. 


वि क्रोशनासो विष्व॑ञ्च आयन्पचाति val नहि पश्च॑दर्धः। 
अयं मे देवः सविता तदाह sda इद्र नवत्सर्पिरित्नः ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Vi krosandso visvanca ayan pacati nemo nahi 
paksadardhah. Ayam me devah savita tadaha 
drvanna idvanavat sarpirannah. 


Souls come into the world from various 
directions in various ways, chanting the name of 
divinity. Some one matures, another does not mature, 
remains half way only. This is what Savita, lord of life, 
giver of light, says to me: the yajna fire which consumes 
the fuel wood and oblations of ghrta helps the soul to 
mature through yajna and self-sacrifice. The man who 
lives on fruit and milk and butter matures with divine 
love and yajnic fire. 


अपर्यं ग्रामं वहमानमारादचक्रया स्वधया वर्तमानम्‌ । 
सिषक्त्यर्यः प्र युगा जनानां सद्यः शिश्ना प्रमिनानो 
नवीयान्‌ ॥ ९९ ॥ 


19. Apasyam gramam vahamanam-arad-acakraya 
svadhaya vartamanam. Sisaktyaryah pra yuga 
jJananam sadyah sisna praminano naviyan. 


From far off by observation of nature and from 
near by meditation, I have perceived and realised the 
divine power and presence bearing the multitudinous 
humanity and other forms of life by its own essential 
might, moving without wheels, that is, moving and yet 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 27 541 


not moving, being omnipresent, eternal, yet even new 
in manifestation, who, sole lord of life, creates the male 
and female pairs of humans from eternity. 


एतौ मे गावौ प्रमरस्य युक्तौ मो षु प्र सेंधीरमुहु रिन्म॑मन्धि । 
आप॑श्चिदस्य वि नशन्त्यर्थं सूर॑श्च मर्क उपरो बभू- 
AML २०॥ 


20. Etau me gavau pramarasya yuktau mo su pra 
sedhir-muhurin-mamandhi. Apascidasya vi 
nasantyartham surasca marka uparo babhuvan. 


Lord of life, pray do not deprive me, the mortal 
man, of these two vital energies of prana and apana 
joined to my existence, pray keep them integrated with 
me, active and pleasing. The subtle body and the pranic 
energies help us reach our divine goal, and may the sun 
and pranic energies, like the cloud, shower me here 
below with light and joy. 


अयं यो वज्र॑ः पुरुधा feats वः सूर्य॑स्य बृहतः Were 
श्रव इदेना परो अन्यदस्ति तदव्यथी जरिमाणस्तरन्ति ॥ २९॥ 


21. Ayam yo vajrah purudha vivrtto ’vah suryasya 
brhatah purisat. Srava idena paro anyadasti 
tadavyathi jarimanas-taranti. 


This thunderous pranic energy, which radiates 
from the mighty orb of the sun in varied ways, comes 
down to us by the paths of Prakrti. Beyond this is there 
another path and destination too, revealed and heard, 
to which the celebrants of divinity free from psychic 
travails of existence attain beyond the flood of pleasure 
and pain here. 


542 RGVEDA 


वृक्षेवृक्षे निय॑ता मीमयद्रौस्ततौ वयः प्र पतान्पूरुषादः । अथेदं 
विश्वं भुव॑नं भयात इन्द्राय सुन्वदुष॑ये च शिष्च॑त्‌ ॥ २२॥ 


22.  Vrksevrkse niyata mimayad-gaustatau vayah pra 
patan purusadah. Adhedam visvam bhuvanam 
bhayata indraya sunvadrsaye ca Siksat. 


The string fixed like destiny on every bow 
twangs with a clang, the arrows fly and fall like 
cannibals on humanity, consuming life and karma. And 
then the whole world shakes with fear. O yajaka on the 
vedi, keep on the offer of soma homage to Indra, the 
omniscient who knows it all. 


देवानां माने प्रथमा अतिष्ठन्करृन्तत्रदिषामुप॑रा sata 
त्रय॑स्तपन्ति पृथिवीमनूपा द्वा बुबूंकं वहतः पुरीषम्‌ ॥ २३ ॥ 


23. Devanam mane prathama atisthan krntatrad- 
esamupara udayan. Trayas-tapanti prthivim- 
anupa dva brbukam vahatah purtsam. 


For the formation of the first and basic divine 
natural causes of cosmic evolution, the original causes 
already existed in the primordial state of Prakrti. From 
the disturbance of those primordial causes in that state 
of unified equilibrium into dynamic state, arose the 
diversity of subtle and gross elements of material and 
psychic forms. Three of these (heat, air and water) 
together mature the earth for life, and two (heat and air) 
bring the life energy to it. 


सा त जीवातुरुत तस्य॑ विद्धि मा स्मैताद्गपं गूहः समर्ये । 
आविः स्व॑ः कृणुते गूह॑ते बुसं स पादुर॑स्य निर्णिजो न 
मुच्यते ॥ २४॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 28 543 


24. Sa te jivaturuta tasya viddhi ma smaitadrgapa 
guhah samarye. Avih svah krnute guhate busam 
Sa padurasya nirnijo na mucyate. 


That, O man, is your life line, the trinity of sun, 
air and water, Know it, and know that divine Indra. It’s 
all his. In the serious holy business of living, forget it 
not, nor let life slip away. Indra creates and opens out 
the bliss of life, consumes the waste to create further, 
and this evolutionary cyclic process of the life giver 
never ends, it continues. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 28 
Devata: Indra (1, 3-5, 7, 9, 11), Vasukra Aindra (2, 6, 8, 
10, 12); Rshi: Indra snusha (1), Indra (2, 6, 8, 10, 12), 
Vasukra Aindra (3-5, 7, 9, 11) 


This hymn is a dialogue between Indra and 
Vasukra. It is an allegory on the organismic, integrated, 
organised system of life from the individual to the social 
and the cosmic order. The chief and supreme master is 
the soul, the ruler, Indra. Others too are powers, but 
subordinate to the chief. 


विश्वो ह्य4न्यो अरिराजगाम ममेदह शशरो ना ज॑गाम । 
जक्षीयाद्दाना उत सोमं पपीयात्स्वाशितः पुनरस्तं जगा- 
यात्‌ ॥ ९॥ 
if Visvo hyanyo arirajagama mamedaha svasuro na 
jJagama. Jakstyaddhana uta somam papiyat 
svasitah punarastam jagaydt. 
Vasukra’s wife says: All other masterly powers 


are arrived here. Only the chief is not come. I wish he 
were here, accept our hospitality of food and drink and, 


544 RGVEDA 
satisfied and fulfilled, go back to his seat. 


(The soul emerges in the body, takes over and 
rules over the body system after all other powers have 
developed and the body is mature for emergence of the 
soul. So is the social system the soul of which is the 
sovereign ruling power. So is the cosmos, the ruling 
soul of the system is Indra.) 


स रोरुवद्‌ वृषभस्तिग्मशुंद्खो वर्ष्मन्तस्थौ वरिमन्ना पुंथिव्याः। 
विश्वेष्वेनं वृजनेषु पामि यो मे कुक्षी सुतसोमः पृणाति ॥ २॥ 


2. Sa roruvad-vrsabhas-tigmasrngo varsman 
tasthau varimanna prthivyah. Visvesvenam vrja- 
nesu pami yo me kuksi sutasomah prnati. 


Indra: I, mighty ruling power, harbinger of 
showers of plenty and prosperity, commanding sharpest 
forces of defence and offence, abide on top of the mighty 
expanse of the earth. Whoever the maker of soma that 
offers me homage and hospitality to my pleasure and 
satisfaction, I defend, protect and promote in all battles 
of life. 

अद्रिणा ते मन्दिनं इन्द्र तूर्यान्त्सुन्वन्ति सोमान्पिब॑सि 
त्वमेषाम्‌। पच॑न्ति ते वृषभां अत्सि तेषां पृक्षेण यन्म॑- 
घवन्हूय्पानः ॥ ३॥ 


Adrina te mandina indra tuyantsunvanti soman 
pibasi tvamesam. Pacanti te vrsabhan atsi tesam 
prksena yanmaghavan huyamanah. 


Vasukra: O mighty ruler of wealth and power, 
Indra, happy performers of the yajnic system, with the 
best of equipment, extract exciting soma juice and they 
prepare sanative tonics from vrshabha herbs, of which, 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 28 545 


when cordially invited, you drink and taste with pleasure 
to your satisfaction and fulfilment. 


इदं सु मे जरितरा चिकिद्धि प्रतीपं शापं नद्यो वहन्ति। 
त्मोपाशः सिहं प्रत्यञ्चमत्साः क्रोष्टा वराहं निरतक्त 
कर्षात्‌ ॥ ४॥ 


4. Idam su me jaritara cikiddhi pratipam sapam 
nadyo vahanti. Lopasah simham pratyancamat- 
sah krosta varaham niratakta kaksat. 


O celebrant, know this force of my power: By 
the dynamic force of my system and order, the stream 
of ordered life can carry off criticism, opposition and 
contradictions and throw out all poisonous elements, 
the ordinary vegetarian citizen faces and drives off the 
violent carnivorous enemy, and a single clarion call 
would dig out and throw out the most destructive 
terrorist forces from the darkest den. 


कथा त॑ एतदहमा चिकेतं गृत्स॑स्य पाकस्तवसो मनीषाम्‌। 
त्वं नो fast ऋतुथा वि वोचो यमर्धं" ते मघवन्क्षेम्या 
धूः ॥ ५॥ 


a, Katha ta etadahama ciketam grtsasya pakasta- 
vaso manisam. Tvam no vidvan rtutha vi voco 
yamardham te maghavan ksemya dhuh. 


O lord of wealth and power, all knowing all 
watching ruler of the world, Indra, how would I, a simple 
man, understand and know this mysterious ground 
power and policy of yours, wise and versatile master of 
the mighty order. O lord, you alone know, you alone 
can enlighten us about the admirable basis and direction 
of your policy of peace and progress of humanity 


546 RGVEDA 


according to the time and season. 


एवा हि मां तवसं वर्धयन्ति दिवश्चिन्मे बृहत उत्तरा धूः | 
पुरू सहस्रा नि शिशामि aed हि मा जनिता 
WTA ६ ॥ 


6. Eva hi mam tavasam vardhayanti divascinme 
sdkamasatrum hi ma janita jajana. 

Thus do they (assistant powers) exalt me, mighty 
soul, ruler of the system. The foundation, structure, 
direction and stability of the system, the power I wield 
to sustain and rule the system is greater than the vast 
heavens. A thousand foes I eliminate, all at once, witha 
single stroke. Indeed the creative powers that generate 
and manifest me as power generate me without enemy 
and opposition. 


एवा हि मां तवसं जज्ञुरुग्रं कर्मन्कर्मन्तृष॑णपिन्द्र Sa: 1 
वधीं वृत्रं वज्रैण मन्दसानोऽ प॑ व्रजं HAT दाशुष वम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


7. Eva hi mam tavasam jajnurugram karmankar- 
man vrsanamindra devah. Vadhim vrtram vajr- 
ena mandasano’pa vrajam mahina dasuse vam. 


Thus do the devas, divine powers and faculties 
create and know me as mighty and formidable, virile 
and generous in every act of the system. Happily with 
the mighty vajra, vital power, I break the dark cloud of 
rain with mighty thunder and open the paths of progress 
for the creative and generous vital channels of the 
dynamics of the system. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 28 547 


देवास आयन्पर शूरं बिश्वन्वनां वृश्चन्तो अभि विङ्भिरा- 
यन्‌। नि सुद्र्वं दध॑तो वक्चणांसु यत्रा कृपीटमनु तद॑ 
हन्ति ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Devasa ayan parasunrabuibhran vana vrscanto 
abhi vidbhirayan. Ni sudrvam dadhato vaksanasu 
yatra krpitamanu taddahanti. 


Let men of power and enlightenment march 
forward bearing weapons of defence and action, felling 
forests and oppositions, march forward with people of 
the land, stay the floods of rivers, release the flow into 
streams and canals, burning the undergrowth and drying 
up pools of stagnant water. 


शशः क्षुरं प्रत्यञ्चं जगारारद्रिं ल्टोगेन व्य॑भदमारात्‌। 
बृहन्तं चिद्‌ हते र॑न्धयानि वयंद्त्सो Gas शूशुवानः ॥ ९ ॥ 

2 Sasah ksuram pratyaicam jagara’drim logena 
vyabhedamarat. Brhantam cidrhate randhayani 
vayadvatso vrsabham susuvanah. 


The deer faces and beats up the tiger of fatal 
paw since I can break up the mountain with a lump of 
clay from far or near. I can crush the biggest with the 
tiniest, and the calf, waxing with strength, can force the 
bull to retreat and run. (This is the might of soul and 
prana). 


सुपर्णं इत्था नखमा सिंषायाव॑रुढ्धः परिपदं न सिंहः । 
निरु ब्दश्चिन्महिषस्तष्यर्विान्गोधा तस्मा अयथं कर्षदे- 
ALU ९०॥ 

10. Suprarna ittha nakhama sisayavaruddhah pari- 


padam na simhah. Niruddhascinmahisastarsya- 
van godha tasma ayatham karsadetat. 


548 RGVEDA 


10. Let Suparna, Indra, the soul on top all 
round of the living system and at the centre of the self, 
confirm, hold and monitor its power-in-readiness as this: 
Like the lion in the den ready with his paw, like a rhino 
in position thirsting to strike (as a battery of force and 
power calibrated unto the live switch) and the power 
like the bow string in optimum tension would strike 
and throw out and far off the negativities and enemies 
wherever they be, (such is the force and power of prana, 
spirit and soul of the living system at individual, social 
and cosmic level) in service for the master, Indra. 


तेभ्यो गोधा अयथं कर्षदेतद्ये ब्रह्मणः प्रतिपीयन्त्य्नैः । सिम 
sens वसूर्टो अदन्ति स्वयं Goth ara: SOIT: ॥ ९९॥ 
Tebhyo godha ayatham karsadetadye brahm- 
anah pratipiyantyannaih. Sima uksno’vasrstan 
adanti svayam balani tanvah srnanah. 


11. The systemic strength in optimum tension 
spontaneously throws out those who, feeding on the 
nutriments provided by the system itself, abuse, revile 
and sabotage the social order, eating into all the 
creativities of the system and thereby, at the same time, 
damage the strength of their bodies by themselves. 


एते शमीभिः gor अभूवन्ये हिन्विरे तन्व4: सोम॑ उक्थेः। 
Tages नो माहि वाजान्दिवि श्रवो! दधिषे नामं 
वीरः ॥ ९२॥ 

Ete samibhih susami abhuvan ye hinvire tanvah 
soma ukthaih. Nrvad-vadann-upa no mahi vajan 
divi Sravo dadhise nama virah. 


12. Those persons rise to creative power and 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 29 549 


grandeur who, with holy words and noble acts of yajnic 
creations of soma peace and vitality serve life and 
humanity and strengthen and advance the body of the 
social order and thus address the ruling power: O ruling 
soul of the order, speaking and proclaiming as leader, 
pioneer and ruler, bring us all our share of sustenance 
and power, acknowledge our achievement and victory, 
and feel great that you wield the honour and power of 
the order, yours is the name and the glory from earth to 
heaven. You are the heroic brave. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 29 
Indra Devata, Vasukra Aindra Rshi 


वने न वा यो न्य॑धायि चाकञ्छुचिर्वां carat भुरणावजीगः 1 
यस्येदिन्द्रः पुरुदिनेषु dat नृणां नर्यो नृत॑मः श्चपार्वान्‌॥ ९ ॥ 


i Vane na va yo nyadhayi cakanchucirvam stomo 
bhuranavajigah. Yasyedindrah purudinesu hota 
nrnam naryo nrtamah ksapavan. 


Like the baby bird placed in the nest on the tree, 
waiting and watching for the mother bird, and the mother 
bird arriving, may this song of love and purity reach 
you, O complementary powers of light, Ashvins, the 
song, of which Indra, ruler of the world, is the inspirer 
and deity, manliest leader of men, who rules over the 
day and night of human activity 


ad अस्या उषसः प्राप॑रस्या नृतौ स्याम नृत॑मस्य नृणाम्‌। 
अनु, त्रिशोकः शतमावं हनरन्कुत्सेन रथो यो असंत्स- 
सवान्‌ ॥ २॥ 

2. Pra te asya usasah praparasya nrtau syama 


nrtamasya nrnam. Anu trisokah Satamavahanrn 
kutsena ratho yo asat sasavan. 


550 RGVEDA 


Indra, ruler of the world, manliest leader of the 
leaders of humanity, lord of triple splendour of 
knowledge, action and spiritual advancement, who 
command a hundred heroes by virtue of power and 
thunder, source of peace, advancement and bliss, may 
we ever abide in the light and joy of the dawn of today 
and of other days to come in our course of life. 


कस्ते मद इन्द्र Teal भूहुरो Pret अभ्युश्ग्रो वि ata 
कद्वाहो stata मा मनीषा आ त्वा शक्यामुपमं राधो 
अर्चः ॥ ३॥ 


ध Kaste mada indra rantyo bhudduro giro abhyugro 
vi dhava. Kadvaho arvagupa ma manisa त tva 
Sakyam-upamam radho annaih. 


What is the most exhilarating song of prayer 
and presentation dear to you? O lustrous lord of force 
and power, come to us by the doors of yajna in response 
to our songs of invocation. Harbinger of power and 
peace, when shall I see you face to face? When will my 
prayer be fruitful? When shall I be able to regale you 
with homage and adoration, most eminent master and 
ruler? 


कढु Tes त्वाव॑तो नून्कयां धिया करसे कन्न आग॑न्‌ । 
मित्रो न सत्य उरुगाय भृत्या अन्ने समस्य यदसं॑न्म- 
नीषाः॥ ४॥ 

4. Kadu dyumnamindra tvavato nrn kaya dhiya 


karase kanna agan. Mitro na satya urugaya 
bhrtya anne samasya yadasan manisah. 


Indra, when shall we have the light, power and 
honour of prosperity in life? What is that order of 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 29 551 


intelligence by which you transform humans to divine 
consciousness of your presence? When would you 
reveal your presence to us in direct experience? O lord 
adorable ever true as friend, when would our thoughts 
and actions be fruitful and win your favour of food, 
sustenance and stability for all mankind in peace and 
prosperity? 


ta सूरो अर्थ न पारं ये siea कामं जनिधाइव TI 
गिर॑श्च ये ते तुविजात पूर्वीर्नर इन्द्र प्रतिशिश्चन्त्यत्न: ॥ ५ ॥ 


of Preraya suro artham na paramye asya kamam 
janidha iva gman. Girasca ye te tuvijata purvi- 
rnara indra pratisiksantyannaih. 


Indra, like the sun that leads from darkness to 
light, inspire and lead humanity to the attainment of 
their desire for freedom across the world, all who 
entertain this ambition like their love for home life 
earlier. O lord of infinite manifestation, bless all those 
people who adore you with songs of universal 
exhortation, who guide others to sing and pray with 
universal voice, and who offer homage to divinity with 
foods and charity in various forms. 


मात्रे नु ते सुमिते इन्द्र पूवीं द्यौर्मज्मना पृथिवी काव्येन | 
वराय ते घृतव॑न्तः सुतासः स्वादानभवन्तु पीतये मधूनि ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Matre nu te sumite indra purvi dyaurmajmana 


prthivi kavyena. Varaya te ghrtavantah sutasah 
svadman bhavantu pitaye madhuni. 


O Indra, lord omniscient and omnipotent, 
mother earth and the heaven of light, both ancient and 
eternal in the existential cycle, are created in excellent 


552 RGVEDA 


measure of form and function by your vision and power. 
May the delicious and refined honey drinks of soma 
and sumptuous foods gifted by sun and earth be 
exhilarating and delightful for noble humanity and for 
their yajnic homage to you. 


आ मध्वो अस्मा असिचन्नम॑त्रमिन्द्रय got स हि सत्यराधाः | 
स वावृधे वरिमन्ना पुंथिव्या अभि क्रत्वा नर्यः पौस्यैर्च ॥ ७॥ 


न A madhvo asma asicann-amatram-indraya 
purnam sa hi satyaradhah. Sa vavrdhe varimanna 
prthivya abhi kratva naryah paumsyaisca. 


Let us offer the honey sweet bowl] of our heart 
and soul overflowing with love and faith to Indra who 
is truly magnificent and munificent. He is the benevolent 
guide of humanity and supreme leader of leaders and 
by his powers, potentials and creative actions manifests 
higher and exalted over the expansive earth and space. 


व्यानचिन्द्रः पृत॑नाः स्वोजा आस्मै यतन्ते स॒ख्याय॑ पूर्वीः | 
आ स्मा रथं न पृत॑नासु तिष्ठ यं भद्रया सुमत्या चोदर्यासे ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Vyanalindrah prtanah svoja asmai yatante 
sakhaya purvith. A sma ratham na prtanasu tistha 
yam bhadraya sumatya codayase. 


Indra, lord of holy light and lustre, pervades the 
peoples’ heart and soul within and joins them in their 
struggles in the world outside. The best of people since 
time immemorial try to win his love and friendship with 
homage, prayer and meditation. O lord of cosmic 
chariot, ruler of the world, come to us to bless us and 
our social order like a master of the chariot among 
people whom you inspire and bless with clear 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 30 553 


intelligence, noble ambition and holy enthusiasm in the 
right direction. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 30 
Apah or Apam-napat Devata, Kavasha Ailusha Rshi 


प्र देवत्रा ब्रह्मणे गातुरेत्वपो अच्छा मन॑सो न प्रयुक्ति । महीं 
मित्रस्य वरुणस्य धासिं desea रीरधा सुवृक्तिम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Pra devatra brahmane gdaturetvapo accha manaso 
na prayukti. Mahim mitrasya varunasya dhasim 
prthujrayase riradha suvrktim. 


Let our voice of thanks and praise, our acts of 
yajnic creation and self-sacrifice in service of the cosmic 
sustainer, reach all the divine energies and powers of 
nature and humanity which are ever on the move and 
sustain life, and let this expression be the very symbol 
of the total dedication of our mind and soul. O celebrant, 
O high priest of yajna, proclaim and realise this our 
will to live as a mighty gift of the lord of love and 
judgement, and proclaim as well our vision of the 
ultimate freedom from selfish attachment, which we 
would realise in dedication to our own spirit, to the social 
order, and to the infinite lord of cosmic dynamics with 
the same love and judgement. 


अध्वर्यवो हविष्मन्तो हि भूताऽ च्छाप इतोशतीरुशन्तः | 
अव याश्चषटै अरुणः सुंपर्णस्तमास्य॑ध्वमूर्भिमद्या सुंह- 
स्ताः॥ २॥ 

2. Adhvaryavo havismanto hi bhuta’cchapa 


itosatirusantah. Ava yascaste arunah suparnas- 
tamasyadhvam-urmim-adya suhastah. 


554 RGVEDA 


O priests and organisers of the socio-cosmic 
order, bear and bring the fragrant materials of yajnic 
action for development, rise with passion and 
enthusiasm, reach the vaulting waters of life, and with 
open expert hands today receive the waves which the 
moon and ocean raise and the flood of light and energy 
which the sun showers down. 


अध्वर्यवोऽ प इता समुद्र मपां नपातं ह विषां यजध्वम्‌ । 
स वों दददूर्मिमद्या सुपूतं तस्मै सोमं मधुमन्तं सुनोत ॥ ३ ॥ 


5 Adhvaryavo’pa ita samudramapam napatam 
havisa yajadhvam. Sa vo dadad-urmimadya 
suputam tasmai somam madhumantam sunota. 


O priests and organisers, reach the ocean and 
the waters of space and connect with the sun and light 
in space and skies with the right materials of yajna. The 
sun never allows the waters to exhaust and gives you 
the purest showers ever. Create and offer the sweetest 
and most powerful soma oblations to the sun for 
permanent supply of liquid energies for the sustenance 
of life. 


यो अनिध्मो दीद॑यदप्स्व१न्तर्य विप्रास dhe steer । 
अपां नपान्मधुमतीरपो दा याभिरिन्द्रो वावृधे वीयीय ॥  ॥ 


4. Yo anidhmo didayad-apsvantar-yam viprasa tlate 
adhvaresu. Apam napan-madhumatir-apo da 
yabhir-indro vavrdhe viryaya. 


O sun who burn and shine in space without fuels 
of fire, whom priests and scientists serve and adore in 
yajna, who never allow liquid energies of the world to 
exhaust, pray give us the honey sweets of liquid energies 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 30 555 


by which Indra, ruler of the world order on earth, may 
rise to strength and accomplish great deeds for humanity. 


याभिः सोमो aida हर्ष॑ते च कल्याणीभिर्युवतिधिर्न wat: | 
ता अध्वर्यो अपो अच्छा परेहि यदासिञ्चा ओष॑धीभिः 
पुनीतात्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


a: Yabhih somo modate harsate ca kalyanibhir- 
yuvatibhirna maryah. Ta adhvaryo apo accha 
parehi yadasinca osadhibhih punitat. 


The liquids with which Soma, the ruling spirit, 
rejoices and feels exhilarated as men feel happy and 
exhilarated by noble youthful women, those exciting 
liquid energies, O high priest of yajna, find from far 
and near, and when you find them, then cleanse and 
strengthen the drinks and sanatives for health and joy. 


एवेद्यूने यु वतयो। नमन्त यदीमुशच्चुशातीरेत्यच्छ । सं जानते 
मन॑सा सं चिंक्कित्रेऽध्वर्यवों धिषणापश्च देवीः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Evedyune yuvatayo namanta yadimusannu- 
Satiretyaccha. Sam janate manasa sam cikitre 
*dhvaryavo dhisanapasca devih. 


Just as youthful women submit to young men, 
and as men with love eagerly advance to loving women, 
so do the leaders of social and scientific yajna know 
the liquid energies of nature and with their science and 
intelligence create, obtain and develop. So do also they 
develop the energies and competence of the rising 
youthful generation for the social yajna of the world 
order of humanity. 


556 RGVEDA 


यो al वृताभ्यो अकृणोदु लोकं यो al मह्या अभि- 
रस्तेरमुंज्चत्‌। तस्मा इन्द्राय मधुमन्तमूर्मिं देवमाद॑नं प्र 
हिणोतनापः ॥ ७॥ 


7. Yo vo vrtabhyo akrnodu lokam yo vo mahya abhi- 
Sasteramuncat. Tasma indraya adhuman-tam- 
urmim devamadanam pra hinotanapah. 


O people of the social order of the world, 
committed to honesty and loyalty, the ruler who opens 
the doors of freedom against inhibition and creates a 
beautiful world for you, for that Indra, mighty ruler, 
create honey sweet fragrances of exhilarating 
environment and offer him divinely joyous foods and 
drinks of self-fulfilment. 


प्रास्मै हिनोत मधुमन्तमूर्मिं गर्भो यो व॑: सिन्धवो मध्व उत्स॑ः | 
घृतपुंष्ट मीङ्य॑मध्वरेष्वाऽऽपों रेवतीः श्रुणुता हवं मे ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Prasmai hinota madhumantamurmim garbho yo 
vah sindhavo madhva utsah. Ghrtaprstham- 
tdyamadhvaresva’’po revatih srnuta havam me. 


O streams of life aflow, O dynamic people blest 
with wealth, honour and excellence, listen to my call 
and exhortation: Create and set in flow the sweetest 
honeyed waves of joy for this master power and ruler 
who is the fountain head and fathomless ocean source 
of your joy and fulfilment, refulgent and illustrious, 
adorable in the noblest yajnic meets of the world. 


तं सिन्धवो मत्सरमिंन्द्रपान॑मूर्मिं प्रहत य उभे safe | 
मदच्युत॑मोशानं न॑भोजां परि त्रितन्तुं विचरन्तमुत्सम्‌ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 30 557 


र Tam sindhavo matsaram-indrapanam-urmim pra 
heta ya ubhe iyarti. Madacyutam-ausanam 
nabhojam pari tritantum vicarantam-utsam. 


O streams of life, dynamic people of the world, 
inspire and set in motion that joyous wave of living and 
working worthy of all ruling Indra which helps to realise 
both ends of life, fulfilment over here and freedom of 
moksha hereafter, overflowing with divine ecstasy, 
admirable, heavenly, universal, good for earth, heaven 
and the middle regions, continuous for three living 
generations, dynamic as the river and deep as ocean. 


आवर्वृततीरध नु द्विधारा गोषुयुधो न निंयवं चर॑न्तीः । ऋषे 
जर्नित्रीर्भुव॑नस्य पनीर पो व॑न्दस्व सवृधः सयोनीः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Avarvrtatiradha nu dvidhara gosuyudho na 
niyavam carantth. Rse janitrirbhuvanasya patni- 
rapo vandasva savrdhah sayonth. 


O sage, visionary celebrant of the yajnic world 
order, respect, honour and celebrate the vibrant people 
of the land, fluent in action like winding streams, 
dedicated in thought, word and deed to the two streams 
of individual and collective good, observing a compact 
order of law like fighting forces deployed on fields of 
action over the same one earth, creators, planners and 
achievers of yajnic development, having a common 
origin and growing and moving together in one 
direction. 


हिनोता नो अध्वरं दवयज्या हिनोत ब्रह्मं सनये ध्नानाम्‌। 
ऋतस्य योगे वि ष्यध्वमूधः श्रुष्टीवरी'भुतनास्मभ्य- 
मापः॥ ९९॥ 


558 RGVEDA 


11.  Hinota no adhvaram devayajya hinota brahma 
sanaye dhananam. Rtasya yoge vi syadhva- 
mudhah srustivarir-bhutanasmabhyam-apah. 


O dynamic powers of nature, O vibrant people 
of the earth, in worship of the lord supreme, in honour 
of mother nature’s divinities, and for love and well being 
of noble humanity, inspire and accelerate our yajnic 
action in cooperation, for the achievement of wealth, 
honour and excellence raise the voice of divine 
knowledge, application and action, in the pursuit of 
collective action under the laws of nature and grateful 
humanity, open the sluice gates of clouds and unlock 
the treasure holds of wealth. O powers of the dynamic 
flow of existence, be good, creative and blissful for our 
well being. 


smal रेवतीः क्षय॑था हि वस्वः क्रतुं च भद्रं विंभृथामृतं च । 
रायश्च स्थ स्वपत्यस्य पलीः सर॑स्वती तद्‌ dure वयो! 
धात्‌॥ ९२॥ 


12. Apo ravatih ksayatha hi vasvah kratum ca 
bhadram bibhrthamrtam ca. Rayasca stha 
svapatyasya patnth sarasvati tadgrnate vayo वता. 


O cosmic dynamics of mother nature, O fluent 
streams of earth and the environment, O vibrant people 
of the land, O generous mothers of mankind, be master 
rulers of the world’s wealth, promote the yajnic 
development, well being and immortal values of happy 
life, be protectors and promoters of the veins of nation’s 
wealth and makers of the noble generations of 
humanity’s heroes. May Sarasvati, mother stream of 
divine knowledge, culture and grace bear and bring good 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 30 559 
health, full age and vibrant energy for the celebrant. 


प्रति यदापो अदुश्रमायती्घुतं पयांसि बिभ्र॑तीर्मधुनि । 
अध्वर्युभिर्मनसा संविदाना इन्द्राय सोमं सुषुतं 
भर॑न्तीः॥ ९३॥ 


13. Prati yadapo adrsram-ayati-rghrtam payamsi 
bibhratir-madhuni. Adhvaryubhir-manasa sam- 
vidana indraya somam susutam bharantth. 


Apah, all fluent streams of nature and humanity, 
dynamic forces, powers and people of the world, I see 
you rising and coming in response to the call and prayer 
of the high priests and celebrants of yajna, bearing water, 
milk and ghrta and the honey sweets of life for fertility 
and life’s generation, in perfect union with the mind, 
hopes and aspirations of the priests and yajakas on the 
vedi and bringing pure distilled Soma beauty, prosperity 
and joy for Indra, ruling power and reigning glory of 
life. 


एमा अ॑ग्मत्रेवती्जीवधंन्या अध्वर्यवः areata सखायः | 
नि बर्हिषि धत्तन सोम्यासोऽ पां नप्त्रा संविदानासं एनाः ॥ ९४॥ 


14. Ema agman revatir-jivadhanya adhvaryavah 
sadayata sakhayah. Ni barhisi dhattana somyaso 
‘pam naptra samvidanasa enah. 


Friends, priests and yajakas, these waters, 
vibrant energies of nature and dynamic powers and 
personalities of humanity, all overflowing with life, 
fertility and generative potential, are come here. Give 
them an honourable place in yajna. They know, they 
are united with us, and they are blissful, and they never 
allow the waters of life to exhaust. Know them, seat 


560 RGVEDA 


them on the holy grass and create the beauties and joy 
of life for all. 


आग्मन्नाप उशतीर्बर्हिरेदं न्य॑ध्वरे असदन्देवयन्तीः | अध्व॑- 
da: सुनुतेन्द्र॑य सोममभूदु वः सुशका देवयज्या ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Agmannapa uSsatir-barhiredam nyadhvare asadan 
devayantith. Adhvaryavah sunutendraya somama- 
bhudu vah susaka devayajya. 


Brilliant, fluent and divine energies, powers and 
personalities, united in love with divinity and noble 
humanity have come and they are seated on the holy 
grass in the corporate yajna of love and non-violence 
for development and the creation of life divine for 
humanity. O priests, O yajakas, create the soma for Indra, 
ruling power and reigning glory of life, and may your 
yajnic prayers and programmes for life and humanity 
be realised successfully. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 31 
Vishvedeva Devatah, Kavasha Ailusha Rshi 


srt देवानामुपं वेतु शंसो विश्वेभिस्तुरैरवंसे aaa: | 
तेभिर्वयं सुंषरायो भवेम तरन्तो विश्वां दुरिता स्याम v2 


il; A no devanamupa vetu Samso visvebhis-turair- 
avase yajatrah. Tebhirvayam susakhayo bhavema 
taranto visva durita syama. 


May the adorable word and wisdom of lord 
Supreme and all divinities of nature and humanity come 
to us in communion with all the speed, power and 
excellence of the world for our protection and progress. 
May we be good friends with them and cross over all 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 31 561 


hurdles, sins and evils of existence. 


UR चिन्मर्तो द्रविणं ममन्यादू तस्यं पथा नमसा feared | 
उत स्वेन रतुना सं वदेत श्रेयांसं दक्षं मन॑सा जगृभ्यात्‌ २॥ 


2. Pari cinmarto dravinam mamanyad-rtasya patha 
namasa vivaset. Uta svena kratunad sam vadeta 
Sreyamsam daksam manasa jagrbhydt. 


Let mortal man love and desire wealth, honour 
and excellence in the comprehensive context of the 
world and divinity, shine and refine it with faith and 
reverence by the path of truth and universal law, speak 
of it, think and define it with his own conscience in 
communion with divinity, and then, with his own mind 
and soul, realise the high degree of expertise, vision 
and perfection of thought, action and achievement for 
himself. (Divinity, humanity, nature, the world around, 
these are the context of our success and achievement.) 


अधायि धीतिरसंसूग्रमंशास्तीर्थे न दस्ममुप यन्त्यूमाः । 
अभ्यानश्म सुवितस्य॑ शूषं नवेदसो अमृतानामभूम ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Adhayi dhitir-asasrgram-amsastirthe na dasma- 
mupa yantyumah. Abhyanasma suvitasya susam 
navedaso amrtanam-abhuma. 


Maturity of thought and concentration is 
achieved, vibrations of thought in waves flow in, 
protective and illuminative for the spirit in virile posture 
like waves of flood on the holy shore. Thus may we 
achieve the power of success and prosperity, thus may 
we be knowers and achievers of the boons of immortals 
in knowledge, awareness and, in fact, in our very being. 


562 RGVEDA 


नित्य॑श्चाकन्यात्स्वप॑तिर्दमूंना यस्मा उ देवः सविता जजानं। 
भगो वा गोभिरर्यमेम॑नज्यात्सो अस्मै चारुश्छदयदुत 
स्यात्‌॥ ४॥ 


4. Nityas-cakanyat svapatirdamuna yasma u devah 
savita jajana. Bhago va gobhir-aryamemanajyat 
so asmai carus-chadayaduta sydt. 


May the lord eternal, master of the world’s 
wealth of Prakrti, generous and potent, love to give and 
bless humanity for whom Savita, lord creator and 
generator provides all things of existence, and may 
Bhaga, lord of universal power and prosperity, and 
Aryama, lord of justice and dispensation, enlighten him 
with the word of knowledge, and may the lord of love, 
beauty and bounty, provide man the sweet shade of 
protection for advancement. 


इयं सा yar उषसामिव क्षा ag क्षुमन्तः शव॑सा समाय॑न्‌। 
अस्य स्तुतिं ज॑रितुर्भिक्षमाणा आ न॑ः शग्मास उप॑ यन्तु 
वार्जाः॥ ५॥ 


2; Iyam sa bhuya usasamiva ksa yaddha ksuman- 
tah Savasa samayan. Asya stutim jariturbhiksam- 
ana ठ nah §agmasa upa yantu vajah. 


When clouds laden with power and plenty of 
rain, and sages with words of enlightenment and power 
come and bless the earth, then this world of humanity, 
like the light and freshness of the dawns, shines and 
prospers on earth, and seekers of wisdom and power 
asking the sages for knowledge and wisdom of divinity 
and power and advancement on earth flock here to us, 
and we pray may power and prosperity continue to flow 
in for us and our children. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 31 563 


अस्येदेषा सुं मतिः पंप्रथानाऽभंवत्पूव्यां भूम॑ना गौः | अस्य 
ilar असुरस्य योनौ समान आ भरणे लिशभ्र॑माणाः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Asyedesa sumatih paprathana’bhavat purvya 
bhumana gauh. Asya sanila asurasya yonau 
samana @ bharane bhibhramanah. 


This knowledge and wisdom, this Vedic voice 
of this sage of divinity, may, we pray, be universal, 
eternal and ever expansive, and may we, united and 
organised together on this equal and undivided earth, 
abide under the same one social order of this mighty 
life-giving ruler, living safe, secure and sustained in a 
state of peace and progress. 


किं स्विद्वनं क उ स gat आंस यतो द्यावापृथिवी निं तक्षुः | 
सं तस्थाने अजरं इतऊती अहानि पूर्वीरुषसो! जरन्त ।॥ ७ ॥ 


a. Kim svidvanam ka u sa vrksa asa yato dyava- 
prthivi nistataksuh. Samtasthane ajare ita uti 
ahani purvirusaso jaranta. 


Which is that forest, which was that tree, that 
material cause, from which the Vishvedevas, divine 
powers of lord Supreme, fashioned forth the heaven and 
earth sustained in cosmic order in the imperishable 
universe, safe and protected, which the eternal days and 
nights and the dawns at morning and evening proclaim 
and adore. 


नैतावं देना परो अन्यदस्त्युक्षा स द्यावापृथिवी fasted | 
त्वचं पवित्रं कृणुत स्वधावान्यदीं सूर्य न हरितो वह॑न्ति ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Naitavadena paro anyadastyuksa sa dyavaprthivi 


bibharti. Tvacam pavitram krnuta svadhavan 
yadim suryam na harito vahanti. 


564 RGVEDA 


There is no other universe like this nor beyond 
this, and yet there is one power not just exactly as this 
but beyond, and that is the mighty generous creator and 
generator who bears this heaven and earth. That is the 
master lord of Prakrti, his own Shakti, the mighty 
material cause of the universe, and he creates and 
structures the sacred form of it and bears it all as the 
cosmic energies and space directions bear the sun. 


स्तेगो न क्षामत्येति पृथ्वीं मिहं न वातो वि हं वाति ya 
मित्रो यत्र वरुणो अज्यर्मानोऽ यिर्वने arts शोक॑म्‌।॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Stego na ksamatyeti prthvim miham na vato vi ha 
vati bhuma. Mitro yatra varuno ajyamano’- 
gnirvane na vyasrsta Sokam. 


As the sun lights up and transcends the earth, as 
the wind shakes the cloud of life showers and passes, 
so does he pervade and transcend the heaven and earth, 
so does he move the universe to creative activity. Where 
Mitra, the sun, and Varuna, the moon, 1.e., the couple— 
prana and apana, heat and water, sun and air, sun and 
moon, energised and impassioned, create and release 
life energy, heat and desire, there Agni releases the life 
of life as fire releases heat and vests it in the wood. 


weitere सद्यो अज्यमाना व्यथिरव्यथीः कुणुत 
स्वगोपा । पुत्रो यत्पूर्वः पित्रोर्जनिष्ट शम्यां गौर्ज'गार 
यन्द पृच्छान्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 

10. Stariryat suta sadyo ajyamana vyathiravyathth 
krnuta svagopa. Putro yat purvah pitrorjanista 
Samyam gaurjagara yaddha prcechan. 

Like the heifer, mother Prakrti (void of life in 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 32 565 


pre-creation stage of existence) is immediately energised 
and impregnated by the Spirit of life Supreme, master 
of the herd of living forms. The original and efficient 
cause, first mover, creates motion in the unmoved and 
unmoving, and makes the potential forms move in their 
orbits. The saviour protector and presiding power that 
existed awake as ever, even before the parental couples, 
manifested in action and mother Prakrti gave birth to 
forms which now ask, seek and worship the mystery. 


उत कण्वं Fad: पुत्रमाहुरुत श्यावो धनमादत्त वाजी । प्र 
कृष्णाय रुश॑दपिन्वतोधं ऋ तमत्र नकिरस्मा अपीपेत्‌॥ ९९॥ 


11. Uta kanvam nrsadah putramahuruta syavo 
dhanamadatta vaji. Pra krsnaya rusad-apinva- 
todhar-rtamatra nakirasma apipet. 


And man, the intelligent, they call the child of 
divine energy. The vibrant, the wise and bold achieve 
the wealth of life and divinity, and for such as draw the 
attention and love of divinity, the lord opens his treasure 
hold of joy and blesses them. None other than divinity 
can bless humanity with joy and ultimate fulfilment. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 32 
Indra Devata, Kavasha Ailusha Rshi 


प्र सु wed धियसानस्य सक्षणि atte अभिषु 
प्रसीद॑तः। अस्माकमिन्द्र उभयं जुजोषति यत्सोप्यस्यान्ध॑सो 
लुलोधति ॥ ९॥ 

| Pra su gmanta dhiyasanasya saksani varebhir- 


varan abhi su prasidatah. Asmakamindra ubha- 
yam jujosati yat somyasyandhaso bubodhati. 


566 RGVEDA 


May Indra, omnificent spirit and highest 
presence of the universe, cherished object of the 
meditative seeker, move to accept the best of the seeker’s 
acts of homage and surrender and bless him in his state 
of clairvoyant ecstasy with the objects of his love and 
desire. Indeed Indra, who acknowledges the homage 
and service of the man dedicated to search for divinity, 
loves, joins and rewards our search for knowledge and 
action with fulfilment. 


वीन्द्र यासि fear रोचना वि पार्थिवानि रज॑सा पुरुष्टुत | 
ये त्वा वह॑न्ति मुहुरध्वराँ उप ते सु व॑न्वन्तु वग्वनाँ अ॑रा- 
धसं: ॥ २॥ 


2; Vindra yasi divyani rocana vi parthivani rajasa 
purustuta. Ye tva vahanti muhuradhvaran upa 
te su vanvantu vagvanan aradhasah. 


Indra, omnipotent light of the universe, adored 
and worshipped by all, by your universal light and 
energy you pervade and radiate over all divine 
luminaries of earth, heaven and all space. Those who 
continuously send up their prayers and dedicate their 
yajnic actions and endeavours to you win the fruits of 
their prayers and worship and thereby eliminate all their 
want and deprivations. 


तदिन्मे छन्त्सदरपुंषो वपुष्टरं पुत्रो यज्जानं पित्रोर्‌ धीय॑ति। 
जाया पत्ति" वहति agat सुमत्पुंस saat dea: परि- 
thd: UR UI i 

3 Tadinme chantsadvapuso vapustaram putro 
yajjanam pitroradhiyati. Jaya patim vahati vag- 
nuna sumat pumsa idbhadro vahatuh pariskrtah. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 32 567 


Let it be more and more pleasing for me as soul 
in body form then when man grows more and more 
handsome than beauty itself in existence, when the child 
born of parents carries the family line higher forward, 
when the wife pleases the husband and exhorts him with 
sweet words to love and noble thoughts, and it is nice 
and auspicious for the man to be good and cleansed at 
heart by love and loyalty. 


तदित्सधस्थ॑मभि चारु दीधय गावो यच्छसंन्वहुतुं न ra: । 
माता यन्मन्तुर्युथस्यं Goat shy वाणस्य GAM ARS: ॥ ४ ॥। 


4. Tadit sadhasthamabhi caru didhaya gavo yaccha- 
san vahatum na dhenavah. Mata yanmantur- 
yuthasya purvya’bhi vanasya saptadhaturijjanah. 


Indra, give us a bright happy home where 
illuminative voices of divine Vedic wisdom rule and 
lead the family as horses draw the chariot, where the 
mother is honoured as the first and intelligent centre of 
the family and where the inmates are healthy and virile 
with all the seven vitalities of physical health. 


प्र वोऽ च्छां रिरिचे देवयुष्पदमेको रुद्रेभिर्याति qatar: | 
जरा वा येष्वमृतेषु दावने परि a wae: सिञ्चता 
मधु ॥ ५॥ 


a: Pra vo’ccha ririce devayuspadameko rudrebhir- 
yati turvanih. Jara va yesvamrtesu davane pari 
va umebhyah sincata madhu. 


O seekers of divinity, there is only one guide 
and leader for you who creates and provides the ultimate 
haven for you with the divines. And that is Indra who 
readily and instantly comes with his powers of justice, 


568 RGVEDA 


reward and punishment. And among the seekers of 
immortality and freedom, divine worship and adoration 
alone is the ultimate and unfailing giver. Therefore offer 
honeyed hospitality and sincere worship for the 
divinities that provide the means of protection, 
advancement and immortality. 


निधीय्मानमप॑गूढ्न्हपप्सु प्र मे देवानां व्रतपा sare । =a 
fagt अनु हि त्वा चचक्च तेनाहमग्ने अनुंशिष्ट॒ आगाम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Nidhiyamanam-apagiulhamapsu pra me devanam 
vratapa uvaca. Indro vidvan anu hi tva cacaksa 
tenahamagne anusista agam. 


The protector and preserver of the laws of 
divinities, Indra, divine spirit and teacher, enlightens 
me and speaks of the fire and spirit of life, Agni, 
pervasive and concealed in the waters, in particles of 
Prakrti abounding in space and in the will, awareness 
and acts of humanity. O Agni, Indra, the spirit, only 
experiences and watches your presence. Taught, 
enlightened and committed by Indra, I have come to 
the realisation of your presence. 


अक्षेत्रवित्कषेत्रविदं ह्यप्राट्‌ स प्रतिं क्षेत्रविदानुंशिष्टः। 
एतद्वै भद्रम॑नुशासंनस्योत स्तुतिं विन्दत्यञ्जसीनाम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


ie Aksetravit ksetravidam hyaprat sa praiti ksetra- 
vidanusistah. Etadvai bhadram-anuSasan-asyota 
srutim vindatyanjasinam. 


Let the man ignorant of the field of life ask the 
teacher who knows the field and facts of life and who 
can communicate, and, thus taught and trained, go 
forward in the business of living. This only is the holy 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 32 569 


and auspicious end and aim of teaching and training 
for life. And this is the way of the evolution and 
development of tradition by which man gets enlightened 
on way to progress. 


अद्येदु प्राणीदम॑मन्निमाहापींवृतो अधयन्मा तुरू धः | 
एमेनमाप जरिमा युर्वानमर्े्छन्वसुः सुमनां बभूव ।॥ ८ ॥ 


oe Adyedu pranid-amamannimahapivrto adhayan- 
maturudhah. Emenamapa jarima yuvana-mahe- 
lan vasuh sumana babhiva. 


Just today Indra, the soul, starts receiving the 
energy of prana in the womb, then, covered in the womb 
these days, it has the feel of its existence, then, when 
born it sucks the mother’s milk, then it grows, thought 
and language comes to it, adolescence and youth, and 
finally old age takes it over the youth. O lord, let the 
resident soul in the body be holy at heart without anger 
and frustration. 


एतानि भद्रा कलश क्रियाम कुरुश्रवण दद॑तो मघानिं। 
दान इदो मघवानः सो अस्त्वयं च सोमो हृदि यं बिभर्मि ne 


we Etani bhadra kalasa kriyama kurusravana dadato 
maghani. Dana idvo maghavanah so astvayam 
ca somo hrdi yam bibharmi. 


O treasure hold of knowledge, Indra, O learned 
teacher, O listener of my praises and prayers, these are 
the holy acts of reverence and adoration which we, 
givers of thanks and presents, perform in homage to 
your honour. O men of wealth and power of knowledge, 
let this knowledge and this presentation of thanks and 
appreciation be a holy gift of gracefulness and culture, 


570 RGVEDA 


and so may this soma of knowledge be for you, the 
knowledge which I hold at heart in myself. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 33 


Vishvedevah (1), Indra (2-3), Kurushravana 
Trasadasyava Danastuti (4-5), Upamashrava Maitratithi 
(6-9) Devatah, Kavasha Ailusha Rshi 


प्रमा युयुजे प्रयुजो जनानां वहामि स्म पूषणमन्तरेण | 
विश्वे देवासो अध माम॑रक्षन्दुःशासुरागादिति घोषं 
आसीत्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


ly Pra ma yuyujre prayujo jananam vahami sma 
pusanam-antarena. Visvedevaso adha mamara- 
ksan duhsasuragaditi ghosa asit. 


May the divine givers of knowledge and 
enlightenment to the people inspire and enlighten me 
too, so I hold the lord giver of life and nourishment 
dear to my heart in the soul. May the divinities of heaven 
and earth in nature and humanity protect and promote 
me. The indomitable is come: this is the declaration. 


सं मा au-cafud: सपलीरिव usta: 1 
नि बाधते अमंतिर्नग्रता saat वेवीयते मतिः ॥ २ ॥ 


0. Sam ma tapantyabhitah sapatniriva parsavah. Ni 
badhate amatirnagnatd jasurverna veviyate 
matih. 


All round the pressures of life oppress me like 
rival mistresses, adversity, depression and exhaustion 
bind me down to loss of self-awareness, and my 
understanding is paralysed like the bird’s before the 
hunter. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 33 571 


मृषो न शिश्ना व्य॑दन्ति areal: स्तोतारं ते शतक्रतो । 
सकृत्सु नो मघवन्निन्द्र मृव्छयाऽधां पितेव नो भव ।॥ ३॥ 


Di Muso na Ssisna vyadanti madhyah stotaram te 
Satakrato. Sakrt suno maghavannindra mrlaya’- 
dha piteva no bhava. 


As mice eat up the weaver’s thread soaked in 
starch, so do the afflictions of want and worry consume 
me, your celebrant, O lord of a hundred grand acts of 
protection, promotion and boundless generosity. O lord 
of power and glory, Indra, be kind and save us now as 
ever, and always be our saviour and protector like a 
father. 


कुरुश्रवणमावृणि राजानं जासंदस्यवम्‌। 
dfs वाघतामृषिः ॥ ४॥ 

4. Kurusravanamavrni rajanam trasadasyavam. 
Mamhistham vaghatamrsih. 


I, the man of vision and comprehensive 
judgement, choose and abide by the brilliant ruler, all 
attentive and universal listener, offspring of the 
destroyer of evil, want, injustice and violence, and most 
generous protector and patron of the wise and grateful 
celebrants. 


यस्य॑ मा हरितो ta fret वर्हन्ति साधुया । 
स्तवै सहस्रदक्षिणे ॥ & ॥ 


5: Yasya ma harito rathe tisro vahanti sadhuya. 
Stavai sahasradaksine. 


I celebrate and adore Indra, generous lord of 
thousandfold charity of kindness and grace, whose 


572 RGVEDA 


threefold gifts of divine knowledge, holy will and 
grateful prayer and adoration transport me like three 
horses of the divine chariot of human life well through 
and across the world of human existence to the state of 
freedom from limitations and eternal bliss. 


यस्य प्रस्वादसो गिरं उपमश्र॑वसः पितुः। 
eat न रण्वमूचुषे ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Yasya prasvadaso gira upamasravasah pituh. 


Ksetram na ranvamucuse. 


I celebrate the brilliant ruler whose words of 
kindness and grace—fatherly protector, exemplary 
listener and exceptionally rich and honoured as he is— 
are like a field shower of joyous generosity for the 
supplicant. 


अधिं पुत्रोपमश्रवो नर्पाम्मित्रातिथेरिदहि। 
पितुष्ट अस्मि वद्दिता।॥ ७॥ 


7. Adhi putropamasravo napan-mitratitherihi. 
Pituste asmi vandita. 


O ruler, exemplary kind, exceptionally 
generous, honourable son and scion of the line of the 
ruler, friend of friends and strangers alike, I honour and 
adore your father and your family line. Pray come and 
bless. 


यदीशीयामृतानामुत वा मत्यीनाम्‌। 
जीवेदिन्मघवा मम॑॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yadistyamrtanamuta va martyanam. 
Jivedinmaghava mama. 


If I were master controller and ruler of the mortal 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 34 a7 3 


as well as of the immortal principles and elements of 
my existence, then I would be really alive in all my 
power and potential for all time. 


न carafe ad शातात्मां चन जीवति। 
तथा युजा वि वावृते ॥ ९॥ 


a Na devanamati vratam satatma cana jivati. 
Tatha yuja vi vavrte. 

No soul of a hundred year life on earth, even if 
it had a hundred lives, can live beyond the laws of nature 
and divinity, therefore it has to leave and return to life 
with its natural concomitants of body and mind again 
and again in the cycle. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 34 
Aksha (1, 7, 9, 12), Krshi (13), Akshakitava Ninda (2-6, 
8, 10, 11, 14) Devata, Kavasha Ailusha or Aksha 
Maujavan Rshi 


प्रावेपा at बहतो मादयन्ति प्रवातेजा इरिणे afar: 
सोम॑स्येव मोजवतस्य॑ भक्षो विभीदको जागृविर्मह्य॑म- 
च्छान्‌॥ ९॥ 


0 Pravepa ma brhato madayanti pravateja irine 
varvrtanah. Somasyeva maujavatasya bhakso 
vibhidako jagrvir-mahyam-acchan. 


The large quivering dice, made of vibhidika tree 
grown on grassy green mountain slopes, shaking and 
rolling awesome on the dice board, tantalise me like 
the sight of exhilarating drink from a munyja grass 
covered mountain valley, they excite me and I lose my 
sleep. 


574 RGVEDA 


नमां मिमेथ न Rate एषा शिवा सखिभ्य उत Fala । 
अक्षस्याहमेकपरस्य॑ हेतोरनुव्रतामप जायाम॑रोधम्‌।॥। २॥ 


ps Na ma mimetha na jihila esa siva sakhibhya uta 
mahyamasit. Aksasyaham-ekaparasya heto- 
ranuvratamapa jayamarodham. 


This gentle lady, my wife, is good to me and to 
my friends, she never quarrels with me nor does she 
embarrass or hate me. Alas, for one reason, my persistent 
addiction to gambling, have I alienated my devoted wife 
totally dedicated to her life’s duty. 


af श्वश्रूरप॑ं जाया रुणद्धि न नाथितो विन्दते मर्डितारम्‌ । 
अश्व॑स्येव॒ जर॑तो वस्न्य॑स्य नाहं चिन्दामि कितवस्य 
भोग॑म्‌ ॥ २॥ 


Dvesti Svasrurapa jaya runaddhi na nathito 
vindate marditaram. A$vasyeva jarato vasnyasya 
naham vindami kitavasya bhogam. 


Normally speaking, the wife of a gambler feels 
indifferent and alienated from him, the mother-in-law 
hates him, the wretched man finds no friends’ sympathy, 
there is none to comfort him. Like an old, exhausted, 
broken horse, though he might have been valuable 
otherwise, no one bids for him. I set no value upon the 
gambler. Who would? 


अन्ये जायां परिं मृशन्त्यस्य eas वाज्य१श्चः। 
पिता माता भ्रात॑र एनमाहुर्न जानीमो नय॑ता TAAL ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Anye jayam pari mrsantyasya yasyagrdhadve- 
dane vajyaksah. Pita mata bhratara enama-hurna 
janimo nayata baddhametam. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 34 575 


Others covet his wife as a possible prize since 
the mighty dice have cheated him of his money and all 
wealth. Father, mother, brother, all disown him and say: 
off with him, we bound and taken. We know him not. 


यदादीध्ये न द॑विषाण्येभिः परायद्ध्योऽ व॑ हीये सखिविभ्यः। 
as बभ्रवो वाचमक्रत एमीदेषां निष्कृतं जारि- 
णींव॥ ५॥ 


Di Yadadidhye na davisanyebhih parayadbhyo’va 
hiye sakhibhyah. Nyuptasca babhravo vacama- 
kratan emidesam niskrtam jariniva. 


When I realise and think I must not play with 
dice and must not be miserable, even then, having so 
decided, I succumb to the approaching dice as to 
seductive friends. Red and shining dice cast in the game 
rattle and resound, and I walk into the den like a woman 
stealing to her paramour. 


सभामेति कितवः पृच्छमानो जेष्यामीति तन्वा ई BRISA: | 
अक्षासो अस्य वि fatima कामं प्रतिदीब्रे दध॑त॒ आ 
कृतानि ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sabhameti kitavah prcchamano jesyamiti tanva 
susujanah. Aksaso asya vi tiranti kamam prati- 
divne dadhata व krtani. 


Puffed up in body and mind, the gambler moves 
to the gambling house asking, even assuring, himself 
in mind: Shall I win? I must, this time. And his dice, 
held and poised in hand to defeat his rival, inflame his 
fire to play and win, more and more. 


576 RGVEDA 


अक्षास इद॑ङ्कुशिनो! नितोदिनो! निकृत्वानस्तपं॑नास्ता- 
पयिष्णव॑ः | कुमारदेष्णा जय॑तः पुनर्हणो मध्वा सम्युक्ता 
कित॒वस्य॑ लर्हणां ॥ ७॥ 


vis Aksasa idankusino nitodino nikrtvanastapanasta- 
payisnavah. Kumaradesna jayatah punarhano 
madhva samprktah kitavasya barhana. 


The dice hold the gambler by the hook, pierce 
like a dagger, hew down the man and even his family 
from the root, as a hatchet, burn like fire and torture 
like incessant pain. For the winner, they bring joyous 
gifts for the time but later in turn they destroy, and 
though soaked in honey for the moment, they tear the 
gambler to pieces at the end. 


त्रिपञ्चाशः ्रीव्ठति ard एषां देवव सविता सत्यधर्मा । 
उग्रस्य॑ चिन्मन्यवे ना न॑मन्ते राजां चिदेभ्यो नम इत्कु- 
णोति॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tripancasah krilati vrata esam deva iva savita 
satyadharma. Ugrasya cinmanyave na namante 
raja cidebhyo nama it krnoti. 

The group of fifty-three of those dice is played 
strictly within unsparing rules of the game like the divine 
sun observing the laws of its motion. They do not bow 
even to the strongest of men, indeed the ruler bows and 
offers obeisance to the dice (if he too is addicted). 


नीचा वर्तन्त उपरि स्फ़रन्त्यहस्तासो हस्त॑वन्तं सहन्ते | दिव्या 
steht इरिणे न्युंसाः शीताः सन्तो हृद॑यं निर्दहन्ति neu 
१ Nica vartanta upari sphurantyahastaso hasta- 


vantam sahante. Divya angara irine nyuptah 
sitah santo hrdayam nirdahanti. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 34 577 


Some time they go down, some time they spring 
up high, and although they are armless they beat the 
strongest armed warrior. Thrown upon the dice board, 
they can be burning brilliant and some time, even though 
ice cold, they burn the heart. 


जाया त॑प्यते कितवस्य हीना माता पुत्रस्य चर॑तः क्व॑ स्वित्‌। 
ऋणावा बिभ्यब्दनयिच्छमानोऽ न्येषामस्तमुप नक्त - 
मेति॥ ९०॥ 


10. Jaya tapyate kitavasya hina mata putrasya 
caratah kva svit. Rnava bibhyad-dhanami- 
cchamano’ nyesamastamupa naktameti. 


The forsaken wife of the gambler suffers at 
heart, the mother of her child wandering somewhere 
feels tortured by loss. Down under loss and debt, pining 
for money, he is oppressed by fear, and at night goes to 
other’s home either for shelter or for money the way he 
can get. 


स्त्रियं ger कितवं त॑तापाऽन्येषां जायां get च 
योनिंम्‌। gate अश्वान्युयुजे हि aye अगरन्ते 
तृषल्छः प॑पाद ।॥ ९९॥ 


11. Striyam drstvaya kitavam tatapa’nyesam jayam 
sukrtam ca yonim. Purvahne asvan yuyuje hi 
babhriuntso agnerante vrsalah papada. 


The gambler suffers when he sees his wife, and 
he regrets when he sees another’s wife well settled, their 
noble acts and comfortable home. Yet again in the 
forenoon he grabs the tempting dice as a warrior takes 
to his steed, but when the fire is gone cold, he falls 
down broken and farlorn. 


578 RGVEDA 


यो व॑ः सेनानीर्महतो गणस्य राजा व्रात॑स्य प्रथमो बभूवं। 
तस्मै कृणोमि न धना रुणध्मि दशाहं प्राचीस्तदूतं 
व॑दामि।॥ ९२॥ 


12. Yo vah senanirmahato ganasya raja vratasya 
prathamo babhiuva. Tasmai krnomi na dhana 
runadhmi dasaham pracistadrtam vadami. 


O dice, O gamblers, to that which is the first 
and foremost of you, the ruler of your mighty order and 
organisation, the leading warrior over all of you, my 
homage and salutation with farewell with folded hands 
and all the ten fingers, open all in front with the vow 
that I would lose no money any more, and this is the 
truth I speak. (The gambler shows his ten fingers, may 
be, because his hands are empty now.) 


अक्षैर्मा दीव्यः कुषिमितत्कुषस्व वित्ते र॑मस्व बहु मन्य॑मानः। 
तत्र गाव॑ः कितव तत्र॑ जाया तन्मे वि च॑ष्टे सविताय- 
मर्यः un ९३॥ 

13. Aksairma divyah krsimit krsasva 1711८ ramasva 
bahu manyamanah. Tatra gavah kitava tatra jaya 
tanme vi caste savitayamaryah. 


Play not with dice. Till the land. Be happy with 
the land and wealth you produce. Take it that that much 
is enough and be content. There are the cows, O gambler, 
there your wife is happy. This is what Savita, lord of 
life and giver of light has revealed to me. 


मित्रं कुणुध्वं tae मूव्छता नो ar Al घोरेण चरताभि 
धृष्णु ।नि वो नु मन्युर्वितामरातिरन्यो ब॑भ्रूणां प्रसितौ 
न्व॑स्तु।॥ ९४॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 35 579 


14. Mitram krnudhvam khalu mrlata no ma no 
ghorena caratabhi dhrsnu. Ni vo nu manyur- 
visatamaratiranyo babhrunam prasitau nvastu. 


Be friends, make friends, be good and kind to 
us. Treat us not with the torture of fear and suppression. 
Let your anger and passion subside into peace and 
tranquillity, and may another unfortunate in adversity 
in the snares of dice be the same way free. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 35 
Vishvedevah Devata, Lusha Dhanaka Rshi 


अबु्रमु त्य इन्द्र॑वन्तो अग्रयो ज्योतिभर॑न्त उषसो ST । 
मही द्यावापृथिवी चेंततामपोऽ द्या देवानामव आ वुंणी- 
महे॥ ९॥ 


॥ Abhudhramu tya indravanto agnayo jyotirbha- 
ranta usaso vyustisu. Mahi dyavaprthivi deta- 
tamapo’ dya devanamava व vrnimahe. 


In the early hours of the dawn, those flames of 
morning fire bearing light and energy of the sun awake 
and awaken the great heaven and earth, dispelling the 
darkness, and arouse the people to the karmic business 
of the day. In this very morning hour of the day, we 
pray for the protection and promotive energy of the 
divinities of nature and humanity for enlightenment. 


दिवस्पुंथिव्योरव आ वुंणीमहे मातृत्त्सिन्धून्पर्व ताञ्छर्य- 
urea: | अनागास्त्वं सूर्यमुषासमीमहे भद्रं सोम॑: सुवानो 
अद्या कृणोतु नः॥२॥ ` 

2 Divasprthivyorava a vrnimahe matrntsindhun 
parvatancharyanavatah. Anagastvam suryamusa- 
samimahe bhadram somah suvano adya krnotu nah. 


580 RGVEDA 


We pray for the good will, protection and 
inspiration of heaven and earth for light and 
nourishment. We want the love and blessings of mother 
powers, the energy and liquid flow of the streams and 
seas, showers of clouds, the cool of mountain snows 
and gifts of soma herbs. We pray for the energies of all 
that is dynamic and generous in life. Innocent and free 
from sin, we pray for the rise of a new dawn and light 
of the sun every day. May the peace, beauty and 
inspiration of nature at dawn inspired with the love and 
power of divinity bless us with vision, will and power 
to act here and now so that we too may rise and shine. 


द्यावा नो अद्य पुंथिवी अनागसो मही त्रायेतां सुविताय 
मातरा । उषा उच्छन्त्यप बाधतामघं स्वस्त्य4यिं संमिधान- 
Maen ३॥ 


ai Dyava no adya prthivi anagaso mahi trayetam 
suvitaya matara. Usa ucchantyapa badhatama- 
gham svastyagnim samidhanamimahe. 


May this new day, the great mother powers of 
earth and heaven, generous givers of inspiration, light 
and settlement, protect and promote us, their innocent 
children, for the sake of happiness and well being. May 
the bright dawn now rising keep off sin and evil. We 
pray that the lighted fire and rising light and all 
enlightened powers of human will and action be good 
to us and all may be well and blissful. 


इयं न॑ sen प्र॑थमा सुदेव्यं रेवत्सनिभ्यो! रेवती व्युंच्छतु। 


आरे मन्युं दुर्विदत्रस्य धीमहि स्वस्त्य१ यिं संमिधान- 
मींमहे।। su 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 35 581 


4. Tyam na usra prathama sudevyam revat sanibhyo 
revati vyucchatu. Are manyum durvidatrasya 
dhimahi svastyagnim samidha-nam-imahe. 


This dawn, this maiden, this first moving power 
of the early day, blest with wealth and energy of rising 
life may, we pray, shine, bring us and illuminate divine 
gifts of life worthy of the holies for the friendly 
community of seekers. May we cast off the anger and 
malice of the unbearables and take in and internalise 
the love and enthusiasm of the most challenging 
discipline of life divine. We pray may the lighted fire 
and rising dawn bring all happiness and all round well 
being of life. 


va: सिस्त्र॑ते सूर्य स्य रणश्मिथिर्ज्योतिभररिन्तीरुषसो asa | 
भद्रा नो अद्य श्रव॑से व्युच्छत स्वस्त्य१यिं स॑मिधान- 
मींमहे।॥। ५॥ 


२0 Pra yah 5757८1८ suryasya rasmibhir-jyotirbha- 
rantirusaso vyustisu. Bhadra no adya sravase 
vyucchata svastyagnim samidhanam-imahe. 


The lights of dawn at the break of day which 
shine with rays of the sun, bearing the message of 
enlightenment, may, we pray, rise and radiate and be 
good for us today for our nourishment of body, mind 
and soul and for our honour and excellence of life. We 
pray may the lighted fire and rising dawn bring us all 
happiness and well being of life. 


अनमीवा उषस आ च॑रन्तु न उदग्रयों जिहतां ज्योतिषा 
बृहत्‌। आयुक्षातामश्विना तृ तुजिं रथं स्वस्त्यषथिं संमिधान- 
मींमहे।॥। ६ ॥ 


582 RGVEDA 


6. Anamiva usasa a carantu na udagnayo jihatam 
Jyotisa brhat. Ayuksatamasvina tutujim ratham 
svastyagnim samidhanam-imahe. 


May the dawns free from ailments bring us good 
health, and may the yajna fires rise up high with blazing 
light. Let the day and night keep the fastest chariot in 
harness for us. We pray may the lighted fire and the 
rising dawn bring us all happiness and well being of 
life. 

श्रेष्ठं नो अद्य सवितर्वरेण्यं भागमा सुव स हि tae असिं। 
रायो जनित्रीं धिषणामुप ब्रुवे स्वस्त्य१यिं स॑मिधान- 
मीमहे ॥ ७ ॥ 


4a; Srestham no adya savitarvarenyam bhagama 
suva sa hi ratnadha asi. Rayo janitrim dhisa- 
namupa bruve svastyagnim samidhanam-imahe. 


O Savita, lord of life and giver of light, create 
for us the highest of our choice share of life’s joy to our 
satisfaction and pleasure as you are the treasure hold of 
the jewels of life. I speak and pray to the voice and 
omniscience of divinity, universal creator of life’s 
wealth: May the rising dawn and lighted fire bring us 
all happiness and well being of life. 


fadd मा तदुतस्यं प्रवाचनं देवानां यन्म॑नुष्या ३ अमन्महि। 
विश्वा इदुस्राः स्पव्युदेति सूर्यः स्वस्त्यप भिं संमिधान- 
मींमहे।॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Pipartu ma tadrtasya pravacanam devanam 


yanmanusya amanmahi. Visva idusrah spaludeti 
suryah svastyagnim samidhanam-imahe. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 35 583 


May that original voice of divinities, which 
revealed the nature and laws of existence at the 
beginning of human creation and which we humans 
honour, adore and pray for, protect and promote us with 
fulfilment. The sun rises, the same one, and illuminates 
all the dawns. We pray may the lighted fire and rising 
dawn bless us with felicity and total fulfilment. 


अद्वेषो अद्य बर्हिषः स्तरीमणि ग्राव्णां योगे मन्म॑नः साधं 
ईमहे। आदित्यानां शर्म॑णि स्था भुरण्यसि caer fit 
संमिधानमीमहे।॥ ९॥ 


a Adveso adya barhisah starimani gravnam yoge 
manmanah sadha imahe. Adityanam Sarmani stha 
bhuranyasi svastyagnim samidhanam-imahe. 


Today in the congregation of the sages on the 
holy grass spread on the yajna vedi of search for 
knowledge without jealousy, anger and malice, we pray 
for the fulfilment of our aspirations. O man, smart and 
brilliant as you are, we wish that you enjoy the light 
and peace of the bliss and warmth of the sun in the 
zodiacs throughout the year in the inspiring company 
of eminent scholars and thus advance. We pray that the 
lighted fire and rising dawn bless us with felicity and 
total fulfilment. 


आ नो बर्हिः सधमादे बृहद्दिवि cat vad सादया सस 
Bd इन्द्रं मित्रं वरुणं सातये भगं career) it स॑मिधान- 
मींमहे।॥ gon 

10. Ano barhih sadhamade brhaddivi devan ile 


sadaya sapta hotrn. Indram mitram varunam 
sdtaye bhagam svastyagnim samidhanamimahe. 


584 RGVEDA 


O lord of light and bliss, O Adityas, phases of 
the sun and earth on the move, in this joyous hall of 
yajna in our open ended search for physical, mental and 
spiritual knowledge and well being, I invoke the 
brilliancies of nature and humanity and pray let the seven 
priests be seated for the conduct of the yajna (the seven 
being senses of perception, senses of volition, speech, 
mind, discriminative intelligence, selective memory, and 
the self). We invoke Indra, divine and secular power, 
Mitra, divine and human love and cohesion with 
cooperation, Varuna, divine and human judgement and 
choice in relation to nature and society, and Bhaga, 
divine glory and human prosperity with power and self 
confidence, for sure success and victory. We pray may 
the lighted fire and rising dawn bless us with felicity 
and self fulfilment. 


त आदित्या आ ग॑ता सर्वतातये वृधे नो यज्ञम॑वता सजोषसः | 
बृहस्पतिं पूषणमश्विना भगं स्वस्त्य१थिं संमिधान- 
Maen ९९॥ 


11. Ta dditya व gata sarvatataye vrdhe no yajnama- 
vata sajosasah. Brhaspatim pusanam-asvina 
bhagam svastyagnim samidhanam-imahe. 


May the Adityas come and join us with love and 
favour for the advancement and comprehensive success 
of our yajna of universal character and save, protect 
and promote our yajnic projects of creative progress. 
We invoke Brhaspati, power of infinite knowledge and 
speech, Pushan, power of nourishment and growth, 
Ashvins, complementary powers of nature and 
humanity, and Bhaga, spirit of universal power and 
prosperity and pray may the lighted fire and the rising 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 35 585 
dawn bring us felicity and total self-fulfilment. 


तन्नं देवा यच्छत सुप्रवाचनं छर्दिरादित्याः सुभरं नृपाय्य॑म्‌। 
usd तोकाय तन॑याय जीवसे स्वस्त्य4 यिं स॑मिधान- 
मींमहे॥ ९२॥ 


12. Tanno deva yacchata supravacanam chardira- 
dityah subharam nrpayyam. Pasve tokaya 
tanayaya jivase svastyagnim samidhanam-imahe. 


May the Adityas, divine harbingers of the light 
of omniscient divinity at the dawn of humanity, give us 
that universal word of knowledge and that peaceful 
settlement in life which holds all abundant power and 
prosperity for the protection and advancement of our 
human family, the animals, our children and grand 
children for our good health and full life of joy. We 
pray may the lighted fire and the rising dawn bring us 
all felicity and total fulfilment. 


विश्वे अद्य मरुतो विश्व॑ ऊती विश्वे भवन्त्वय्रयः after: । 
विश्वे नो देवा अवसा ग॑मन्तु विश्व॑मस्तु द्रविणं वाजो 
अस्मे UN ९३॥ 


13. Visve adya maruto visva uti visve bhavantva- 
gnayah samiddhah. Visve no deva avasa gamantu 
visvamastu dravinam vajo asme. 


Today in this life of ours, may all the winds and 
pranic energies and all lighted fires of the world bring 
us all protections and promotions. May all divine powers 
of nature and humanity in the world come with all 
protection, power and progress. May all wealth, honour 
and excellence of the world, all speed, success and 
victory be our common human heritage, good fortune 


586 RGVEDA 
and universal victory. 


यं दैवासोऽ aa वाज॑सातौ यं त्रायध्वे यं पिपृथात्यंहः । यो 
वो गोपीथे न भयस्य वेद्‌ ते स्याम देववीतये तुरासः ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Yam devaso’vatha vajasatau yam trayadhve yam 
piprthatyamhah. Yo vo gopithe na bhayasya veda 
te syama devavitaye turasah. 


O Vishvedevas, divine powers of nature and 
humanity, pray let us be, help us all to be, a happy, 
vibrant and dynamic human community of noble nature, 
character and action living the life divine and moving 
ahead on the holy path of life to total fulfilment here 
and beyond: The person and the community whom you 
protect, guide and lead to victory in the struggle of 
existence, whom you save, guard and direct against sin 
and suffering to success knows no fear. Pray let us be 
that on the paths of pilgrimage to the Life Divine. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 36 
Vishvedevah Devata, Lusha Dhanaka Rshi 


उषासानक्ता बृहती सुपेश॑सा द्यावाक्षामा वरुणो मित्रो 
अर्यमा । इन्द्रं हुवे मरुतः पर्वतो अप आंदित्यान्द्यावापृथिवी 
अपः स्व॑ः॥ ९॥ 
iB Usasanakta brhati supesasa dyavaksama varuno 
mitro aryama. Indram huve marutah parvatan 
apa adityan dyavaprthivi apah svah. 
I invoke the rising dawn of the light of day and 
the soothing darkness of restful night, the radiant 


illuminative heaven and the vast sheltering stabilising 
earth, both great and expansive, beautiful and beatific, 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 36 587 


I invoke Varuna, oceans of earth and spatial vapours, 
Mitra, friendly warmth of the sun, Aryama, refreshing 
breezes, Indra, infinite energy and power of nature, 
Maruts, stormy forces of the winds, clouds and 
mountains, sun rays, zodiacs of the sun, radiative energy 
of the sun and magnetic and gravitational energy of 
earth, the middle regions of space for expansion and 
the highest regions of light for illumination. 


diya नः पृथिवी च प्रचेतस secret रक्चतामंहंसो रिषः। 
मा दुर्विदत्रा निऋतिर्न ईशत तद्देवानामवो अद्या duit- 
ASU २॥ 


2: Dyausca nah prthivi ca pracetasa rtavari raksata- 
mamhaso risah. Ma durvidatra nirrtirna tsata ta- 
ddevanamavo adya vrnimahe. 


The sun and the earth, father and mother, both 
sources of enlightenment, both committed to divine law 
and replete with dynamic energy, may, we pray, protect 
us from sin and violence. Let ignorance, injustice and 
adversity never dominate our life, let pain and suffering 
keep off. This is the safety, security and protection of 
our choice we pray for of the divinities today. 


विश्व॑स्पात्नो अदितिः पात्वंहसो माता मित्रस्य वरुणस्य 
रे वत॑ः | स्वंर्वज्योतिरवृकं न॑शीमहि तदेवानामवों अद्या 
तंणीमहे।॥। ३॥ 

Visvasmanno aditih patvamhaso mata mitrasya 


varunasya revatah. Svarvajjyotiravrkam nasi- 
mahi taddevanamavo adya vrnimahe. 


May the eternal mother power, the divine Shakti, 
Aditi, protect us from sin and suffering of the world, 


588 RGVEDA 


she being the mother of abundant sun and ocean, love 
and judgement. May we receive the light of heaven 
without violence. This is our prayer for protection we 
may make to the divinities with free choice today. 


ग्रावा वदन्नप रक्षांसि सेधतु दुष्ष्वप्न्यं निऋतिं विश्वं - 
मत्रिण॑म्‌। आदित्यं शर्म मरुतामशीमहि तद्देवानामवो अद्या 
तंणीमहे।। ४ ॥ 


4. Grava vadannapa raksamsi sedhatu dussvapn- 
yam nurrtim visvamatrinam. Adityam Sarma 
marutamasimahi taddevanamavo adya vrnimahe. 


May the thundering voice of wise sages keep 
off all destructive forces, evil dreams, want, adversity 
and fear of death, and all voracious elements of society. 
May we obtain the protection, peace and enlightenment 
of the leading lights and stormy troops of society. This 
is the shelter and protection we now pray for, of our 
own choice, from the divinities. 


एन्द्रो बर्हिः tid” पिन्व॑तामिव्ठा बृहस्पतिः साम॑भिक्ऋक्वो 
अर्चतु | सु प्रकतं जीवसे मन्म॑ धीमहि तद्देवानामवो! अद्या 
तंणीमहे।॥ ५ ॥ 


a: Endro barhih sidatu pinvatamila brhaspatih 
samabhirrkvo arcatu. Supraketam jivase manma 
dhimahi taddevanamavo adya vrnimahe. 


May Indra, omnipotent lord of the universe, 
enlighten us at heart and bless our yajnic home, may 
Ila, the earth and the divine voice, raise our health and 
awareness, may Brhaspati, sagely scholar of the divine 
Word, adore the spirit with songs of praise, and may we 
obtain divine wisdom and intelligence and meditate on 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 36 589 


the light divine. This is the favour and protection of the 
divinities we pray for today. 
दिविस्पृशं यज्ञमस्माकमश्विना जीराध्वरं कृणुतं सुम्न- 
fara प्राचीन॑रश्मिमाहुतं घतेन तदे वानामवों अद्या 
तंणीमहे।। ६ ॥ 


6. Divisprsam yajnamasmakamasvina jiradhvaram 
krnutam sumnamistaye. Pracinarasmimahutam 
ghrtena taddevanamavo adya vrnimahe. 


May the Ashvins, complementary fire and wind, 
refine and energise our yajna of love and non-violence, 
fed on ghrta, rising in high flames as ever before, and 
may they raise it to the regions of the sun to bring us 
peace and joy for the fulfilment of our aspirations. This 
is the favour and protection of the divinities we pray 
for today. 


sd ह्ये सुहवं मारुतं गणं पावकमृष्वं cere शं भुवम्‌ | 
रायस्पोषं सौश्रवसाय धीमहि तदेवानामवों अद्या duit- 
महे ।। ७ ॥ 


a Upa hvaye suhavam marutam ganam pavakamr- 
svam sakhyaya Sambhuvam. Rayas-posam sau- 
Sravasaya dhimahi tad devanamavo adya vrni- 
mahe. 


I invoke and call upon the band of Maruts, 
vibrant winds of nature and dynamic sages and pioneers 
of humanity, worthy of service and adoration, pure and 
purifying and harbingers of peace and well being, all 
heroic and sublime. I invoke them to win their love and 
friendship. We study and meditate upon wealth, energy 
and enrichment for participation in their grace and glory. 


590 RGVEDA 


This is the protective and promotive favour of the 
divinities we choose to pray for today. 


अपां पेरु vlad भरामहे देवाव्यं सुहव॑ंमध्वर ्रिय॑म्‌। 
सुरश्मिं सोम॑मिन्ियं य॑मीमहि तद्ेवानामवो अद्या वंणी- 
महे॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Apam perum jivadhanyam bharamahe devavyam 
suhavamadhvarasriyam. Surasmim somamin- 
driyam yamimahi tad devanamavo adya vrni- 
mahe. 


We bear Soma at heart, love and honour Soma, 
spirit of universal peace, vitality and ecstasy, protector 
and promoter of life’s liquid energies for action, inspirer 
of life adorable for the divinities, beauty of the yajna of 
love and non-violence, worthy of invocation and 
celebration. Beautiful are its flames of fire, its rays of 
light and its waves of fragrance worthy of being 
perceived, experienced and internalised, all these we 
love. And that Soma is the gift, favour and protection 
of the divinities we choose to pray for, this day. 


सनेम तत्सुंसनितां सनित्वभिर्वयं जीवा जीवपुत्रा stra: । 
ब्रहाद्धिषो विष्वगेनो भरेरत तद्देवानामवो! अद्या auit- 
महे।॥ ९॥ 


2, Sanema tat susanita sanitvabhirvayam jiva 
Jivaputra anagasah. Brahmadviso visvageno 
bharerata tad devanamavo adya vrnimahe. 


Let us join and live that Soma spirit of life along 
with all others who live it with passion and enthusiasm. 
We are all children of life, living and vibrant with our 
children and grand children, free from sin and crime. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 36 591 


Let others who negate, hate and violate that universal 
Spirit of love, life and peace bear, for that reason, their 
negativities and the dispensation thereof. And that 
favour of the love of Soma and protection against 
negativities we beg of the divinities this day. 


ये स्था मनोर्यजियास्ते शुणोतन यद्रो देवा ईम॑हे तद॑दातन | 
Wai क्रतुं रयिमद्वीरवद्यशास्तदेवानामवों अद्या वुंणी- 
ASU ९०॥ 


10. Ye stha manoryajniyaste Ssrnotana yadvo deva 
imahe taddadatana. Jaitram kratum rayimadvi- 
ravadyasastad devanamavo adya vrnimahe. 


And listen all, those who are dedicated to yajna 
at heart in communion with divine Soma, be steadfast 
and, O divine souls, bear and bring us that we pray for 
from you : Bring us the spirit of success and victory, 
holy yajnic action, wealth, honour and fame with 
progeny worthy of the brave. That is the favour and 
prayer of our choice we ask of you this day. 


महदद्य Hearn वुंणीमहे ऽ वो देवानां बृहतामंनर्वणाम्‌। 
यथा वसु वीरजातं नशामहै तद्देवानामवो अद्या duit- 
महे।॥ ९९॥ 


11. Mahadadya mahatama vrnimahe’vo devanam 
brhatamanarvanam. Yatha vasu virajatam 
nasamahai tad devanamavo adya vrnimahe. 


Today, the grandeur of the great we ask for, of 
our own choice, and the protection of the grand 
progressive and irresistible divinities we pray for, so 
that we may acquire the security and stability created 
and established by brave generations of humanity: that 


592 RGVEDA 


is the favour and prayer of our choice for protection of 
the divinities we ask for this day.11. Today, the 
grandeur of the great we ask for, of our own choice, 
and the protection of the grand progressive and 
irresistible divinities we pray for, so that we may acquire 
the security and stability created and established by 
brave generations of humanity: that is the favour and 
prayer of our choice for protection of the divinities we 
ask for this day. 


महो अगः darren शर्मण्यनागा मित्रे वरुणे taeda | 
श्रेष्ट स्याम सवितुः सवीमनि तद्देवानामवो अद्या वुंणी- 
महे॥ ९२॥ 


12. Maho agneh samidhanasya Sarmanyanaga mitre 
varune svastaye. Sresthe syama savituh savimani 
tad devanamavo adya vrnimahe. 


Let us live under the shelter and protection of 
the great Agni, self-refulgent, self enlightened leading 
light of the cosmic yajna. Let us live free from sin and 
evil under the abundant care of Mitra, friendly sun, and 
Varuna, boundless ocean of space, for the achievement 
of plenty, prosperity and all round well being. Let us 
live under the guidance and ruling control of Savita, 
highest spirit of life, creation and regeneration. This is 
the gift of protection and progress we choose to ask of 
the divinities this day. 


ये dfaa: सत्यस॑वस्य विश्वे feral व्रते वरुणस्य ear: | 
ते सौभ॑गं वीरवद्रोमदप्रो दधातन द्रविणं चित्रमस्मे ॥ ९३॥ 
13. Ye savituh satyasavasya visve mitrasya vrate 


varunasya devah. Te saubhagam viravadgoma- 
dapno dadhatana dravinam citramasme. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 37 593 


All those generous, brilliant and illuminative 
divinities of the world, both in nature and in humanity, 
which observe and work under the laws and discipline 
of Savita, creator of the world of truth and reality, Mitra, 
lord of light and love, and Varuna, lord of judgement 
and boundless abundance, may they all bear and bring 
for us all holy good fortune, power of choice and action, 
and wondrous variety of wealth blest with brave 
progeny, lands, cows and culture of enlightenment. 


सविता पश्चातात्सविता पुरस्तात्सवितोत्तरात्तात्सविता- 
धरात्तात्‌। सविता न॑: सुवतु सर्वतातिं सविता al रासतां 
दीर्घमायुः ॥ ९४ i 


14. Savita pascatat savita purastat savitottarattat 
savitadharattat. Savita nah suvatu sarvatatim 
savita no rasatam dirghamayuh. 


May Savita protect us from behind. May Savita 
protect us in front. May Savita protect us from above. 
May Savita protect us from below. May Savita bless us 
all round, create and give us universal wealth of 
existence. May Savita bless us with a long, happy and 
full life. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 37 
Surya Devata, Abhitapa Saurya Rshi 
नमो! मित्रस्य वरुणस्य चक्ष॑से महो देवाय dad सपर्यत | 
दूरे दृशो देवजाताय केतवे दिवस्पुत्राय सूर्यीय शंसत ॥ ९ ॥ 
| Namo mitrasya varunasya caksase maho devaya 


tadrtam saparyata. Duredrse devajataya ketave 
divasputraya suryaya Samsata. 


594 RGVEDA 


Homage and salutations to the eye of the lord 
of universal love and cosmic judgement, lord of day 
and deep night, mighty generous light of the world. 
Observe and abide by that universal law of the lord. 
Sing and celebrate in honour of the Sun, child of Light, 
heavenly ensign of divine refulgence, born of space, 
the eye that can see as far as the bounds of existence. 


सामां सत्योक्तिः of पातु विश्वतो erat च यत्र॑ ततनन्नहानि 
च । विश्वमन्यन्नि विशते यदेज॑ति विश्वाहापों विश्वाहोदेति 
सूर्यः: ॥ २॥ 


१.७ Sama satyoktih pari patu visvato dyava ca yatra 
tatanannahani ca. Visvamanyanni visate yadejati 
visvahapo visvahodeti suryah. 

May the word of truth abide by me and protect 
and sustain me all round all time: That Sun, light of the 
world, is the presence in which the heavens of light and 
the green earth abide, days and nights arise and expand, 
wherein the other worlds abide and all else moves and 
abides, wherein all dynamics of the universe abide and 
move day and night, wherein the sun rises every morning 
for all time in the existential world. 


न ते अदेवः प्रदिवो नि ataa यदेतशेभिः पतर र॑थर्यसिं। 
प्राचीन॑मन्यदनुं वर्तते रज उदन्येन ज्योतिषा यासि सूर्य ॥ ३ ॥ 


3 Na te adevah pradivo ni vasate yadetasebhih 
patarai ratharyasi. Pracinamanyadanu vartate 
raja udanyena jyotisa yasi surya. 


O sun, when you ride your chariot and move on 
with the radiation of your rays, the earlier darkness of 
the night does not stay before you, instead it moves on 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 37 595 


to the other region you left behind, and as you move 
on, you go forward with your light for another region 
of the world. 


येन॑ सूर्य ज्योतिषा बाध॑से तमो जग॑च्च विश्व॑मुदियर्षिं 
भानुना । तेनास्मद्विश्वामनिंरामनांहुतिमपामीं वामपं दुष्ष्वप्न्यं 
सुव ॥ ४॥ 


4. Yena surya jyotisa badhase tamo jagacca visva- 
mudiyarsi bhanuna. Tenasmadvisvam-aniram- 
anahutim-apamivamapa dussvapnyam suva. 


O sun, by the light by which you dispel the 
darkness, and by the rise by which you go up and light 
up the moving world in the day, by that very light and 
enlightenment, pray, dispel and throw out all famine of 
food in the world,, all poverty of yajnic programmes, 
all sickness and disease, and all depression and evil 
dreams born of want and poverty of light. 


विश्व॑स्य हि प्रेषितो tale व्रतमहव्ठयन्ुच्यर॑सि स्वधा अनु | 
यदद्य त्व सूर्योपब्रवामहै तं नो देवा अनु मंसीरत 
क्रतुंम्‌॥ ५॥ 


3. Visvasya hi presito raksasi vratamahelayannu- 
ccarasi svadha anu. Yadadya tva suryopabra- 
vamahai tam no deva anu mamstirata kratum. 


O lord of light, moved and inspired by your own 
divine self and invoked by prayers of the supplicants, 
you protect and rule the laws and disciplines of the world 
around, and without passion or disturbance you rise and 
move according to your own powers and in response to 
your celebrants’ homage (such as the homage of the 
planets and yajnic offers of devotees). O sun, whatever 


596 RGVEDA 


we pray for, may the divinities of nature and humanity 
favour and respond to our yajnic action and prayer. 


तं नो aratofardt तन्न आप इन्द्रः श्वण्वन्तु मरुतो हवं 
ad: मा शनै भूम सूर्यस्य संदुर्शिं भाद्रं जीवन्तो जरणा- 
म॑शीमहि॥ ६॥ 


6. Tam no dyavaprthivi tanna apa indrah sSrnvantu 
maruto havam vacah. Ma sune bhuma suryasya 
samdrsi bhadram jivanto jaranamasimahi. 


That word of invocation and prayer, and that 
word of homage and prayer with supplication may the 
heaven and earth as father and mother, waters of earth 
and space and the learned sages of holy attainments, 
Indra, omnipotent lord and ruler of the earth, Maruts, 
pranic energies of life and leading lights of humanity 
listen, and may they favourably respond. May they never 
be indifferent. May we live blest in the light of the sun 
and the illumination of divinity. We pray that living in 
peace and felicity, we may enjoy a full life of good health 
and mental and spiritual fulfilment. 


विश्वाहा त्वा सुमन॑सः qaatea: प्रजावन्तो अनमीवा 
अनागसः | उद्यन्तं त्वा मित्रमहो दिवेदिवे ज्योग्जीवाः प्रतिं 
पश्येम सूर्य ॥ ७॥ 


Vs Visvaha tva sumanasah sucaksasah prajavanto 
anamiva anagasah. Udyantam tva mitramaho 
divedive jyogjivah prati paSyema surya. 


We pray, O sun, may we be happy at heart, 
enlightened of vision, blest with noble progeny, free 
from ill health, sin and evil, and thus happy and healthy, 
live long to see you rising every day all the time. May 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 37 597 


we, O sun, see you rising day by day as the greatest 
friend of ours and live long for a happy time in the light 
and bliss divine. 


महि ज्योतिर्बिभ्र॑तं त्वा विचक्षण भास्वन्तं चक्षुषेचक्षुषे 
मय॑ः । आरोहन्तं बहतः पाजंसस्परिं वयं जीवाः प्रति पश्येम 
सूर्य ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Mahi jyotirbibhratam tva vicaksana bhasvantam 
caksuse caksuse mayah. Arohantam brhatah 
pajasaspari vayam jivah prati paSyema surya. 


O sun, lord of vision watching all, we pray that 
while we live a long and full life time here on earth, we 
may continue to see you as the divine power bearing 
great light of life, shining bright and blessing every 
living eye with light and joy, and rising high over the 
vast order of mighty time and the world of existence. 


यस्य॑ ते विश्वा भुव॑नानि केतुना प्र ata नि च॑ विशन्ते 
अक्तुभिः । अनागास्त्वेन हरिकेश Gat sete नो वस्य॑सा- 
वस्यसोदिंहि॥ ९॥ 


9. Yasya te visva bhuvanani ketuna pra cerate ni ca 
visante aktubhih. Anagastvena harikesa surya’- 
hnahna no vasyasavasyasodihi. 


O Sun, self-refulgent divinity, by whose light 
and sustaining power all regions of the universe, stars 
and planets move on with their tasks in their own orbits 
and then recede into their state of rest as into the night, 
O lord of radiant light and fire of life, by your inviolable 
purity of law and natural piety, shine, and emerge more 
and more bright and excellent for our experience, 
guidance and sustenance day by day for us. 


598 RGVEDA 


शंनो भव चक्ष॑साशंनो अहवा शं भानुना शं हिमा शं 
yur | यथा शमध्वजञ्छमसंहुरोणे ada द्रविणं धेहि 
चित्रम्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. Sarno bhava caksasd Sar no ahna Sam bhanuna 
sam hima sam ghrnena. Yatha samadhvan- 
chamasad durone tat surya dravinam dhehi 
citram. 


By your light and gracious eye, let there be peace 
and bliss for us, peace and well being by day, peace and 
bliss by light and solar radiation, peace by the cool of 
snow and peace by soothing warmth of the sun, peace 
the way it may be possible on our paths of progress, 
and peace and all round well being in the home. That 
wondrous variety of wealth, honour and excellence, O 
Sun, give us by which there may be all round peace and 
total well being in life. 


अस्माकं देवा उभयाय जन्म॑ने ore यच्छत द्विपदे चतुष्पदे | 
अदत्पिब॑दूज॑य॑मानमार्शितं तदस्मे शं योर॑र॒पो द॑धा- 
तन ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Asmakam deva ubhayaya janmane sarma 
yacchata dvipade catuspade. Adat pibadurjaya- 
manamasitam tadasme sam yorarapo dadhatana. 


May all you Devas, divinities of nature and 
humanity, give us peace and felicity for our life, for 
both humans and animals. Let all that is eating, all that 
is drinking be strong, energetic and fulfilled. Pray give 
us that peace and well being which is free from violence, 
sin and evil. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 38 599 


यद्वो देवाङ्चकृम जिह्यं गुरु मन॑सो वा प्रयुती देवहेव्ठनम्‌। 
अरावा यो नो अभि दुच्छुनायते तस्मिन्तदेनो! वसवो नि 
धेतन ॥ १२॥ 


12. Yadvo devascakrma jihvaya guru manaso va 
prayuti devahelanam. Arava yo no abhi succhu- 
nayate tasmin tadeno vasavo ni dhetana. 


O Devas, divinities of nature and humanity, if 
we trespass or do some grave offence by word, thought 
or action and behaviour to earn your displeasure or even 
provoke your anger, pray forgive us and cleanse us of 
that weakness and negativity. And if there be some mean 
and uncharitable person among us who behaves in a 
vile manner toward us, then O divine givers of peace 
and shelter, pray let that sin visit back upon the source. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 38 
Indra Devata, Mushkavan Indra Rshi 


sea इन्द्र पृत्सुतौ यश॑स्वति शिमीवति क्रन्द॑सि प्राव॑ 
सातये । यत्र गोर्षाता धृषितेषु खादिषु विष्वक्पत॑न्ति दिद्यवो 
नृषाह्ये ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Asmin na indra prtsutau yaSsasvati Simivati kran- 
dasi prava sataye. Yatra gosata dhrsitesu khadisu 
visvak patanti didyavo nrsahye. 


Indra, O ruler of the world, in this mighty battle 
for honour and industry, you roar and thunder, pray 
defend and protect us to advance to the victory. This is 
a battle for the reclamation, defence and development 
of the lands and cows, between bold, undaunted soldiers 
thirsting for the enemy’s blood, and on them, in this 


600 RGVEDA 


murderous contest, sharp and blazing arrows fall on all 
sides. 


aa: क्षुमन्तं सर्द॑ने व्यूर्णुहि mister रयिमिन्द्र श्र॒वाय्य॑म्‌ | 
स्याम ते जय॑तः शक्र मेदिनो य्था वयमुश्मसि तद्व॑सो 
pau 


De Sa nah ksumantam sadane vyurnuhi go-arnasam 
rayimindra Sravayyam. Syama te jayatah sakra 
medino yatha vayamusmasi tadvaso krdhi. 


Indra, O lord of power and glory, in this house 
of the social order abundant in food, water and the 
wealth of lands and cows, cover, protect and promote 
the honoured wealth of the nation. O mighty victorious 
lord, let us be your friends, allies and admirers and, O 
lord giver of peace, settlement and a good home, pray 
do as we would wish to fulfil our aspirations. 


यो नो दास siraf वा पुरुष्टुताऽदेव इन्द्र युधये Fachafar । 
अस्माभिष्टे सुषहाः सन्तु शत्रवस्त्वया वयं तान्व॑नुयाम 
संगमे ।॥ ३॥ 


a Yo no dasa aryo va purustuta’deva indra yudhaye 
ciketati. Asmabhiste susahah santu Satravastvaya 
vayam tan vanuyama samgame. 


O lord most admired and celebrated, Indra, 
whether it is a power ignoble and slavish in character, 
or even one dynamic in character but undivine and 
negative, who challenges us to battle, let those enemies 
be boldly faced and fought out, and let us all under your 
leadership, overthrow and destroy them in battle. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 38 601 


यो दभ्रेभिर्हव्यो यश्च भूरिं href अभीक वरिवोविन्चृषाह्य | 
तं विखादे सस्निमद्य श्रुतं नर॑मर्वाञ्चमिन्द्रमव॑से करा- 
ASUS 


4. Yo dabhebhirhavyo yasca bhuribhiryo abhike 
varivovinnrsahye. Tam vikhade sasnimadya 
Srutam naramarvancamindramavase karamahe. 


In the decisive battle of humanity to the point 
of the destruction of evil and negative forces, we now 
choose and install that man as Indra, leader for defence, 
protection and progress, who is adorable equally by the 
select few and the many, small as well as great, who is 
clean and pure, reputable and universally rich and 
powerful to create the space and freedom for thought 
and action around. 


स्ववृजं fe त्वामहमिन्द्र staré वुंषभ terete | 
प्र dsara परि कुत्सादिहा ग॑हि किमु त्वावानमुष्कयोर्वब्द 
आसते ॥ ५ ॥ 


Svavrjam hi tvam-aham-indra susravananudam 
vrsabha radhracodanam. Pra muncasva pari 
kutsadiha gahi kimu tvavan muskayorbaddha 
asate. 


Come Indra, lord potent and generous, rise and 
take on the leadership. We hear and know you are 
powerful by yourself to uproot evil, indefatigable, 
inspirer of fighting forces, uplifter of the weak and 
breaker of blockades. Pray be free and free us from terror 
and violence. How can the brave like you stay back 
stolen by ravishment in obscurity? 


602 RGVEDA 


Mandala 10/Sukta 39 
Ashvinau Devata, Ghosha Kakshivati Rshi 


यो at परिज्मा सुवृद॑ञ्विना रथो दोषामुषासो हव्यो 
हविष्म॑ता । शश्वत्तमासस्तमु वामिदं वयं पितुर्न नाम॑ सुहवं 
हवामहे uv Vu 


1. Yo vam parijma suvrdasvina ratho dosamusaso 
havyo havismata. SasSvattamasastamu vamidam 
vayam piturna nama suhavam havamahe. 


Ashvins, complementary powers of nature and 
humanity like heat and cold, light and liquids, teacher 
and preacher, science and technology, swift and smooth 
is your chariot, turning, moving and going all over the 
world in all directions. Adored and adorable is it day 
and night by admiring priests, worthy of invocation by 
them with homage and havi. Since time immemorial 
we have been calling on you and this chariot of yours 
as we chant the holy name of father, and we call upon 
you, riders of the chariot, now. 


चोदयतं सूनृताः पिन्व॑तं धिय उत्पुर॑न्धीरीरयतं तदुश्मसि | 
यशसं भागं Hurd नो अश्विना सोमं न चारु मघवत्सु 
नस्कृतम्‌ 2 ॥ 


0.0 Codayatam sunrtah pinvatam dhiya ut puran- 
dhirirayatam tadusmasi. Yasasam bhagam krnu- 
tam no asvina somam na carum magha-vatsu nas- 
krtam. 


Ashvins, inspire, energise and raise the voice 
of truth and divine law of eternity. Nourish, strengthen 
and advance the intelligence and will of humanity for 
action. Raise up, strengthen and confirm the principles 


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 39 603 


and policies which govern and sustain the values of 
human institutions. That is what we love and desire of 
you. Create and confirm our share of honour and 
excellence in the affairs of human society. Vest the 
beauty and grace of sweetness and culture for our sake 
among the men of wealth and power. 


अमाजुर॑श्चिद्धवथो युवं भगोऽ नाशोश्चिंदवितार।पमस्यं 
चित्‌। अन्धस्य चिन्नासत्या aera चिद्युवामिरदाहुर्भिंषजां 
रुतस्य चित्‌॥ ३॥ 


Amajurascidbhavatho yuvam bhago’nasoscida- 
vitarapamasya cit. Andhasya cinnasatya krsasya 
cidyuvamidahurbhisaja rutasya cit. 


Ashvins, you are the hope and inspiration of the 
bed-ridden home-confined old person. You are saviours 
of the debilitated and the weakest persons who are 
unable to eat and move. O lovers and observers of the 
truth and law of nature, you bring light for the blind, 
strength for the anaemic and health for the chronic 
sufferers. That is what people call you, “saviours of life’. 


युवं च्यवानं सनयं यथा रथं पुनर्युवानं चरथाय तश्चथुः | 
निष्टौग्यमूंहथुरद्द्रयस्परि विश्वेत्ता वां सव॑नेषु प्रवाच्या ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Yuvam cyavanam sanayam yatha ratham punar- 
yuvanam carathaya taksathuh. Nistaugrya- 
muhathuradbhyaspari visvet ta vam savanesu 
pravacya. 

You rejuvenate the broken old man to fresh 
youth to go round and enjoy life as the craftsman repairs 
an old worn out chariot and converts it to new efficiency. 
You raise the drowned man from the water and revive 


604 RGVEDA 


him to life. That’s why all your works and achievements 
are praised and celebrated in holy gatherings. 


पुराणा वां dats waar जनेऽथो हासथुर्भिषजा मयोभुवां । 


तावां नु नव्याववसे करामहेऽयं नासत्या श्रदरिर्यथा 
दध॑त्‌॥ ५॥ 


a: Purana vam virya pra brava jane’tho hasathur- 
bhisaja mayobhuva. Ta vam nu navyavavase 
karamahe’yam nasatya Sradariryatha dadhat. 


O physician and surgeon dedicated to truth and 
goodness of life, your old and ancient deeds I proclaim 
and praise among people. Be you both harbingers of 
good health, peace and joy. We celebrate you both as 
adorable for the sake of health and protection so that 
this dynamic community may have faith and trust in you. 


इयं ame sora मे अश्विना पुत्रायेव पितरा मह्यं शिक्चतम्‌। 
अनापिरज्ञा असजात्यामतिः पुरा तस्यां अभिशस्तेरव 
स्पतम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Iyam vamahve srnutam me aSsvina putrayeva 
pitara mahyam Ssiksatam. Anapirajnd asajatya- 
matih pura tasya abhisasterava sprtam. 

I, this supplicant girl, request you, Ashvins, pray 
listen to me, and as father speaks to the child, so please 
instruct me on matters of health. I am alone and 
unrelated, ignorant, without kith and kin and immature. 
Pray protect me with knowledge before the onslaught 
of the effects of that ignorance. 


युवं रथेन विमदाय शुन्ध्यु वं न्यूहथुः पुरुमित्रस्य योष॑णाम्‌ | 
युवं हवं वधिमत्या अगच्छतं युवं atti चक्रथुः 
पुर॑न्धये ॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 39 605 


7. Yuvam rathena vimadaya sundhyuvam nyuhathuh 
purumitrasya yosanam. Yuvam havam vadhri- 
matyad agacchatam yuvam susutim cakrathuh 
purandhaye. 


O Ashvins, with your knowledge of body and 
mind, you join the youthful, bright and intelligent 
daughter of the widely friendly father with a bright 
young man for their joy and fulfilment. You listen to 
the call of the barren woman, treat her, restore her 
fertility, and she is blest with a child for a joyous home 
life. 


युवं विप्र॑स्य soe aa: Wa: कलेरकृणु तं Faga: | 
युवं वन्द॑नमृश्यदादुदुपथुर्युवं सद्यो विश्पलामेतवे कृथः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yuvam viprasya jaranam-upeyusah punah 
kalerakrnutam yuvadvayah. Yuvam vandana- 
mrsyadad-udupathur-yuvam sadyo vispalam- 
etave krthah. 


You rejuvenate and restore to vibrant youthful- 
ness the aging veteran scholar in pursuit of research. 
You raise the man of holiness from chronic ailment to 
renewed life. And you help the public health authority 
in community health programmes so that they may go 
on with their normal activity. 


युवं ह॑ रे भं वुंषणा गुहा हितमुदैरयतं ममुवांसंमणश्विना | 

युवमृबीसमुत daa ओम॑न्वन्तं चक्रथुः CAAT ॥ ९ ॥ 
D. Yuvam ha rebham vrsana guha hitamudair- 

ayatam mamrvamsam-asvina. Yuvamrbisamuta 


taptamatraya omanvantam cakrathuh sapta- 
vadhraye. 


606 RGVEDA 


You revive the sinking man who has lost 
consciousness, all but surviving in the brain, and 
muttering from the subconscious. You cure the man in 
high fever in the state of delirium and restore him to 
health, full consciousness and self-immunity with all 
his five senses, mind and intelligence fully working in 
perfect order. 


युवं vad पेदवेऽ श्विनाश्वं नवभिवजिर्नवती च॑ वाजिनम्‌ | 
ape ददथुद्रावयत्संखं भगं न नृभ्यो हव्यं मयोभु- 
ठ॑म्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. Yuvam svetam pedave’svinasvam navabhir- 
vajair-navati ca vajinam. Carkrtyam dadathur- 
dravayatsakham bhagam na nrbhyo havyam 
mayobhuvam. 


Ashvins, for the active intelligent soul you give 
pure unsullied virility and vitality and vibrant swift 
smartness blest with nine and ninety qualities and 
faculties of body (nine faculties of sense and mind each 
energised with ten pranic energies) ever in action 
onward like a constant friend as you bring for people 
plenty, prosperity and power full of peace and joy worthy 
of love and invocation in life for all time. 


न तं राजानावदिते कुतश्चन नांहो अश्नोति दुरितं 
नकिर्भयम्‌ यम॑श्विना सुहवा रुद्रवर्तनी पुरोर थं कुणुथः 
पत्न्यां GEN ९९॥ 

11. Na tam rajanavadite kutascana namho asnoti 


duritam nakirbhayam. Yamasvina suhava rudra- 
vartani puroratham krnuthah patnya saha. 


O brilliant, independent and inviolable twin 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 39 607 


divine powers, nothing from any where, no sin, no evil, 
no hate, no fear touches him whom, O Ashvins, easily 
invoked and approachable, moving by paths free from 
the pain and suffering of ailments, you join in wedlock 
and lead forth to a happy home. 


आ तेन॑ यातं मन॑सो जवीयसा रथं यं वामृभवंश्चक्रुरंञ्विना | 
यस्य योगे दुहिता जाय॑ते दिव उभे अहनी सुदिने विव- 
tat: ९२॥ 


12. A tena yatam manaso javiyasad ratham yam 
vamrbhavascakrurasvina. Yasya yoge duhita 
jayate diva ubhe ahani sudine vivasvatah. 


O Ashvins, morning stars divine, come by that 
chariot of yours faster than mind which the celestial 
artists crafted for you, that which you yoke in harness 
and the maiden of heaven walks forth to ride and rise 
and then both the happy day and soothing night born of 
the sun move on. 


ता वर्तियीतं जयुषा fa पर्वतमपिन्वतं श॒यवे धेनुमश्विना । 
वृकस्य चिद्वर्ति'कामन्तरास्याद्युवं शचीभिर्ग्रं सितामं- 
मुञ्चतम्‌॥ 23 ॥ 


13. Ta vartiryatam jayusa vi parvatamapinvatam 
Sayave dhenumasvina. Vrkasya cidvartikamanta- 
rasyadyuvam sacibhirgrasitamamuncatam. 


O Ashvins, divine powers of knowledge and 
action, enlightened men and women of the world, 
harness the victorious chariot of divine vision and 
inspiration, rise forth and move forward by the road to 
the clouds, strengthen and raise the rousing voice for 
sleeping humanity, and with your voice and actions free 


608 RGVEDA 
the poor victims seized and held in the jaws of wolves. 


एतं वां स्तोम॑मण्विनावकमर्तिक्षाम भृग॑वो न tet 
न्यमृक्षाम योष॑णां न मर्ये नित्यं न सूनुं तन॑यं दधानाः ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Etam vam stomamasvinavakarmataksama bhr- 
gavo na ratham. Nyamrksama yosanam na marye 
nityam na sunum tanayam dadhanah. 


Ashvins, complementary twin powers of nature 
and humanity, this song of adoration we offer in your 
honour as the divine artists craft and offer the celestial 
chariot for you, and we have adorned it as we always 
adorn and prepare a bride for the groom. Blest with 
children and grand children we abide in life (and depend 
on you for strength and inspiration in the life cycle day 
and night, through the seasons, year in and year out). 


Mandala 10/Sukta 40 
Ashvinau Devata, Ghosha Kakshivati Rshi 


रथं यान्तं कुह को हं वां नरा प्रतिं द्युमन्तं सुविताय॑ भूषति | 
प्रातर्यावाणं विभ्वं विशोविशो वस्तोर्वस्तोर्वह॑मानं धिया 
पिं ।॥ ९॥ 


1. Ratham yantam kuha ko ha vam nara prati 
dyumantam suvitaya bhusati. Prataryavanam 
vibhvam visevise vastorvastorvahamanam dhiya 
Sami. 

O leading lights of life and humanity, who and 
where, with holy intelligence and action, crafts, adorns 
and prepares your mighty spacious, brilliant, and 
auspicious chariot ever on the move in action going 
every morning to yajna every day to every people, 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 40 609 


bearing and bringing all kinds of wealth for the sake of 
happiness and well being? 


कुहं स्विदोषा कुह वस्तोरश्विना कुहाभिपित्वं करतः 
कुदोषतुः । को वां शयुत्रा विधवेव देवरं मर्य न योषां कृणुते 
सधस्थ STU २॥ 


2, Kuha svid dosa kuha vastorasvina kuhabhipit- 
vam karatah kuhosatuh. Ko vam Sayutra vidhave- 
va devaram maryam na yosa krnute sadhastha a. 


Ashvins, man and woman, where were you at 
night? Where in the day? Where do you find food and 
rest? Where do you live? Where do you sleep? Where 
do you stay together like the widow with her second 
husband, or a maiden married to a youth? Who invites 
you to yajna? 


प्रातर्जरेथे जरणेव काप॑या वस्तोर्वस्तोर्यजता गच्छथो गृहम्‌ | 
कस्य॑ ध्वस्रा भ॑वथः कस्य वा नरा राजपुत्रेव सवनावं 
गच्छथः 13 ॥ 


> Pratarjarethe jaraneva kapaya vastorvastorya- 
jata gacchatho grham. Kasya dhvasra bhavathah 
kasya va nara rajaputreva savanava gacchathah. 


Early morning, like venerable divinities you are 
honoured with songs of praise. Venerable and adorable, 
you visit the devotee’s home day by day. Whose 
weaknesses do you destroy? And O leading lights of 
humanity, whose house and yajna do you visit like the 
princes of a royal realm? 


युवां मृगेव॑ वारणा मुंगण्यवो दोषा वस्तोर्हविषा नि हवयामहे | 
युवं होत्रामृतुथा Wad नरेषं जनाय वहथः शुभस्पती ॥ ठ ॥ 


610 RGVEDA 


4. Yuvam mrgeva varana mrganyavo dosa vastorha- 
visa ni hvayamahe. Yuvam hotramrtutha juhvate 
naresam janaya vahathah subhaspati. 


Looking and searching for you as seekers and 
saviours, we invoke and invite you with homage day 
and night. All house holders invoke you and offer you 
homage of havi according to the seasons, and you, 
leading lights for humanity, treasure holds of good and 
promoters of the auspicious, bring food and energy for 
the people. 


युवां ह घोषा पर्यश्विना यती राज्ञं ऊचे दुहिता पुच्छे वां 
नरा। भूतं मे अह॑ उत भूंतमक्तवेऽ vatad रथिने शक्त- 
मर्वते॥ ५॥ 


2: Yuvam ha ghosa paryasvina yati rajna uce duhita 
preche vam nara. Bhutam me ahna uta bhutama- 
ktave’svavate rathine Saktamarvate. 


Ashvins, leading lights of the land, rulers and 
warriors, this voice of the ruling order like a daughter 
of the sovereign, going round and knowing every thing 
of the state, asks you and says : Be up and awake for me 
day and night and strengthen yourselves and strengthen 
me to meet the challenges of the forces of horse, chariot 
and the stormy troopers and thus save me and the social 
order. 


युवं कवी ठः पर्यश्विना रथं विशो न कुत्सो जरितुर्न- 
शायथः | युवोर्ह मक्षा पर्यश्विना मध्वासा भ॑रत निष्कृतं 
न योष॑णा ।॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Yuvam kavi sthah paryasvina ratham 1750 na 


kutso jariturnasayathah. Yuvorha maksa parya- 
svina madhvasa bharata niskrtam na yosana. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 40 611 


Ashvins, you are visionary poetic creators, stay 
fast on the chariot, go to the people and appreciate their 
songs of adoration as a creator and maker of songs 
would. The honey sweets of your creation, the honey 
bees taste and drink with their mouth as a youthful 
woman loves the sweet beauty of her new home. 


युवं हं भुज्युं युवमश्विना वशं युवं शिजञ्जारंमुशनामुपारथुः | 
युवो ररावा परिं सख्यमासते युवोर्‌ हमव॑सा सुम्नमा 
च॑के ।॥। ७॥ 


i. Yuvam ha bhujyum yuvamasvina vasam yuvam 


^०.~ ° ~ 


sakhyamasate yuvor-ahamavasa sumnama cake. 


Ashvins, protect the protector and sustainer of 
the people’s standard of living, protect the dependent 
and supporter, protect him who appreciates and adores, 
and protect the poet of love and beauty. Your generous 
admirer loves to be friends with you, and I too pray for 
your protection and gift of well being. Pray help all these 
people to complete their journey of life to self- 
fulfilment. 


युवं हं कृशं युवमश्विना we aa विधन्तं विधवामुरुष्यथः | 
युवं सनिभ्यः स्तनयंन्तमणश्विनाऽपं व्रजमूर्णुथः सखसा- 
स्य॑म्‌।॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Yuvam ha krsam yuvamasvina Sayum yuvam 
vidhantam vidhavam-urusyathah. Yuvam 


sanibhyah stanayantam-asvina’pa vrajamurnu- 
thah saptasyam. 


Ashvins, both of you, pray protect and support 
the weak, the depressed, the supporter of the weak, and 


612 RGVEDA 


the widow who has lost all support. And, O Ashvins, 
for the lovers of knowledge and devotees of yajna and 
divinity, open the seven rousing flood gates of the seven 
metres of Vedic poetry for chanting and hearing. 


जनिष्ट योषां पतयत्कनीनको fa चारुहन्वीरुधों दंसना 
अनुं । आस्मै रीयन्ते निवनेव सिन्ध॑वोऽ स्मा अद भवति 
तत्प॑तित्वनम्‌॥ ९॥ 


9. Janista yosa patayat kaninako vi caruhan virudho 
damsana anu. Asmai rtyante nivaneva sindhavo’- 
sma ahne bhavati tat patitvanam. 


The maiden is grown mature, the suitor comes 
seeking and proposes for marriage, the plants and 
creepers bloom according to innate power and potential, 
streams and rivers, desires and passions for living and 
continuing, flow down the slopes for the young man, 
and that is the stage for matrimony when the day of 
youthfulness is on the high and irrepressible. 


जीवं रुदन्ति वि म॑यन्ते अध्वरे दीर्घामनु प्रसितिं aera: । 
वामं पितृभ्यो य इदं समेरिरे मयः पतिभ्यो जन॑यः 
परिष्वजे ।॥ ९०॥ 


10. Jivam rudanti vi mayante adhvare dirghamanu 
prasitim didhiyurnarah. Vamam pitrbhyo ya idam 
samerire mayah patibhyo janayah parisvaje. 


People yearn for life, live it with tears and 
ecstasy, exchange vows and positions on the vedi of 
love and non-violence, and they desire that they live in 
wedlock as long as they may wish. Those who live in 
this felicity for their parents and elders, even away from 
them, would live happy, their wives would love them 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 40 613 


and bring them peace and joy in their conjugal 
relationship. 


न तस्य॑ विद्य तदु षु प्र वोचत युवां ह यद्यं वत्याः क्षेति 
योनिषु | प्रियोस्रियस्य वृषभस्य॑ रेतिनो गृहं ग॑मेमाश्विना 
तदुरुमसि ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Natasyavidma tadu su pra vocata yuva ha yadyu- 
vatyah kseti yonisu. Priyosriyasya vrsabhasya 
retino grham gamemasvina tadusmasi. 


We know not of that mystery of life, O Ashvins, 
pray speak of that mystery, that bond and felicity, to the 
youth who lives in the home of his youthful wife. We 
only wish that we may find a sweet home with a loving, 
generous, virile young man, loving at heart and winsome 
to his wife. 


आ वामगन्त्सु मतिवौ जिनीवसू न्य॑श्विना ecg कामां 
अयंसत | अभूतं गोपा मिथुना शुभस्पती प्रिया अर्यम्णो 
दुर्यो अशीमहि।॥ eeu 


12. A vamagant-sumatir-vajinivasa nyasvana hrtsu 
kama ayamsata. Abhutam gopa mithuna subha- 
spati priya aryamno duryan asimahi. 


O Ashvins, twin powers of domestic 
complementarity of love and wisdom, masters of the 
science and art of wedlock and home life, may the 
benefit of your enlightenment come to us, may there be 
the joy of life with wisdom and emotional control in 
our hearts. That way, be our protectors as leading lights 
in our pursuit of happiness and well being. Bless us 
that we may love, desire and find a home with loving, 
enlightened, generous and caring husbands. 


614 RGVEDA 


ता मन्दसाना मनुषो दुरोण आ धत्तं रयिं सहवीरं वचस्यवे | 
कृतं तीर्थं सुप्रपाणं शुभस्पती स्थाणुं प॑थेष्ठामपं दुर्मतिं 
ह॑तम्‌ ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. {त 17वाावदऽदा1व manuso durona ठ dhattam rayim 
sahaviram vacasyave. Krtam tirtham suprapa- 
nam subhaspati sthanum pathesthamapa durma- 
tim hatam. 


O Ashvins, joyous spirits of love and wisdom, 
prosperity and generosity, to the celebrant of life and 
divinity, to the house of humanity, bear and bring wealth, 
honour and excellence with brave progeny worthy of 
the celebrant. O givers, protectors and promoters of the 
good and well being of life, establish a happy home life 
overflowing with food, drink and freedom of holiness. 
Pray cast away infirmity, rigidity, hatred and negative 
disposition that may obstruct our path of progress in 
life. 


क्व स्विदद्य कतमास्वश्विना विश्चु gen मादयेते शुभस्पतीं। 
क ईनि येमे कतमस्य जग्मतुर्विप्रस्य वा यज॑मानस्य वा 
गृहम्‌ ॥ ९४॥ 


14. Kvasvidadya katamasvasvina viksu dasra mada- 
yete Ssubhaspati. Ka im ni yeme katamasya jag- 
matur-viprasya va yajamanasya va grham. 


Ashvins, lustrous divinities, wondrous workers, 
where have you been today? Among which people have 
you been enjoying yourselves for the day? Who can 
make you stay for the day? Which sage’s or which 
yajamana’s home did you visit for the day? 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 41 615 


Mandala 10/Sukta 41 
Ashvinau Devata, Suhastya Ghausheya Rshi 


समानमु त्यं पुरुहूतमुक्थ्यं १ रथं त्रिचक्रं सव॑ना ara I 
परिज्मानं विदथ्यं सुवृक्तिभिर्वयं ast उषसो हवामहे ti ९॥ 


i Samanamu tyam puruhutam-ukthyam ratham tri- 
cakram savana ganigmatam. Parijmanam vida- 
thyam suvrktibhirvayam vyusta usaso havamahe. 


O Ashvins, harbingers of new light and energy, 
in the light of the dawn with holy chant of mantric 
formulae, we invoke and call for that constant and 
invariable, universally loved and invoked, venerable and 
purposefully specialised three stage three wheeled 
chariot which would be constantly on the move to reach 
yajnic programmes all over the earth. 


प्रातर्युजं नासत्याधि तिष्ठथः प्रातर्यावाणं मधुवाहं नं रथ॑म्‌ | 
विशो येन गच्छ॑थो यज्च॑रीर्नरा कीरेज्चिंद्य्ञं होतुंमन्त- 
मण्विना ॥ २॥ 


Prataryujam nasatyadhi tisthathah prdatarya- 
vanam madhuvahanam ratham. Viso yena gac- 
chatho yajvarirnara kirescidyajnam hotrmantam- 
asvina. 

O Ashvins, harbingers of the light of knowledge 
and energy of life, leading lights of humanity dedicated 
to truth and never deviating from your path of rectitude, 
you ride and guide the chariot harnessed, started and 
moving in the morning, which bears and brings honey 
sweets of life and by which you reach the yajnic 
communities and bless the celebrant’s yajna joined by 
devotees in unison and cooperation. 


616 RGVEDA 


अध्वर्यु वा मधुपाणिं सुहस्त्य॑मधिधं वा धृतद॑श्चं दमूनसम्‌। 
विप्र॑स्य वा यत्सव॑नानि गच्छ थोऽ a आ यातं मधुपेय॑- 
मश्विना ॥ ३ ॥ 


Adhvaryum va madhupanim suhastyamagnidham 
va dhrtadaksam damunasam. Viprasya va yat 
savanani gacchatho’ta a yatam madhupeyam- 
asvina. 

O Ashvins, harbingers of the light of knowledge 
and practical power and energy through yajna, whether 
you go to the dexterous organiser of yajna, bearing 
honeyed offerings, or you go to the initiator of yajna 
and fire kindler, expert in the science and power of yajna 
and at the same time generous and socially oriented, or 
whether you go to the yajnas of the vibrant scholar 
specialist, you would have a taste of the honey sweets 
of life for achievement. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 42 
Indra Devata, Krishna Angirasa Rshi 


अस्तेव सु प्र॑तरं लायमस्यन्भूष॑न्निव प्र भ॑रा स्तोम॑मस्यै। 
वाचा विप्रास्तरत वाचमर्यो नि रामय जरितः सोम 
इन्द्र॑म्‌ ॥ ९॥ 

I Asteva su prataram layamasyan bhusanniva pra 
bhara stomamasmai. Vaca viprastarata vacama- 
ryo ni ramaya jaritah soma indram. 

As an expert archer shoots a distant target with 
the arrow, similarly bear and offer a holy song in honour 


of divine Indra, thereby exalting him with the beauties 
of word and music. O sages, with your voice of song 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 42 617 


overwhelm the other voice, of negation. O celebrant, 
hold the divine Indra at heart, be happy and let the 
Presence shine in your peaceful soul. 


ada गामुप॑ शिश्चा सायं प्र बोधय जरितजरमिन्द्॑म्‌। 
कोशं न पूर्ण वसुना न्यु ष्टमा च्यावय मघदेयाय शूरम्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Dohena gamupa Ssiksa sakhayam pra bodhaya 
Jaritar-jaram-indram. Kosam na purnam vasuna 
nyrstama cyavaya maghadeyaya suram. 


O celebrant, with constant churning of the mind, 
refine and energise your voice of adoration, send it in 
to your friend Indra, the soul within, and, like a 
treasurehold overflowing with wealth of light, stir it, 
wake up the brave soul for the gift of excellence and 
grandeur. 


किमङ् wat मघवन्भोजमाहुः शिशीहि at शिशयं त्वां 
श्रृणोमि | अघ्र॑स्वती मम धीर॑स्तु शक्र वसुविदं भग॑मिन्द्र 
भ॑रा नः।॥ ३॥ 


3. Kimanga tva maghavan bhojamahuh Ssisthi ma 
Sisayam tva Srnomi. Apnasvati mama dhirastu 
Sakra vasuvidam bhagamindra bhara nah. 


Indra, mighty soul, dear as breath of life, grand 
and sublime, don’t they say you are the giver of all 
pleasure and glory of life? Pray bless me too with the 
wealth of light and grandeur. I hear you are the all 
omnificent lord. O Lord Almighty, refine and sharpen 
my vision and understanding to the efficiency of divine 
attainment. Indra, pray bring us glory and good fortune 
full of wealth, power and peace. 


618 RGVEDA 


त्वां जना ममसत्येष्विन्द्र सन्तस्थाना वि ह्वयन्ते समीके । 
अत्रा युजं कृणुते यो हविष्पान्नासुन्वता सख्यं व॑ष्टि 
Rusu 


4. Tvam jana mamasatyesvindra santasthana vi 
hvayante samike. Atra yujam krnute yo havisman 
nasunvata sakhyam vasti Surah. 


Indra, people invoke you for help in contests of 
righteousness and call upon you while they march to 
the battle. Here too, however, he alone wins his help 
who offers faith and yajna, because the mighty one does 
not love, nor recognise, the friendship of the selfish and 
the non-performer of Soma-yajna. 


धनं न स्यन्द्रं dee यो अस्मै तीव्रान्त्सोर्मा आसुनोति 
प्रय॑स्वान्‌ । तस्मै शत्रन्त्सुतुकान्प्रातरद्यो नि स्वष्ट्‌।न्युवति 
हन्तिं वृत्रम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


3, Dhanam na spandram bahulam yo asmai tivrant- 
soman asunoti prayasvan. Tasmai $atruntsutukan 
pratarahno ni svastran yuvati hanti vrtram. 


Whoever the man of discipline and practice that 
offers precious gifts of holy and plenteous value and 
performs effective and powerful soma yajna of peace 
and pleasure for this divine Indra, ruling lord of 
humanity, for him Indra dispels all darkness and evil 
and eliminates all his enemies at the very outset of the 
day, howsoever strong, violent and well-armed the 
enemies might be. 


यस्मिन्वयं द॑धिमा शंसमिन्द्रे यः Brora मघवा काम॑मस्मे। 
आराच्यित्सन्भ॑यतामस्य VTA द्युम्ना जन्या नम- 
न्ताम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 42 619 


6. Yasmin vayam dadhima Samsamindre yah Ssisraya 
maghava kamamasme. Araccit san bhayatamasya 
Satrur-nyasmai dyumna janya namantam. 


Indra, the ruler in whom we repose our faith 
with admiration and who assures our fulfilment in all 
we want and aspire for, is great and all powerful. His 
enemies, even though they be far off cower with fear 
and flee, and to him all the wealth and powers born and 
produced in the land submit in reverence and loyalty. 


आराच्छन्रुमपं बाधस्व दूरमुग्रो यः शम्बः पुरुद्रूत तेनं । अस्मे 
धेहि यव॑मद्रोम॑दिन्द्र कृधी धियं जरित्रे वाज॑रत्नाम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


da Aracchatrum-apa badhasva duramugro yah 
sambah puruhiuta tena. Asme dhehi yavamadgo- 
madindra krdhi dhiyam jaritre vajaratnam. 


Indra, ruler of the world, invoked and celebrated 
by all, by that thunderbolt of power and justice which 
is lustrous and awful, throw out and keep off from us 
all social and environmental enemies. Give us 
abundance of grain, lands and cows, and for the 
celebrant yajna create an environment of enlightened 
action productive of the jewel wealth of life. 


प्र यमन्तर्वृषसवासो अग्म॑न्तीव्राः सोमा बहुलान्तास इन्द्रम्‌। 
नाहं दामानं मघवा नि यंसन्नि सुन्वते व॑हति भूरि वामम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Pra yamantarvrsasavaso agman tivrah soma 


bahulantasa indram. Naha damanam maghava 
ni yamsanni sunvate vahati bhuri vamam. 


The ruler to whom powerful creations of 
generous and imaginative artists and inspiring somaic 
achievements of peaceful projects are offered and 


620 RGVEDA 


dedicated from within the land for highly generative 
purposes and social values, that ruler, commanding 
wealth, power and majesty, does not impose any 
restrictions upon such veteran and generous artists, 
instead he provides manifold inspiring incentives to the 
creative minds. 


उत प्रहाम॑तिदीव्यां जयाति कृतं यच्छघ्नी विंचिनोतिं are । 
यो देवकामो न धनां रुणद्धि सपित्तं राया सुंजति स्व- 
धावान्‌ ९॥ 


9. Uta prahamatidivya jayati krtam yacchvaghni 
vicinoti kale. Yo devakamo na dhana runaddhi 
Samit tam raya srjati svadhavan. 


A veteran winner, he counters an attack and wins 
the opponent just as an expert player or hunter rounds 
up his prey and chooses the right time to strike and win. 
He does not restrict or restrain the philanthropist who 
loves divinity and spends on yajnic projects, instead, 
master, protector and promoter of wealth and power as 
he is, he blesses the giver with more and more of wealth. 


गोभिर माम॑तिं दुरेवां यवेन क्षुधं पुरुहूत विश््वाम्‌। वयं 
राज॑भिः प्रथमा धनान्यस्माकेन वृजनेना जयेम ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Gobhistaremamatim durevam yavena ksudham 
puruhuta visvam. Vayam rajabhih prathama 
dhananyasmakena vrjanena jayema. 


O ruler of the world invoked and celebrated by 
all humanity, let us solve the difficult problem of poverty 
and mental and cultural backwardness by cow 
development, land development and proper education, 
and the problem of hunger, by food production across 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 43 621 


the world. Let us take the initiative first to win wealth 
by cooperation with other rulers, and ultimately win our 
goals by our own power and effort. 


बृहस्पतिर्नः परि पातु पश्चादुतोत्तरस्मादधरादघायोः । इन्द्र॑ः 
पुरस्तादुत म॑ध्यतो नः सखा सखिभ्यो वरिवः कृणोतु ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Brhaspatirnah pari patu pascadutottarasma- 
dadharadaghayoh. Indrah purastaduta madhyato 
nah sakha sakhibyo varivah krnotu. 


May Brhaspati, omniscient lord of divine voice, 
protect us from sins and negative legacies of the past, 
from doubts and fears from above and below. May Indra, 
mighty ruler, be our friend and protect us from 
difficulties facing upfront. May he promote us on and 
on. May he place us at the centre of life’s problems, 
protect and promote us and create the wealth of honour 
and excellence for us, his friends. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 43 
Indra Devata, Krishna Angirasa Rshi 


अच्छ म इन्द्रं ead: cata: सध्रीचीर्विश्वा seria | 
UR ष्वजन्ते जन॑यो यथा पतिं मर्यं न शुन्ध्युं मघवान- 
मूतये ॥ ९॥ 


i, Accha ma indram matayah svarvidah sadhricir- 
visva usatiranusata. Pari svajante janayo yatha 
patim maryam na sundhyum maghavanam-itaye. 


All my thoughts, words and actions, all together 
in perfect unison concentrated on the love and light of 
divinity, ecstatically adore and celebrate Indra, lord 
almighty of existence. Just as wives with love embrace 


622 RGVEDA 


their human lover, protector and husband, so do my 
prayers centre on Indra, lord of glory, power and purity, 
for all round protection, promotion and well being. 


न at त्वद्रिगप॑ं वेति मे मनस्त्वे इत्कामं पुरुहूत शिश्रय । 
राजेव दस्म नि षदोऽधि बर्हिष्यस्मिन्त्सु सोमे.ऽ वपान॑मस्तु 
ते॥ २॥ 


2 Na gha tvadrigapa veti me manastve it kamam 
puruhita sisraya. Rajeva dasma ni sado’dhi 
barhisyasmintsu some’ vapanamastu te. 


Indra, lord universally invoked and celebrated, 
may my mind and soul having surrendered its love and 
ambition to you, never go astray from the presence such 
as yours. O lord beatific and glorious, you abide on my 
vedi and in my heart as the sovereign ruling presence. 
May your divine love, joy and protection ever abide in 
this mind and soul and bless it with peace and joy in 
your presence. 


विषूवृदिन्द्रो अम॑तेरुत क्षुधः स इद्रायो मघवा स्वं ईरते | 
तस्येदिमे प्र॑व॒णे aa सिन्ध॑वो वयो' वर्धन्ति वृषभस्यं 
शुष्मिणः ॥ ३ ॥ 


९ Visuvrdindro amateruta ksudhah sa idrayo 
maghava vasva 7541८. Tasyedime pravane sapta 
sindhavo vayo vardhanti vrsabhasya susminah. 


Indra, lord of all power and glory, dynamic 
presence all round in the world, dispels hunger and 
ignorance, rules and dispenses wealth, power and peace 
of shelter and settlement. Indeed, under the rule of this 
mighty generous master, all these seven streams of 
nature, life and living energy flow on and evolve to 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 43 623 


perfection. (This is true of both the external world of 
nature under the law of the cosmic spirit and of the 
internal world of mind and pranic energy under the rule 
of the spirit within.) 


वयो न gat सुंपल्छाशमासंदन्त्सोमांस इन्द्रं मन्दिनश्चमूषदः | 
प्रैषामनीकं शव॑सा दविंद्युतद्धिदत्स्व ष मन॑वे ज्योति- 
WEAN ४ ॥ 


4. Vayo na vrksam supalasamasada-ntsomasa 
indram mandinascamusadah. Praisamanikam 
savasa davidyutadvidat svarmanave jyotird-ryam. 


Just as birds take to the tree of rich foliage for 
rest and replenishment of life energy, so the soma cheer 
and energy of the sevenfold fluent streams of cosmic 
and individual systems take to Indra, the soul, for life 
and peace and joy. Then the expressive face of these 
shines with the splendour of Indra, and thus the living 
light of divinity descends in showers for the bliss of 
man. 


कृतं न श्वघ्नी वि चिनोति देव॑ने संवर्ग यन्मघवा सूर्यं जय॑त्‌ | 
न तत्ते अन्यो अनु die शकन्न पुराणो मघवन्नोत 
नूत॑नः ॥ ५॥ 


Krtam na 51400777 vi cinoti devane samvargam 
yanmaghava suryam jayat. Na tat te anyo anu 
viryam Sakanna purano maghavan nota nutanah. 


Just as a player in the game casts the die and 
wins and piles up his gains, so does Indra, lord 
omnipotent and omnificent, in this pleasure garden of 
the dynamics of existence win over the sun and the rain 
bearing cloud. O lord almighty, no one else can possibly 


624 RGVEDA 


equal your might, no one old or new. 


विशंविशं मघवा पर्यशायत जनानां धेनां अवचाकश्दुषां 1 
यस्याहं शक्रः सव॑नेषु रण्य॑ति स तीव्रैः ata: सहते 
पृतन्यतः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Visam-visam maghava paryasayata jananam 
dhena avacakaSsadvrsa. Yasyaha sakrah savanesu 
ranyati sa tivraih somaih sahate prtanyatah. 


The lord of glory abides with all people of the 
world whosoever they be. The generous lord knows, 
listens and grants all prayers of the people. Whosoever 
the devotee whose yajnas the mighty one joins and 
enjoys, that celebrant wins over all his rivals and 
adversaries by the power of his ardent soma offerings 
of holy action in yajna. 


आपो न सिन्धु मभि यत्समक्चर न्त्सोमास इन्द्रं कुल्याडव 
हृदम्‌। वर्धन्ति विप्रा महो अस्य साद॑ने यवं न वृष्टिर्दिव्येन 
दानुना ॥ ७॥ 


४ Apo na sindhumabhi yat samaksarantsomasa 
indram kulya iva hradam. Vardhanti vipra maho 
asya sadane yavam na vrstirdivyena danuna. 


As rivers flow into the sea, as streams of rain 
flow into the lake, so do the beauties of faith and pleasure 
in soma yajnas concentrate on Indra, glory of the world. 
As showers of rain with profuse divine generosity raise 
the crops of barley and the plants grow up in ecstasy, so 
in the homely presence of this generous lord of 
sublimity, saints and sages rise and shine in moral and 
spiritual grandeur. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 43 625 


वृषा न hea: प॑तयद्रजःस्वा यो अर्यप॑लीरकृणोदिमा अपः। 
स सुन्वते मघवा जीरदानवेऽकिन्दज््योतिर्मन॑वे हवि- 
mane ॥ 


8. Vrsa na kruddhah patayadrajah sva yo aryapat- 
nirakrnodima apah. Sa sunvate maghava jirada- 
nave ’vindajjyotirmanave havismate. 


Just as the swelling cloud causes the vapours of 
water in the skies to be released of itself and lets these 
showers of rain fall upon the earth, so does Indra, lord 
of glorious generosity, bring showers of light and bliss 
for the generous man of charity who offers the homage 
of soma to the lord for humanity. 


उल्नायतां पर शुर्ज्योतिंषा सह भूया ऋतस्य सुदुघां Gara | 
वि रोचतामरुषो भानुना शुचिः स्वर्णं शुक्रं शुशुचीत 
सत्प॑तिः ॥ ९॥ 


9. Ujjayatam parasurjyotisa saha bhuya rtasya 
sudugha puranavat. Vi rocatamaruso bhanuna 
Sucih svarna $ukram susucita satpatih. 


Let the thunderbolt of power and justice arise, 
let the voice of truth and law divine be generous, creative 
and fruitful as ever before, let the bright sun rise with 
its immaculate light and glory, may the lord protector 
and promoter of the good reveal the light and power of 
divinity as the bliss of heaven. 


गोभिं्टरे माम॑तिं दुरेवां यवेन क्षुधं Gaga विश्वाम्‌ । 
वयं राज॑भिः प्रथमा धनान्यस्माकेन वृजनेना जयेम ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Gobhistaremamatim durevam yavena ksudham 
puruhuta visvam. Vayam rajabhih prathama dha- 
nanyasmakena vrjanena jayema. 


626 RGVEDA 


Let us dispel the darkness of ignorance with the 
communication of universal knowledge, let us remove 
the world’s hunger with food production, let us reclaim 
our original wealth of knowledge, power and prosperity 
with our innate lights and enlightened actions. 


बृहस्पतिर्नः परि पातु पश्चादुतोत्तरस्मादधरादघायोः । इन्द्र॑ः 
पुरस्तादुत म॑ध्यतो नः सखा सखिभ्यो वरिवः कृणोतु ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Brhaspatirnah pari patu pascadutottarasma- 
dadharadaghayoh. Indrah purastaduta madhyato 
nah sakha sakhibyo varivah krnotu. 


May Brhaspati, lord of Infinity and the master 
of knowledge protect us against the violence of sin and 
sinners upfront, behind, above or below. May Indra, 
ruler and friend of humanity, create and lead us to the 
wealth of life for us and our friends, all at present and 
in our midst. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 44 
Indra Devata, Krishna Angirasa Rshi 


आ यात्विन्द्रः स्वपतिर्मदाय यो धर्मणा तूतुजानस्तुविष्पान्‌ । 
प्रत्वक्षाणो अति विश्वा सहांस्यपारेण महता वृष्ण्येन ॥ ९॥ 


il; A yatvindrah svapatirmadaya yo dharmana 
tutujanastuvisman. Pratvaksano ati visva saham- 
syaparena mahata vrsnyena. 


May Indra, lord ruler of his world of reality, 
come, arise in view, in our consciousness, for the joy of 
his devotees. Mighty is he, loving, bright and accepting 
by his own essential nature and the laws of life, and, by 
his boundless grandeur and generosity, he takes on all 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 44 627 


challenges of counterforces and reduces them to naught 
for his people. (The mantra may be applied to Divinity 
or to the ruling power). 


सुष्ठामा रथ॑ः सुयमा हरीं ते मिम्यश्च वजो नृपते गभ॑स्तौ । 
शीभं राजन्त्सुपथा याह्र्वाङ्न्धीम ते पपुषो वृष्ण्यानि ॥ २॥ 


2. Susthama rathah suyama hari te mimyaksa vajro 
nrpate gabhastau. Sibham rajantsupatha yahyar- 
van vardhama te papuso vrsnyani. 


Stable, strong and perfectly directed is your 
chariot, controlled and accurate your dual powers of 
motion. O refulgent ruler and protector of the people, 
in your hands you hold the controls of the thunder power 
of force and justice. Pray come at the fastest by the safest 
and straightest path to us right here. We celebrate and 
exalt your powers and generosity, and you love to protect 
and promote your celebrants. 


एन्द्रवाहो नूपतिं वज्र॑ बाहमुग्रमुग्रासंस्तविषासं एनम्‌। 
प्रत्व॑क्षसं वृषभं सत्यशुंष्पमेम॑स्पत्रा स॑धमादों वहन्तु ॥ ३ ॥ 


Endravaho nrpatim vajrabahumugramugrasa- 
stavisasa enam. Pratvaksasam vrsabham satya- 
Susmamemasmatra sadhamado vahantu. 


May the mighty, blazing, penetrating, vigorous 
and refining radiations of this Indra, protector and 
promoter of humanity, thunder armed, virile and 
generous, indomitable upholder of truth, come in unison 
with inspiring strength and bring him to us for our social 
and spiritual good. 


628 RGVEDA 


एवा पतिं द्रोणसाचं सचेतसमूर्जः स्कम्भं धरुणा आ 
aurea | ओज॑ः कृष्व सं गुभाय त्वे अप्यसो यथां केनि- 
पार्नामिनो वृधे ॥ ड ॥ 


4. Eva patim dronasacam sacetasamurjah skam- 
bham dharuna ठ vrsayase. Ojah krsva sam grbha- 
ya tve apyaso yatha kenipanamino vrdhe. 


Thus do solar radiations transmit the presence 
of Indra, lord protector and ruler pervasive in the world 
of humanity, all aware, the pillar of universal energy, 
strength and power. Thus do we exalt and celebrate 
Indra. O lord, you are the shower of power and 
generosity in the all-sustaining world of yours. Pray 
create and give us the strength of life, hold us in your 
power and presence for our promotion and progress 
since you are the ultimate lord and master of the 
dedicated aspirants for light. 


गम॑न्नस्मे वसून्या हि शंसिषं स्वाशिषं भरमा याहि aa: | 
त्वमीशिषे सास्मिन्ना स॑त्सि वर्िष्य॑नाधूृष्या तव पात्राणि 
धर्म॑णा ॥ ५॥ 


5: Gamannasme vasunyda hi Samsisam svasisam 
bharama yahi sominah. Tvamisise sasminna satsi 
barhisyanadhrsya tava patrani dharmana. 


Indra, may wealths, peace and honours of the 
world come to us, I wish and pray. Come, accept the 
homage of the celebrant’s song of praise. You rule all, 
come and abide in this holy seat of yajna and love of 
the heart. Bold and undaunted, we are your celebrants 
by the nature and Dharma of our being. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 44 629 


पृथक्प्रायन्प्रथमा देवहूतयो ऽकरण्वत श्रवस्यानि दुष्टरा । न 
ये शेकुर्यज्ञियां नाव॑मारुहंमीर्मेव ते न्यविशन्त केप॑यः ॥ ६ ॥ 


0; Prthak prayan prathama devahutayo’krnvata 
Sravasyani dustara. Na ye sekuryajniyam nava- 
maruhamirmaiva te nyavisanta kepayah. 


People of the first order dedicated to divinity 
and yajnic piety go forward by holy paths of the first 
order and perform admirable acts of the most difficult 
order. But those who cannot board the ark of yajnic order 
and divine love, men of unclean character, doubtful 
mind and crooked ways, lie about here in the lower and 
lowest orders of being. 


एवैवापागपरे सन्तु दूढ्योऽश्वा येषां GAH STATA । इत्था 
ये प्रागुपरे सन्तिं दावने पुरूणि यत्र॑ वयुनानि भोज॑ना ॥ ७॥ 


7. Evaivapagapare santu dudhyo’sva yesam duryuja 
ayuyujre. Ittha ye pragupare santi davane puruni 
yatra vayunani bhojana. 


Thus do people of evil disposition keep 
wallowing in low states of existence whose mind and 
senses are engaged in wrong things like restive horses. 
And thus do others of the first and higher disposition 
fare who are dedicated here itself to the higher 
omnificent divinity in which infinite gifts of freedom, 
peace and happiness abound. 


गिरीरजात्रेज॑मानों अधारयद्‌ द्यौः ऋन्ददन्तरिक्षाणि 
कोपयत्‌। समीचीने धिषणो वि ष्कभायति वृष्ण॑ः पीत्वा 
मद॑ उक्थानि शंसति ॥ ८ ॥ 


630 RGVEDA 


8. Girinrajran rejamanan adharayad dyauh kranda- 
dantariksani kopayat. Samicine dhisane viska- 
bhayati vrsnah pitva mada ukthani samsati. 


He wields the dynamics of nature, fixes the 
mountains and moves the roaring clouds. He holds the 
raging heavens and shakes the violent skies. He holds 
both earth and heaven together and, the glorious sun 
having drunk up the vapours, showers down the rains 
in joy like the overflow of divine ecstasy in the music 
of song. 


इमं बिभर्मि gad ते अङ्कुशं येनारुजासि मघवजञ्छ- 
Tae: | अस्मिन्त्सु ते सव॑ने अस्त्वोक्यं सुत इष्टौ म॑घ- 
वन्बोध्याभ॑ंगः॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Imam bibharmi sukrtam te ankusam yenarujasi 
maghavanchapharujah. Asmintsu te savane 
astvokyam suta istau maghavan bodhyabhagah. 


I happily abide by this law and discipline of 
yours, Indra, which is divinely maintained and sustained, 
the law by which, O lord of power and glory, you punish 
those who strike life by their hoof and claw. May your 
presence abide in this holy seat of my yajna in the heart 
and soul. May your divine majesty, O lord of glory, know 
and fulfil our desire in this cherished act of love and 
faith. 

गोभिष्टरेमामतिं दुरेवां यवेन क्षुधं पुरुहूत विश्वाम्‌ 
वयं राज॑भिः प्रथमा धनान्यस्माकेन वृजनेना जयेम ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Gobhistaremamatim durevam yavena ksudham 
puruhuta visvam. Vayam rajabhih prathama 
dhananyasmakena vrjanena jayema. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 45 631 


O lord universally invoked and celebrated, let 
us overcome the difficult problems of want, of moral 
and spiritual vision and knowledge, by the Vedic voice, 
and the problem of world hunger by cooperative 
production of food. And let us on top win wealth, honour 
and excellence by our own brilliance of intelligence and 
our own persistent effort. 


बृहस्पतिर्नः परि पातु पश्चादुतोत्तरस्मादधरादघायोः । इन्द्र॑ः 
पुरस्तादुत म॑ध्य॒तो नः सखा सखिभ्यो वरिवः कृणोतु ॥ Ve i 


11. Brhaspatirnah pari patu pascadutottarasma- 
dadharadaghayoh. Indrah purastaduta madhyato 
nah sakha sakhibyo varivah krnotu. 


May Brhaspati protect and promote us all round 
from behind, from above and from below against sin 
and evil. May Indra, our friend and ruler, create and 
give wealth, honour and excellence for us and for the 
entire fraternity of the world from within at the centre 
of humanity and may he continue the same into the 
future. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 45 
Agni Devata, Vatsapri Bhalandana Rshi 
दिवस्परि प्रथमं aa अभिरस्मद्‌ द्वितीयं परि जातवेदाः । 
तृतीय॑मप्सु नृमणा अज॑स््रमिन्धान एनं जरते स्वाधीः ॥ ९ ॥ 


i. Divaspari prathamam jajne agnirasmad dvitiyam 
pari jatavedah. Trttyamapsu nrmana ajasramin- 
dhana enam jarate svadhth. 


Agni first manifests as light in the high heavenly 
region in the form of the sun. Secondly it manifests as 


632 RGVEDA 


Jataveda, vital heat in all earthly forms around us. In 
the third form it manifests as energy in waters in the 
middle regions of space as electricity. Agni is the vital 
energy which enables humanity to live and work. Man 
as self-intelligent being lights this perpetual Agni and 
thereby exalts and celebrates the eternal creative spirit 
of existence. 


विदा a अग्ने त्रेधा त्रयाणि विद्या a धाम विभरता पुसत्रा। 
विद्या ते नाम॑ परमं गुहा यद्धिद्या तमुत्सं यत॑ आजगन्थ ।। २॥ 


2. Vidma te agne tredha trayani vidma te dhama 
vibhrta purutra. Vidma te nama paramam guha 
yadvidma tamutsam yata ajagantha. 


Agni, universal vital energy, we know the three 
modes in which you menifest in three different forms, 
structures, properties and functions. All pervasive 
energy, we know the three regions in which you abide. 
For sure we know the deepest secret cave where your 
abode is since we know the infinite source from where 
you arise and manifest as Agni, Vayu and Aditya on 
earth, in sky and in heaven. 


समुद्र त्वा नृमणा अप्स्व १ न्तर्नुचक्षां ईधे दिवो अग्र ऊध॑न्‌ | 
तृतीये त्वा रज॑सि तस्थिवां संमपामुपस्थं महिषा अवर्धन्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


3 Samudre tva nrmana apsvantar-nrcaksa 14/1८ divo 
agna udhan. Trtiye tva rajasi tasthivamsamapa- 
mupasthe mahisa avardhan. 


Agni, the fluid energy excites and kindles you 
in the currents in the depths of the waters; in the region 
of light, the sun that illuminates the world of humanity 
produces and radiates you; and in the third region of 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 45 633 


the skies, the energy of the winds produces and 
augments you as you abide in the depths of the cloud. 


sth daft: स्तनयन्निव द्यौः क्षामा रेरिहद्ीरुधंः समञ्जन्‌ । 
सद्यो जज्ञानो fa हीपिद्दधो अख्यदा रोद॑सी भानुना 
भात्यन्तः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Akrandadagnih stanayanniva dyauh ksama 
rerihad-virudhah samanjan. Sadyo jajnano vi 
himiddho akhyada rodast bhanuna bhatyantah. 


Agni roars as if thundering and shaking the 
skies, at the same time reaching and kissing the earth 
and beautifying the greenery. Always present, instantly 
rising, it proclaims itself, shines, and fills the heaven 
and earth with its light. 


श्रीणामुदारो ereunl रयीणां म॑नीषाणां प्रार्पणः सोम॑गोपाः 1 
वसु: सूनुः सह॑सो अप्सु राजा वि भात्यग्र उषरसामि- 
धानः ॥ ५॥ 


नः Srinamudaro dharuno rayinam manisanam 
prarpanah somagopah. Vasuh sunuh sahaso apsu 
raja vi bhatyagra usasamidhanah. 


Liberal source giver of light, beauty and life’s 
graces, treasure home of wealths, honours and 
excellences, harbinger of intellectual smartness and 
fulfilment, protector and promoter of the soma energies 
of life, shelter home of peace and comfort, child as well 
as energiser of strength and courage, and the ruling 
inspirer of the soul in will and actions, Agni, kindled 
and rising, shines in advance of the dawns at the horizon. 


विश्व॑स्य avatar गर्भं आ रोद॑सी अपृणाजाय॑मानः। 
aie चिदद्रिंमथिनत्परायञ्जना यदगिमय॑जन्त पञ्च॑ ।। ६ ॥ 


634 RGVEDA 


6. Visvasya ketur-bhuvanasya garbha त rodasi 
aprnaj-jayamanah. Vilum cidadrim-abhinat 
parayanjana yadagnim-ayajanta panca. 


Illuminator of the world, pervasive life energy 
of the universe, as it rises it fills the heaven and earth 
with light and life. Moving ahead and penetrating, it 
breaks the mighty strong cloud, and for this reason of 
its energy, power and light all communities of the world 
kindle and adore it in their yajnic projects of creation 
and production. 


उशिक्पावको अरतिः deen मर्तेष्वथिरमरतो नि धायि। 
इयति धूममरुषं भरिदुच्छक्रेणं शोचिषा द्यामिन॑श्चन्‌ i ७॥ 


7, Usik pavako aratih sumedha martesvagniramrto 
ni dhayi. Tyarti dhumamarusam bharibhra- 
ducchukrena sSocisa dyaminaksan. 


Charming, purifying, dynamic, inspiring the 
mind and intelligence to acts of holiness, immortal Agni 
pervades in all mortal forms of nature and humanity. It 
bears and emanates light, sets in motion free fragrance 
for life and, with powerful pure light, fills the heavens 
of space. 


दृशानो रुक्म उर्विया व्य॑द्योदुर्मर्षमायुः fra रुचानः | 
अथिर मृतों अभवद्वयोधियदि' नं द्यौर्जनयंत्सुरेताः ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Drsano rukma urviya vyadyaud durmarsamayuh 


Sriye rucanah. Agniramrto abhavad-vayobhir- 
yadenam dyaur-janayat suretah. 


All watching and self-revealed, glorious Agni 
shines awfully, infinite light, indomitable life and pranic 
energy, all refulgent for the beauty and grace of life. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 45 635 


Agni is immortal and eternal with waves of living energy 
since the heavenly divine life spirit of existence 
generates it as it is. 


यस्ते अद्य कृणवंद्धद्रशोचेऽपृपं देव घुतव॑न्तमगर | 
प्र तं न॑य प्रतरं वस्यो अच्छाऽभि सुम्नं देवभक्तं यविष्ठ ॥ ९ ॥ 


+ 8 Yaste adya krnavad-bhadrasoce "0117477 deva 
ghr-tavantamagne. Pra tam naya prataram vasyo 
accha’bhi sumnam devabhaktam yavistha. 


Agni, holy light of life, self-refulgent generous 
divinity, whoever the dedicated celebrant of the divine 
that prepares and offers you homage and yajna with 
perfect discipline of mind and sense, pray bless him, O 
power ever youthful, with honour and excellence of high 
order and the peace and comfort of a happy home. 


आ तं भ॑ज सौश्रवसेष्व॑ग्र उक्थङक्थ आ भ॑ज शस्यमाने । 
प्रियः सूर्ये प्रियो अग्रा भ॑वात्युज्नातेनं भिनददुज्जनित्वैः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. A tam bhaja sausravasesvagna uktha-uktha a 
bhaja Sasyamane. Priyah surye priyo agna 
bhavatyujjatena bhinadad-ujjanitvaih. 


O self-refulgent Agni, love the celebrant, bless 
him among the celebrities of high renown, love and bless 
him in every celebrative song of adoration, Let him be 
dear to the sun, a darling of the fire to enjoy the favour 
and blessings of these divinities. May he rise with what 
he has created and achieved. May he rise by all that he 
is going to create and achieve. 


त्वामग्रे यज॑माना अनु द्यून्विश्वा ad दधिरे वासीणि। 
त्वया सह द्रविंणमिच्छमाना व्रजं गोमन्तमुशिजो वि 
aa: nee 


636 RGVEDA 


11. Tvamagne yajamana anu dyun visva vasu dadhire 
varyani. Tvaya saha dravinam-icchamana vrajam 
gomantam-uSsijo vi vavruh. 


Agni, lord of light and glory, those who offer 
you yajnic homage and worship are blest with all the 
world’s wealth, peace and comfort of their choice. 
Seeking and aspiring for honour and excellence, loving 
sages and pioneers of progress not only achieve but also 
open the gates of further possibilities on earth abounding 
in lands, cows, and culture of knowledge and grace. 


अस्ताव्यथिर्नरां सुशेवो वैश्वानर safe: सोमंगोपाः। 
अद्वेषे द्यार्वापृथिवी gay देवां धत्त रयिमस्मे सुवीर॑म्‌॥ ९२॥ 


12. Astavyagnirnaram Ssusevo vaisvanara rsibhih 
somagopah. Advese dyavaprthivi huvema deva 
dhatta rayimasme suviram. 


Agni, self-refulgent light and fire of life, blissful 
guardian of humanity, world guide and pioneer of 
leading lights, protector and promoter of the soma 
beauty and glory of life is praised and exalted by seers 
and poetic celebrants. We invoke and pray for the 
blessings of loving heaven and earth free from anger 
and jealousy. We pray may the divinities bear and bring 
us wealth, honour and excellence with brave generations 
of progeny. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 46 


Agni Devata, Vatsapri Bhalandana Rshi 


प्र Mat जातो महान्न॑भोविन्नुषद्ध सीददपामुपस्थे | 
दधिर्यो धायि स ते वयांसि यन्ता वसुनि विधते तनूपाः ॥ ९ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 46 637 


im Pra hota jato mahan nabhovinnrsadva sida- 
dapamupasthe. Dadhiryo dhayi sa te vayamsi 
yanta vasuni vidhate tanupah. 


High priest of the cosmic yajna of creation, 
universally self-manifested, great and glorious, 
pervasive in space and things even beyond the senses, 
abiding in the heart and soul of humanity, Agni rolls at 
the heart of the dynamics of existence. O man, the 
omnipresent light of the universe which holds, controls 
and sustains everything is celebrated in the Vedas and 
worshipped at heart. It is Agni, sustainer of the 
individual body and the cosmic form, ruler and 
controller of everything, that bears and brings you all 
food and energies and blesses you with all wealth, 
honour and excellence of life. 


इमं विधन्तो अपां सधस्थे पशुं न नष्टं पदैरनु ग्मन्‌। गुहा 
चतन्तमुशिजो नमोभिरिच्छन्तो धीरा wats विन्दन्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Imam vidhanto apam sadhasthe pasum na nastam 
padairanu gman. Guha catantamusijo namobhi- 
ricchanto dhira bhrgavo’vindan. 


Just as people search for a lost animal by 
following the foot prints of the animal in the forest, 
similarly seekers and aspirants of this Agni, omnipresent 
in the dynamics of existence, try to search for it by the 
overt as well as covert marks of its presence in the wide 
world of nature, and the deeply dedicated brilliant sages, 
loving and patient in their persistent search with yajnic 
homage, self-dedication and surrender, find it vibrating 
in the cave of the heart and soul. 


638 RGVEDA 


इमं त्रितो भूर्य विन्ददिच्छन्वैभूवसो मूर्धन्यघ्न्यायाः । 
सर शेवृधो जात आ हर्म्येषु नाभिर्यंवां भवति रोचनस्य ॥ ३ ॥ 


Imam trito bhuryavindadicchan vaibhuvaso 
murdhanyaghnyayah. Sa Ssevrdho jata a harmyesu 
nabhiryuva bhavati rocanasya. 


The ardent lover of divinity, Trita, the man 
having got over threefold suffering of body, mind and 
soul through knowledge, good work and meditation, 
finds this Agni presence on top of inviolable nature and 
earthly life in the absolute state of consciousness. Thus 
realised in spiritual manifestation, Agni, harbinger and 
augmenter of spiritual felicity, becomes the centre hold 
of happy homes and a youthful presence of divinity in 
the mind of enlightened souls. 


मन्द्रं होतारमुशिजो नमोभिः प्राञ्चं यज्ञं नेतारंमध्वराणाम्‌ | 
विशामकुण्वन्नर तिं पावकं ह॑व्यवाहं दध॑तो मानुंषेषु ।॥। ४ ॥ 


4. Mandram hotaramuSijo namobhih prancam 
yajnam netaram-adhvaranam. Visam-akrnvann- 
aratim pavakam havyavaham dadhato manusesu. 


Earnest men of love, passion and faith among 
people hold at heart and with homage serve Agni, the 
power that is joyous, yajnic creator giver and organiser, 
foremost leader directly realised, worthy of love and 
reverence, leading power of creative programmes of 
love and non-violence, cleanser and purifier, harbinger 
of holy materials for social development. They hold 
Agni at heart and create and exalt it as the prime power 
among the people. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 46 639 


प्र भूर्जयन्तं महां विपोधां मूरा अमूरं पुरां दर्माण॑म्‌। 
नय॑न्तो गर्भ वनां धियं धुर्हिरिश्मश्रुं नार्वीणां धनर्चम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


Pra bhurjayantam maham vipodham mura 
amuram puram darmanam. Nayanto garbham 
vanam dhiyam dhurhirismasrum narvanam 
dhanarcam. 


Earnest men of love, passion and faith, but, 
being human, limited in intelligence, hold at heart, 
worship and serve Agni pervading and dominating the 
world of existence, great, sustainer of the vibrant wise, 
all knowing and wise, breaker of the strongholds of 
negativity and darkness, the original seed and source 
of life, beatific, supremely intelligent, golden flamed 
and divinely adorable. Men hold at heart, worship and 
serve this omnipresent Agni being more dynamic than 
the dynamics of nature, the instant presence that it is. 


नि पस्त्यासु त्रितः स्त॑भूयन्परिं वीतो aril सीददन्तः | 
अत॑ः संगृभ्या विशां दमूना विधंर्मणायन्त्रेरीयते नृन्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ni pastyasu tritah stabhuyan parivito yonau sida- 
dantah. Atah samgrbhya visam damuna vidhar- 
manayantrairiyate nrn. 


Agni, the light of three worlds, all supportive 
and sustaining, enveloped in light and flames, sits in 
the vedi in the homes as in the midst of regions of the 
universe, and from there, having received the homage 
of yajnic oblations, the generous Agni reaches the 
leading divinities of nature and humanity in various 
ways according to different laws of nature. 


640 RGVEDA 


अस्याजरासो दमामरित्रा अर्च्दूमासो अग्रय॑ः पावकाः। 
श्वितीचय॑ः श्वात्रासो! भुरण्यवो वनर्षदो वायवो न 
सोमाः ॥ ७॥ 


ie Asyajaraso damamaritra arcad-dhumaso agna- 
yah pavakah. Sviticayah svatraso bhuranyavo 
vanarsado vayavo na somah. 


The eternal, adorable and all saving flames and 
fragrances of the powerful fires of this Agni are 
purifying, sanctifying, invigorating, instantly effective, 
pervasive in forests, clouds and waters, and they are 
vibrant and blissful as the soothing pleasures of soma. 


प्र freat भरते वेपो! अयिः प्र वयुनानि चेत॑सा पृथिव्याः 1 
तमायवः शुचय॑न्तं पावकं मन्द्रं होतारं दधिरे यजिष्ठम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Pra jihvaya bharate vepo agnih pra vayunani 
cetasa prthivyah. Tamayavah Sucayantam pava- 
kam mandram hotaram dadhire yajistham. 


Agni, light of omniscience, vests humanity with 
the wisdom, will and power of action, and also with the 
awareness of the laws of the expansive universe, by the 
flames of its powerful Vedic voice of revelations. And 
the people hold, adore, serve and follow that Agni, the 
most lovable and adorable, purifying, sanctifying and 
joyous power which is the high priest of the dynamics 
of existence, the receiver and a thousandfold giver. 


द्यावा waht diet जनिष्टामापस्त्वष्टा भग॑वो यं सहोभिः 1 
gard प्रथमं मातरिश्वा देवास्त॑तक्षर्मन॑वे यज॑त्रम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 
9; Dyava yamagnim prthivi janistam-apastvasta 
bhrgavo yam sahobhih. Ilenyam prathamam 
matarisva devas-tataksur-manave yajatram. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 47 641 


That Agni, self-refulgent spirit and light of the 
universe, is the universal presence which the heaven 
and earth manifest with their vastness, which the blazing 
lights of the stars reveal with their splendour, Agni, the 
first and supreme power and presence, lovable and 
adorable, which the mighty winds and other bright 
divinities of nature reveal for thinking humanity. 


यं wat देवा द॑धिरे हव्यवाहं पुरुस्पृहो मानुषासो asta 
स याम॑न्नये स्तुवते वयो धाः प्र देवयन्यशसः संहि 
पूर्वीः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Yam tva deva dadhire havyavaham purusprho 
manusaso yajatram. Sa yamannagne stuvate vayo 
dhah pra devayan yasasah sam hi purvth. 


Agni, self-refulgent light and spirit of the 
universe whom the divine forces of nature and ardent 
lovers and faithful people adore and worship as loving 
and friendly bearer of the gifts of yajna, we pray, bring 
the food, energy and health and light of life for the 
dedicated celebrant on the highways of existence. May 
the lover of divinity be blest with eternal fame, honour 
and excellence. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 47 
Vaikuntha Indra Devata, Saptagu Angirasa Rshi 

जगृभ्मा ते दक्षिणमिन्द्र हस्तं वसूयवो वसुपते वसूनाम्‌ । 
विद्या हि त्वा गोप॑तिं शूर गोनामस्मभ्यं चित्रं वृष॑णं रयिं 
at: ue 

॥. Jagrbhma te daksinam-indra hastam vasuyavo 
vasupate vasunam. Vidma hi tva gopatim Sura 
gonam-asmabhyam citram vrsanam rayim dah. 


642 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord ruler, controller, promoter and giver 
of the world’s wealth, peace, comfort and joy, we, 
seekers of wealth, honours and excellence, hold on to 
your liberal hand of generosity. Lord of omnipotence, 
we know that you are the ruler and controller of the 
earths, stars, knowledge, wisdom and culture of life. 
Pray bless us with profuse and wondrous source wealth 
of the world with honours, excellence and happiness. 


स्वायुधं स्वव॑सं सुनीथं चतुःसमुद्रं धरुणं veto | 
चर्कृत्यं शंस्यं भूसिवारमस्पभ्यं चित्रं वृष॑णं रयिं र्दाः॥२॥ 


2: Svayudham svavasam sunitham catuhsam-udram 
dharunam rayinam. Carkrtyam samsyam bhi- 
rivaram-asmabhyam citram vrsanam rayim dah. 


We know you, Indra, wielder of mighty 
weapons, unfailing guardian, noble guide, pervasive all 
round in the four quarters of space, treasure-hold of 
universal wealth, constantly doing and glorified, 
adorable and infinite source of choicest boons. Pray bear 
and bring us abundant and wondrous wealth of the 
world. 


सुब्रह्माणं देवव॑न्तं बृहन्त॑मुरुं ग॑भीरं पुथुवुध्नमिन्द्र। 
श्रतऋषिमुग्रम॑भिमातिषाहमस्मभ्यं चित्रं वृषणं र॒यिं 
दाः॥२३॥ 


5 Subrahmanam devavantam brhantam-urum 
gabhiram prthubudhnam-indra. Srutrsimugra- 
mabhimatisaham-asmabhyam citram vrsanam 
rayim dah. 

We know you, Indra, lord of divine speech, 
highest lover of divinities, greatest, boundless, deepest, 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 47 643 


foundation of the expansive universe, exalted among 
seers and sages, blazing lustrous, destroyer of 
opponents. Pray, bear and bring us abundant and 
wondrous wealth of the world. 


सनद्वाजं विप्र॑वीरं cet धनस्पृतं शृशुवांसं सुदक्ष॑म्‌ । दस्युहनं 
पूर्भिदमिन्द्र सत्यमस्मभ्यं चित्रं वृष॑णं रयिं at: ux 


4. Sanadvajam vipraviram tarutram dhanasprtam 
susuvamsam sudaksam. Dasyuhanam purbhidam- 
indra satyam-asmabhyam citram vrsanam rayim 
dah. 


We know you, Indra, abundant in food, energy 
and advancement, commanding the brave and 
intelligent, guiding presence over the ocean of existence, 
infinitely opulent, giver of strength and sure success, 
most powerful, destroyer of evil and negativity, breaker 
of mountainous obstructions, ever true and eternal. O 
lord omnipotent, give us wondrous wealth of life in 
abundance. 


अश्वावन्तं रथिनं वीरव॑न्तं सहस्रिणं शतिनं वाज॑मिन्द्र । 
usald विप्र॑वीरं स्वषमिस्मभ्यं चित्रं वृष॑णं रयिं दाः ॥ ५॥ 


च Asvavantam rathinam viravantam sahasrinam 
Satinam vajam-indra. Bhadrav-atam vipraviram 
svarsamasmabhyam citram vrsanam rayim dah. 


We know you, Indra, equipped with dynamic 
forces, cosmic chariot and brave powers of the world, 
abundant in hundredfold, thousandfold, even infinite 
energy, power and victory, assisted by excellent powers 
of natural law, served by the wise and brave sages, the 
lord all blissful. Pray give us abundant and wondrous 


644 RGVEDA 
wealth of the wonderful world of life. 


प्र ससगुंमृतधीतिं सुमेधां बृहस्पतिं मतिरच्छ जिगाति । य 
ओङ्िरसो नप॑सोपसद्योऽ स्पभ्यं चित्रं वृष॑णं रयिं दाः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Pra saptagum-rtadhitim sumedham brhaspatim 
matiraccha jigdati. Ya angiraso namasopasad- 
yo’smabhyam citram vrsanam rayim dah. 


We know you Indra, lord of the seven-fold world 
of existence sung by seven priests with seven songs of 
the Veda, lord of infinite intelligence, presiding over 
the expansive universe whom the man of intelligence 
adores and who is directly invoked with homage and 
prayer of the man of dynamic faith. Pray give us the 
wondrous wealth of the world full of abundant creative 
possibilities. 
वनीवानो मम॑ दूतास इन्द्रं स्तोमाश्चरन्ति सुमतीरियानाः | 
weet मन॑सा वच्यमाना अस्मभ्यं चित्रं वृष॑णं रयिं 
at: Wie 

ds Vanivano mama dutasa indram stomascaranti 
sumatiriyanah. Hrdisprso manasa vacyamana 
asmabhyam citram vrsanam rayim dah. 

My songs of adoration full of love and faith, 
vibrating with holy thoughts, expressive of the language 
of my mind and touching the heart, reach Indra like 


messengers of my soul. Indra, pray give us wondrous 
wealth of the world in abundance. 


यत्त्वा यामि ake dat इन्द्र बृहन्तं क्षयमसमं जनानाम्‌ । 
अभि तद्‌ द्यावापृथिवी गुंणीतापस्मभ्यं चित्रं वृष॑णं रयिं 
दाः॥८॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 48 645 


8. Yat tva yami daddhi tanna indra brhantam ksaya- 
masamam jananam. Abhi tad dyavaprthivi grni- 
tam-asmabhyam citram vrsanam rayim dah. 


Indra, what I pray for, graciously grant us, a 
boundless expansive abode of joy unlike any house of 
the people on earth. May heaven and earth approve of 
my prayer and join in the supplication. Indra, lord 
omnipotent, give us wondrous wealth of the world, 
creative, abundant, never ending. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 48 
Indra Devata, Vaikuntha Indra Rshi 


अहं भुं वं aaa: पूर्व्यस्पतिरहं धनानि सं ज॑यापि शश्व॑तः | 
मां ह॑वन्ते पितरं न जन्तवोऽहं दाशुषे वि भ॑जापि ari 
नम्‌॥ ९॥ 

0 Aham bhuvam vasunah purvyaspatir-aham 
dhanani sam jayami sasvatah. Mam havante 
pitaram na jantavo’ham dasuse vi bhajami 
bhojanam. 

I am the eternal lord, master protector and 
promoter of the world of existence. I create, raise, protect 
and rule over the eternal wealths of the world. Living 
beings call on me as father, mother and saviour guardian. 
I provide food and sustenance for generous humanity 
dedicated to service and yajna. 


अहमिन्द्रो रोधो aan अथर्वणस्त्रिताय गा अजनयमहेरधि । 
अहं दस्युभ्यः परि नृम्णमा द॑दे गोत्रा शिक्षन्दधीचे मात- 
Reet २॥ 


646 RGVEDA 


2: Ahamindro rodho vakso atharvanastritaya ga 
ajanayamaheradhi. Aham dasyubhyah pari 
nrmnama dade gotra Ssiksan dadhice mata- 
risvane. 


I am the corselet and the centre-hold of pranic 
energy in the state of tension and equilibrium. I create 
the streams of vapour over the cloud and waves of 
energy for the three realms of earth, heaven and the 
middle regions. I collect and disburse wealth of materials 
and energies from and for the dynamics of evolution, 
and I give protection and perception of sense and 
response to the foetus in the mother’s womb. 


Tel त्वष्टा वज्र॑मतक्षदायसं मयि देवासोऽवृजन्नपि क्रतुंम्‌। 
ममानीकं सूर्यस्येव get मामार्यन्ति कृतेन कर्त्वेन 
NBM 


3s Mahyam tvasta vajram-ataksad-adyasam mayi 
devaso’vrjannapi kratum. Mamanikam surya- 
syeva dustaram mamaryanti krtena kartvena ca. 


For me, Tvashta, formative faculty of divine 
nature, creates the thunderbolt of steel. For me, the 
divinities of nature and humanity perform their tasks 
and surrender them unto me. My blazing power is 
insurmountable like the sun’s, and all actions past, 
present and future in nature or humanity must come to 
me for effectual fulfilment. 


अहमेतं गव्ययमश्व्यं पशं पुरीषिणं साय॑केना हिरण्यय॑म्‌। 
पुरू सहस्रा नि शिशामि दाशुषे यन्मा सोमास उक्थिनो 
अमन्दिषुः ॥ ४॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 48 647 


4. Ahametam gavyayamasvyam pasum purisinam 


^° ^~ 


dasuse yanma somasa ukthino amandisuh. 


When men of soma peace and piety chant hymns 
of praise in gratitude to cosmic divinity, it pleases me, 
and this man of perceptive senses, thinking mind, 
penetrative vision, energetic character and a golden 
heart, I vest with the abundance of a thousand capacities 
and capabilities of refinement for rooting out sin and 
evil. 


seat न परां जिग्य इब्दनं न मृत्यवेऽवं तस्थे कदां 
चन। सोममिन्मा सुन्वन्तो याचता वसु न मे पूरवः सख्ये 
रिषाथन ॥ ५॥ 


a. Ahamindro na para jigya iddhanam na mrtya- 
ve’va tasthe kada cana. Somaminma sunvanto 
yacata vasu na me purvah sakhye risathana. 


I am Indra, the powerful, never defeated. None 
can deprive me of my identity. I exist not for death. O 
makers of soma, ask me for the wealth and peace of 
life. Men who abide in friendship with me never come 
to harm. 


अहमे ताज्छाश्व॑सतो द्वाद्वेन्द्रं A ae युध्येऽकुण्वत। 
आओआह्य॑मानां अव हन्म॑नाहनं goat वदच्नन॑मस्युर्नम- 
स्विनः ॥ ६ ॥ 

0; Ahametan-chasvasato dvadvendram ye vajram 


yudhaye’krnvata. Ahvayamanan ava hanmana- 
hanam drlha vadannanamasyur-namasvinah. 


I destroy those challengers who, panting for 


648 RGVEDA 


battle in two’s, raise their thunder weapon and challenge 
the mighty ruling power of the system. I throw them off 
without the weapon, without bending in compromise 
either, but with a determined mind and the warning word 
of the inevitable. 


अभी डेदमेकमेको! अस्मि निष्षाव्भी द्वा किमु त्रय॑: करन्ति | 
wae न पषान्प्रतिं हन्मि भूरि किं at निन्दन्ति शत्र॑वोऽ- 
निन्द्राः ॥ ७॥ 


vis Abhidamekameko asmi nissa-labhi dva kimu 
trayah karanti. Khale na parsan prati hanmi bhuri 
kim ma nindanti Satravo’nindrah. 


I am one, the absolute without a second. I am 
destroyer of the enemies who do not recognise me, Indra, 
centrality of the system. Those who challenge me, I 
destroy, whether it is one or two or three. I crush them 
all as sheaves of corn on the threshing floor. It is a pity 
they revile me. 


अहं गुङ्कभ्यो अतिथिग्वमिष्करमिषं न dad विश्चु धारयम्‌। 
यत्प॑र्णयघ्च उत वां करञ्जहे प्राहं महे वृं त्रहत्ये अशुश्रवि ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Aham gungubhyo atithigvamiskaramisam na 
vrtraturam viksu dharayam. Yat parnayaghna uta 
va karanjahe praham mahe vrtrahatye asuSravi. 


For the protection and advancement of the 
unostentatious people of piety and creativity among 
humanity, I hold and maintain persons and powers that 
are hospitable, producers of food, and destroyers of sin, 
evil and violence, and I protect them like the very 
nourishment of society, since Iam known and celebrated 
for what Iam and what I do: eliminate the forces counter 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 48 649 


to growth, break the cloud for rain, and dispel darkness, 
want and ignorance. 


प्रमे नमी साप्य इषे भुजे भूद्रवामेषे सख्या कुणुत द्विता । 
दिद्युं यद॑स्य समिथेषु मंहयमादिदेनं शंस्य॑मुक्थ्यं करम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


तरः Pra me nami sapya ise bhuje bhud-gavamese 
sakhya krnuta dvita. Didyum yadasya samithesu 
mamhayamadidenam Samsyam-ukthyam karam. 


My celebrant is worthy of love and honour, 
because he is for sustenance, enjoyment and 
procurement of knowledge for society. He is loved and 
honoured for two reasons: for friendship and for 
enlightenment. And when I have given him the light in 
abundance in the battles of life, only then I raise him to 
the position of praise and celebration. 


wan fe-cast सोमो! अन्तर्गोपा नेममाविरस्था कुणोति। 
स frase वृषभं युयुंत्सन्द्रु हस्त॑स्थौ age बन्धो 
अन्तः॥ ९०॥ 


10. Pranemasmin dadrse somo antargopa nemama- 
virastha krnoti. Sa tigmasrngam vrsabham 
yuyutsan druhastasthau bahule baddho antah. 


Among some people, Indra manifests as soma, 
divine spirit of joy, beauty and peace, the protector 
within. Among others, the lord manifests as a bolt from 
the blue, the sudden fall of thunder. Fighting the sharply 
armed, strongly determined forces, he stands and 
subdues like a fury. Thus does Indra manifest, abiding 
within, among all. 


आदित्यानां वसूनां रुद्धिर्याणां देवो देवानां न मिंनापि ert । 
तेमां भद्राय शव॑से ततक्षुरप॑राजितमस्तुं तमरषाव्ठ्टम्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


650 RGVEDA 


11. Adityanam vasunam rudriyanam devo devanam 
na minami dhama. Te ma bhadraya Savase tata- 
ksur-aparajitam-astrtam-asalham. 


Light of lights, generous and potent, I never 
violate, frustrate or transgress the identity, function and 
power of the Adityas, zodiacs of the sun, of Vasus, 
natural spheres of life sustenance, or Rudras, forces such 
as winds and pranic energies. Nor do I ever disturb the 
aditya, rudra and vasu scholars of knowledge and divine 
service. Let them all realise me and manifest my spirit 
and presence for their good and fulfilment of their 
prowess: me, Indra, undaunted, unviolated and 
unopposed. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 49 


Indra Devata, Indra Vaikuntha Rshilndra Devata, Indra 
Vaikuntha Rshi 


अहं दां गृणते yet वस्वहं ब्रहम कृणवं मह्यं वर्ध॑नम्‌। अहं 
dd यज॑मानस्य चोदिताऽय॑ज्वनः साक्षि विश्वस्मिन्भरे ।॥ ९॥ 


Ls Aham dam grnate purvyam vasvaham brahma 
krnavam mahyam vardhanam. Aham bhuvam 
yajamanasya codita’yajvanah saksi visvasmin 
bhare. 


I give to the celebrant of divinity eternal peace 
and freedom of the soul, the highest value of life across 
the world of existence. I create the eternal song of 
existence for self celebration in joyous exaltation. Iam 
the giver of inspiration to the yajnic performer and 
partner in cosmic evolution, and I subdue the negationist 
and uncreative soul in the entire struggle of life for 
evolution. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 49 651 


मां धुरिन्द्रं नाम॑ देवता दिवश्च ग्मश्चापां चं जन्तवः | 
अर्हं हरी वृष॑णा विव्र॑ता रघू अं वज्रं शव॑से धृष्णवा द॑दे ॥ २॥ 


2. Mam dhurindram nama devata divasca gmasca- 
pam ca jantavah. Aham hari vrsana vivrata raghu 
aham vajram 541745८ dhrsnva dade. 


Living beings of land, waters, heaven and all 
spaces and all that move, they accept and adore me in 
faith as Indra, the omnipotent sustainer. I keep the 
twofold dynamic forces of high velocity constantly on 
the move in the cosmic process of evolution, and I, 
power supreme, wield the thunderbolt as my sceptre of 
omnipotent justice and dispensation. 


अहमत्कं कवये शिश्नथं ears कुत्स॑मावमाभिरूतिभिः। 
अहं शुष्ण॑स्य शनथिता aed न यो रर आर्य नाय 
दस्य॑वे ॥ ३॥ 


Ahamatkam kavaye sisnatham hathairaham 
kutsamavamabhirutibhih. Aham susnasya 
$nathita vadharyamam na yo rara aryam nama 
dasyave. 


I pierce and dispel the darkness for the visionary 
seer, giving him the break-through and the light with 
radiations of illuminations and revelation. I protect the 
sage with these modes of protection and advancement. 
I, dispeller and destroyer of drought and want, wield 
the thunderbolt for the negationist and the destroyer 
whom I do not recognise by the name of a creative 
positivist. 


अहं पितेव वेतसूँरभिष्टये तुग्रं कुत्साय eafesi च रन्धयम्‌। 
अहं भुं वं यज॑मानस्य राजनि प्र यद्धरे तुज॑ये न प्रिया- 
धृष ।॥ ४ ॥ 


652 RGVEDA 


4. Aham piteva vetasurnrabhistaye tugram kutsaya 
smadibham ca randhayam. Aham bhuvam yaja- 
manasya rajani pra yadbhare tujaye na priya- 
dhrse. 


Like a father for the good of the man of creative 
generosity, I subdue and throw out the obstinate and 
persistent forces of bruteness, violence and terror. I am 
for the advancement of the man of yajnic creativity and 
enlightenment, and I have nothing good for the violent 
and the bully. 


अहं Cera मृग॑यं श्रुतर्वणे यन्माजिंहीत वयुना चनानुषक्‌ । 
अहं वेशं नम्रमायवेऽकरमहं सव्याय पड्गभिमरन्धयम्‌॥। ५ ॥ 


3, Aham randhayam mrgayam srutarvane yanma- 
Jihita vayuna cananusak. Aham vesam namra- 
mayave’karamaham savyaya padgrbhimaran- 
dhayam. 


I subdue the roaming mind of the learned man 
so that it matures and, always by thought and action, it 
abides in me without going astray. I condition the inner 
spirit of man to humility, love and kindness, and I 
remove the obstacles from the path of the man on way 
to progress. 


अहं स यो Adare बृहद्र॑थं सं वृत्रेव दासं वृ त्रहारुजम्‌। 
यदवर्धय॑नतं प्रथयंन्तमानुषग्दूरे पारे रज॑सो रोचनाकरम्‌ & ॥ 
6. Aham sa yo navavastvam brhadratham sam 
vrtreva dasam vrtraharujam. Yadvardhayantam 


prathayantamanusagdure pare rajaso 
rocanakaram. 


I am that who, like breaking of the cloud, destroy 


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 49 653 


the evil tendencies of body and mind extending to new 
areas like epidemics expanding and covering large 
terrilories, and thus I am that who throw away for all 
time all that sin and darkness which would otherwise 
go on rising and expanding in effect and intensity. 


अहं सूर्य॑स्य OR याम्याशुभिः प्रैतशेथिर्वह॑मान ओज॑सा । 
यन्मां सावो मनुष आहं निर्णिज ऋध॑क्कृषे दासं कृत्व्यं 
Ba: ॥ ७॥ 


(+ Aham suryasya pari yamyasubhih praitasebhir- 
vahamana ojasa. Yanma savo manusa aha nirnija 
rdhak krse dasam krtvyam hathaih. 


I manifest all round in glory as my presence is 
conducted by fast radiations of sun rays, and when the 
celebrant of soma yajna for peace and joy calls on me 
for fulfilment of his essential nature in divinity, 
immediately I strike off all impediments by strokes of 
the thunderbolt as the negativities deserve. 


अहं स॑सहा ARH नहुष्टरः प्राश्रावयं शव॑सा तुर्वशं यदुम्‌ । 
अहं न्यन्यं सह॑सा सह॑स्करं नव त्राध॑तो नवतिं चं 
वक्षयम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Aham saptaha nahuso nahustarah prasravayam 
Savasa turvasam yadum. Aham nyanyam sahasa 
sahaskaram nava vradhato navatim ca vaksayam. 


I am the destroyer of sevenfold darkness (of 
passion, anger, greed, infatuation, pride, fear and 
sorrow) by sevenfold light of divinity. I am the bond 
between humanity and divinity, stronger than strength 
itself. The aspiring man of action and effort, I raise to 
heights of honour and fame. Others, I fortify with 


654 RGVEDA 


courage and patience, and the rising ones, I cause to 
rise higher by nine and ninety times for a full life of 
hundred years. 


अहं सप्त स्रवतो धारयं वृषां द्रविल्वंः पृथिव्यां सीरा अधिं । 
अहमर्णीसि वि तिरामि सुक्रतुर्युधा fad मन॑वे गातु- 
पिष्टये।॥। ९॥ 


9. Aham sapta sravato dharayam vrsa dravitnvah 
prthivyam sira adhi. Ahamarnamsi vi tirami 
sukraturyudha vidam manave gatumistaye. 


Infinite, generous and omnipotent, I cause the 
seven streams to flow and the seven seas to roll on earth, 
and I cause the seven streams of blood and nerve to 
flow in the body. Master of holy action, I provide for 
the river’s flow, and with the dynamics of nature and 
society, I provide the paths of progress for humanity on 
way to fulfilment. 


अहं तदासु धारयं यदासु न देवश्चन त्वष्टाधारयद्ु॑त्‌। 
स्पार्हं गवामूधंःसु वक्षणास्वा मधोर्मधु vars सोम॑मा- 
RAN ९०॥ 


10. 4८7} tadasu dharayam yadasu na devascana 
tvastadharayadruSsat. Sparham gavamudhahsu 
vaksanasva madhormadhu svatryam somama- 
Siram. 

I create and cause to flow that bright fluid in 
these seas and streams of earth and the body which no 
bright power of nature or humanity, not even Tvashta, 
the divine artist, could have created and made to flow: 
the lovely milk in cow’s udders, honey sweet waters in 
the rivers, and the sparkling life blood in the body’s 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 50 655 
veins, the essence of vitality. 


एवा cat इन्द्रो विव्ये नून्प्र Vea मघव। सत्यराधाः । 
विश्वेत्ता ते! हरिवः शचीवोऽ भि तुरासः स्वयशो 
गृणन्ति ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Evadevan indro vivye nrn pra cyautnena magha- 
va satyaradhah. Visvet ta te harivah sacivo’bhi 
turasah svayaso grnanti. 


Thus does Indra, lord of glory and protector of 
Truth and Law, impel and inspire natural and human 
forces of generous and positive action with energy. As 
such, all men of action and excellence over the world 
exalt and adore you, O lord of radiant presence, 
omnipotence and innate excellence, and they feel blest 
in themselves. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 50 
Indra Devata, Indra Vaikuntha Rshi 
प्र वों महे मन्द॑मानायान्धसोऽ ची विश्वानराय favarya | 
इन्द्र॑स्य यस्य सुमखं सहो महि श्रवो नृम्णं च रोद॑सी 
सपर्यत: ।॥ ९॥ ति 


0 Pra vo mahe mandamanayandhaso’ rca visvana- 
raya visvabhuve. Indrasya yasya sumakham saho 
mahi $ravo nrmnam ca rodasi saparyatah. 


You seekers and celebrants, offer reverence and 
homage with service, prayer and selfless work to Indra, 
omnipresent guide, giver of happiness and fulfilment 
to all people of the world, whose holiness of universal 
creativity, strength, grandeur, honour and glory, and 
gracious generosity, both heaven and earth proclaim and 
adore. 


656 RGVEDA 


सो fag सख्या नर्य इनः स्तुतश्चर्कृत्य इन्द्रो माव॑ते नरे । 
विश्वासु ae वाजकृत्येषु सत्पते वृत्रे वाप्स्वभि शर 
मन्दसे ॥ २॥ 


2. So cinnu sakhya narya inah stutascarkrtya indro 
mavate nare. Visvasu dhursu vajakrtyesu satpate 
vrtre vapsvabhi Sura mandase. 


He, Indra, Lord of heaven and earth, leader and 
master of humanity with love and friendship for all, 
loved and adored universally, is worthy of worship for 
all men like me. O lord omnipotent protector and 
promoter of the good and true, you rejoice, exhilarate 
and energise us in all top situations worth challenging 
in the world, in all battles of the brave worth winning, 
and in all states of darkness and showers of the clouds. 


के ते नर॑ इन्द्र ये त॑ इषे ये तें सुम्नं स॑धन्य१ Haar के ते 
वाजायासुयी य हिन्विरे के अप्सु स्वासूर्वरासु पौंस्ये ॥ ३ ॥ 


A Ke te nara indra ye ta ise ye te sumnam sadhan- 
yamiyaksan. Ke te vajayasuryaya hinvire ke apsu 
svasurvarasu paumsye. 


Indra, who are those people that try to win your 
favour of sustenance and enlightenment, who realise 
your divine bliss of peace and well being, who exert 
themselves to win the strength and spirit of life and joy 
of divinity, and who delight in their own acts of 
ambition, manliness and generosity? 


भुवस्त्वमिन्द्र ब्रह्मणा महान्भुवो विश्वेषु सव॑नेषु ate: | 
भुवो नृश्च्यौतो विश्व॑स्मिन्भरे ज्येष्ट॑र्च मन्त्रों fava- 
चर्षणो ॥ ४ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 50 657 


4. Bhuvastvamindra brahmana mahan bhuvo 
visvesu savanesu yajniyah. Bhuvo nrnscyautno 
visvasmin bhare jyesthasSca mantro visvacar- 
sane. 


Indra, you are great by virtue of your infinity 
and eternity of Being and the eternal Word of Being 
and Divinity. In all holy works of creativity in the world, 
you are adorable. In all struggles of existence, you are 
the power and inspiration of humanity. And you are the 
first, highest and the most sacred chant of human 
consciousness of divinity, O lord all watching and 
inspiring for the world. 


अवा नु कृं ज्यायान्यज्ञव॑नसो महीं त ओमात्रां कृष्टयो विदुः | 
असो नु कमजरो वधीश्च विश्वेदेता सव॑ना तूतुमा 
कुषे ॥ ५॥ 


5. Ava nu kam jyayan yajnavanaso mahim ta oma- 
tram krstayo viduh. Aso nu kamajaro vardhasca 
visvedeta savana tutuma krse. 


Indra, you are great, pray protect and promote 
the lovers and performers of the divine yajna of faith 
and creativity. People know the grandeur and greatness 
of your power of protection. Unaging and imperishable 
you are, pray promote life and all. Indeed, ultimately, it 
is you who effect all these acts of creation and progress 
with strength and speed. 


एता विश्वा सव॑ना तूतुमा कषे स्वयं Gat सहसो art 
दधिषे। वराय ते पात्रं धर्मणे तनां यज्ञो मन्त्रो ब्रह्योद्य॑तं 
वचं: ॥ ६ ॥ 


658 RGVEDA 


6. Eta visva savana tutuma krse svayam suno sahaso 
yani dadhise. Varaya te patram dharmane tana 
yajno mantro brahmodyatam vacah. 


You perform all these acts of holiness, O inspirer 
of force and power, which you hold and sustain. May 
your protection be for safety and peace, wealth for 
Dharma mantra, for communion, and the song be for 
Divinity. 

ये ते विप्र ब्रह्मकृतः सुते सचा ada च वसुनश्च दावने । 
प्र ते सुम्नस्य मन॑सा पथा भुंवन्मदे सुतस्य सोम्यस्या- 
न्ध॑सः॥ ७॥ 


Ti Ye te vipra brahmakrtah sute saca vasunam ca 
vasunasca davane. pra te sumnasya manasa patha 
bhuvan made sutasya somyasyandhasah. 


Lord of vibrant generosity, the celebrants of 
divinity in song together in this assembly wait for your 
gift of the highest wealth of wealths. May they, with 
their heart and soul and by the path of rectitude, abide 
in the peace and joy of the soma gift of your grace of 
spiritual food they pray for. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 51 
Agni (1, 3, 5, 7, 9), Devah (2, 4, 6, 8) Devata, Devah (1, 
3, 5, 7, 9), Agni Sauchika (2, 4, 6, 8) Rshis 


This sukta is a dialogue between the Devas such 
as Mitra, Varuna, pranic energies such as prana and 
udana and Agni. Agni here means many forms of energy 
of the world of existence: earthly agni that is fire, middle 
regions’ agni that is electricity, and self-refulgent agni 
that is light of the solar region. In Vedic literature, it 


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 51 659 


means energy not only in these forms but also in many 
more forms, that is, the vital heat of life, the passion for 
living, the spirit of life, the body heat, the vital virility, 
life itself, the soul and the cosmic spirit. This wide 
context is relevant to the present sukta. 


महत्तदुल्लं स्थविरं तदांसीदयोनाविंष्टितः प्रविवेशिथापः | 
विश्वां अपश्यद्भहुधा ते अग्रे जात॑वेदस्तन्वों देव एक॑ः ॥ ९ ॥ 


I Mahat tadulbam sathaviram tadasidyenavis-titah 
pravivesithapah. Visva apasyadbahudha te agne 
jatavedastanvo deva ekah. 


O Agni, Jataveda, cognizable in existential 
forms, great is that form, that cover, that medium, fine 
and firm, clothed in which you enter upon the course of 
life in existence. There is one Divinity which watches 
all your body forms existent in nature in various media 
in the world. 


को मां cael कतमः स देवो यो A तन्वो! बहुधा पर्यपश्यत्‌ | 
क्वाहं मित्रावरूणा श्चियन्त्यगर्विश्वाः समिधो देवयानीं: ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Ko ma dadarsa katamah sa devo yo me tanvo 
bahudha paryapasyat. Kvaha mitravaruna 
ksiyantyagnervisvah samidho devayanth. 


O Devas, who saw me? Which is that Divine 
who sees me in my body forms in so many ways? O 
Mitra and Varuna, O sun and moon, O vital energies of 
prana and udana, say where abide all my bright and 
vital waves and flames of fire and energy in the world 
which light up the paths of divinity and lead humanity 
there? 


660 RGVEDA 


testa त्वा बहुधा जातवेदः प्रविं्टमगे अप्स्वोष॑धीषु । तं 
त्वां यमो अचिकेच्चित्रभानो दशान्तरुष्याद॑तिरोच- 
मानम्‌॥ ३॥ 


3. Aicchama tva bahudha jatavedah pravista-magne 
apsvosadhisu. Tam tva yamo acikeccitra-bhano 
dasantarusyadatirocamanam. 


O Jataveda, manifest in all that is born and come 
into existence, Agni, we seek for you, co-existent as 
you are with all waters, motions, plants and trees. Yama, 
the One Divine who directs all things in existence knows 
you and watches you, O mysterious presence of infinite 
forms, shining, illuminating, energising and vitalising 
life from the depth of ten orders of existence: ten sense 
organs, ten pranas, and ten physical abodes, 1.6., earth, 
skies, heavens of light, the fire, electric energy, the sun, 
waters, plants, trees and the living bodies. 


होत्रादहं व॑रुणा बिभ्यदायं नेदेव मा युनजन्नत्र देवाः । तस्यं 
मे तन्वो! बहुधा निविं्टा एतमर्थं न चिंकेताहमभिः ॥  ॥ 


4. Hotradaham varuna bibhyadayam nedeva ma 
yunajannatra devah. Tasya me tanvo bahudha 
nivista etamartham na ciketahamagnih. 


O Varuna, lord of judgement and choice, 
soothing spirit of waters cool in peace, afraid of self- 
sacrifice to the senses and to the fiery divinities, I, the 
soul, come to you from the burning fire. Here neither 
the senses nor the divinities would consume me. As such 
my body and body organs with all waves and vibrations 
are completely merged in you. Here I know no such 
purpose as there in the fire. 


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 51 661 


एहि मनुर्देवयुर्यज्ञकामोऽरं कृत्या तम॑सि sere । सुगान्पथः 
कुणुहि देवयानान्वह हव्यानि सुमनस्यमानः ॥ ५॥ 


+ Ehi manurdevayuryajnakamo’ramkrtya tamasi 
ksesyagne. Sugan pathah krnuhi devayanan 
vaha havyani sumanasyamanah. 


Agni, come, you are the soul, director of your 
divine senses and mind, thoughtful and intelligent, lover 
of divinities, dedicated to yajna. But you are still steeped 
in darkness. Come, get ready for yajnic performer. 
Prepare the paths of divinity for yourself and, happy at 
heart, carry the holy fragrances to the divinities by yajna. 


अगः पूर्वे भ्रात॑रो stef ai र थीवा्ध्वानमन्वावरीवुः। 
तस्माद्भिया व॑रुण दूरमायं गौरो न क्षेप्नोरविजे ज्यायाः ॥ & ॥ 


6. Agneh purve bhrataro arthametam rathiv- 
adhvanamanvavarivuh. Tasmadbhiya varuna 
duramayam gauro na ksepnoravije jyayah. 


O Varuna, earlier my brothers created the same 
paths for themselves as a charioteer selects the road for 
himself, but they went off. For that reason I have come 
this far to you here, and I tremble with fear as a deer 
shakes with fear from the twang of the bow string of a 
hunter. 


कुर्मस्त आयुर जरं यदग्रे य्था युक्तो जातवेदो न feat: 1 
अथौ वहासि सुमनस्यमानो भागं देवेभ्यो हविषं 
सुजात U9 

re Kurmasta adyurajaram yadagne yatha yukto 


jatavedo na risyah. Atha vahasi sumanasya-mano 
bhagam devebhyo havisah sujata. 


662 RGVEDA 


O Agni, O soul, known as born in the body, we 
create and ordain an unaging life for you so that joined 
to that life divine you come to no hurt, nor would you 
die, and then, happy at heart, happily born, you carry to 
the divinities that share of the yajnic homage which is 
meant to be dedicated to them. 


प्रयाजान्पे अनुयाजांश्च केव॑त्मानूर्जस्वन्तं हविषो! द॑त्त 
भागम्‌। घृतं चापां पुरुषं चौष॑धीनामगेश्च॑ दीर्घमायुरस्तु 
देवाः ।॥ ८ ॥ 


~ ° ~ ~“ ^ 


haviso datta bhagam. Ghrtam capam purusam 
causadhinamagnesca dirghamayurastu devah. 


O Devas, give me the prayaja, food part of yajnic 
offerings, and the anuyaja, supplimentary part of food, 
and that part of the offerings which gives energy, light 
and vision, the lustre of liquid energy, vitality from herbs 
and plants, long age of health for the soul and freedom 
from death. O Devas, brilliant, illuminative generous 
givers. Give me only that part which is mine. 


तवं प्रयाजा अनुयाजाश्च hae ऊर्जस्वन्तो हविषं: सन्तु 
भागाः। त्वाये यज्ञो ३ऽ यमस्तु सर्वस्तुभ्यं नमन्तां 
प्रदिशश्चतस्रः ॥ ९॥ त 

0. Tava prayaja anuyajasca kevala urjasvanto 
havisah santu bhagah. Tavagne yajno’yamastu 
sarvas-tubhyam namantam pradisas-catasrah. 


O Agni, O Soul, yours is the prayaja part of 
yajnic food, yours is anuyaja, the supplimentary part. 
Let all this be for experience and for the realisation of 
your essential spiritual nature. And let your share be 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 52 663 


full of energy and light for you. Indeed all this yajna of 
your individual existence is for you, the soul, as the 
cosmic yajna of existence is for the cosmic soul. Let it 
not go counter to the soul. Let all four directions of 
space and all that therein is be for experience and self- 
realisation. (Let it be subservient to the soul, let not the 
soul be lost in the experience of it.) 


Mandala 10/Sukta 52 
Vishvedevah Devata, Agni Sauchika Rshi 


fava देवाः शास्तन मा यथेह eat वृतो मनवै यच्चिषद्यं | 
wooed भागधेयं यथां वो येन॑ पथा ह॒व्यमा वो वहानि ॥ ९॥ 


I, Visve devah sastana ma yatheha hota vrto 
manavai yannisadya. Pra me bruta bhagadhe- 
yam yatha vo yena patha havyama vo vahani. 


O Vishvedevas, generous brilliancies of nature 
and humanity, instruct me that, selected, elected, 
appointed and seated in my position as organiser and 
high priest of the yajnic social system, how I should 
think and act and how and in what way or ways I shall 
carry out my responsibilities and fulfil my obligations 
to you in the social system to offer you your share of 
sustenance. 


अहं होता न्य॑सीदं यजीयान्विश्वे देवा मरुतो! मा aaa । 
अहरहरण्विनाध्वर्यवं वां ब्रह्मा समिद्ध॑वति साहु ति- 
्वाम्‌॥ २॥ 

2 Aham hota nyasidam yajiyan visve deva maruto 


ma junanti. Aharaharasvinadhvaryavam vam 
brahma samidbhavati sahutirvam. 


664 RGVEDA 


I am the hota, performer of yajna, calling to the 
fire and offering oblations into the vedi, seated on the 
vedi one in unison with all people. All divinities of the 
world and Maruts, vibrant youth, like winds of storm, 
inspire and energise me. O Ashvins, complementary 
powers of nature and humanity, men and women, 
teachers and preachers in the socio-economic system, 
yours is the conduct of the organisation of yajna day by 
day at and from the very rise of dawn. Let the Vedic 
scholar, bright and cool like the moon be the Brahma, 
presiding high priest, and act like ignition and 
illumination of the fire, and let that light and fire be the 
concluding oblation into the fire. 


अयं यो होता किरु स यमस्य Hales यत्समञ्जन्ति देवाः | 
अहरहर्जायते मासिमास्यथा देवा द॑धिरे हव्यवाहम्‌ 3 ॥ 


3 Ayam yo hota kiru sa yamasya kamapyuhe yat 
samanjanti devah. Aharaharjayate masimasya- 
tha deva dadhire havyavaham. 


Who is this hota, yajnic performer, who carries 
out any and all the powers and obligations of Yama, 
order and controller of the whole system, whom all the 
devas, brilliancies of the system, anoint, prepare and 
honour? He rises higher and higher day by day, month 
by month, and all the devas, divine powers, uphold and 
support him while he conducts the vital economy of the 
yajnic system. 


मां देवा दधिरे हव्यवाहमप॑म््युक्तं बहु कृच्छ्रा चर॑न्तम्‌ | 
अयिर्विंद्वान्यज्ञं न॑: कल्पयाति पञ्च॑यामं Grad aa- 
त॑न्तुम्‌॥ ४ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 52 665 


4. Mam deva dadhire havyavaham-apamluktam 
bahu krcechra carantam. Agnirvidvan yajnam nah 
kalpayati pancayamam trivrtam saptatan-tum. 


Me the devas, divines, honour and uphold while 
I conduct the powers and obligations of the yajnic 
system for them and face the many difficult and most 
laborious situations even in the minutest details with 
perfect discipline. Hence they all say: This Agni, the 
light and fire of the system, well aware of life and its 
conduct, accomplishes the yajna, threefold, five ways 
and seven stages. 


आ at यक्ष्यमृतत्वं सुवीरं यथा at देवा वरिंवः कराणि । 
आ बाह्यर्वज्रमिन्द्र॑स्य धेयामथेमा विश्वाः पृत॑ना जयाति ॥ ५॥ 


=f A vo yaksyamrtatvam suviram yatha vo deva 
varivah karani. A bahvorvajramindrasya dheya- 
mathema visvah prtana jaydati. 


O devas, as I do honour and service to you in 
the best manner, as I pray for your gifts of immortality, 
virility and vitality, and as I hold in hands the ruler’s 
thunderbolt of justice and dispensation, this way does 
man win all the battles of life. 


त्रीणि श॒ता त्री सदहरस््राण्ययिं त्रिंशच्च देवा नव॑ चासपर्यन्‌ । 
ओश्चन्घुतैरस्तुणन्बर्हिर॑स्मा आदिन्दधोतारं न्य॑सादयन्त ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Trini Sata tri sahasranyagnim trimsacca deva 
nava casaparyan. Auksan ghrtair-astrnan 
barhirasma adiddhotaram nyasadayanta. 


Three thousand three hundred thirty and nine 
are the divinities that serve this yajaka, Agni, shower it 
with brightest ghrta and cover the vedi with holy grass, 


666 RGVEDA 


and they seat the high priest over the yajna of the cosmos, 
nature, society, and also the individual living soul. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 53 
Agni (1-3, 6-11), Devah (4-5) Devata, Devah (1-3, 6-11), 
Sauchika Agni (4-5) Rshis 


यमैच्छाम मन॑सा सो ३ऽयमार्गाद्यज्ञस्य॑ विद्वान्परुषण्चि- 
कित्वान्‌। स नो यक्षदेवताता यजीयान्नि fe षत्सदन्तरः 
पूर्वो अस्मत्‌ Bu 


I; Yamaicchama manasa so’yamagddyajnasya 
vidvan parusascikitvan. Sa no yaksad devatata 
yajtyan ni hi satsadantarah purvo asmat. 


He whom we Devas loved and sought with heart 
and mind is come. He knows the integrated process of 
yajnic union, knows all and every part of it. May this 
unifying principle of life, most venerable, join us here 
in the yajna of life, infact it was abiding here itself within 
before we joined. (The Devas are the divine principles 
and faculties of life, and Agni whom the Devas love 
and seek is the life itself, the soul, which integrates the 
faculties with the identity that the soul acquires with 
the body and the faculties, all united in one organismic 
individual form. Reference may be made to Aitareya 
Upanishad, ch. 1, 2 and Atharva-Veda, 5, 30, 17). 


अराधि होता निषदा यजीयानभि प्रयांसि सुधितानि fe 
ख्यत्‌। यजामहै यज्ियान्हन्त दे वां ईव्छामहा fear 
आज्येन ॥ २॥ 

me Aradhi hota nisada yajityanabhi prayamsi 
sudhitani hi khyat. Yajamahai yajniyan hanta 
devan tlamaha idyan ajyena. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 53 667 


The high priest, Agni, lovable and adorable, is 
seated on the vedi. Honoured and adored, he also 
observes with interest and favour the sacred offerings 
placed with faith and reverence on the vedi in homage. 
We adore and worship all the divine powers that deserve 
and command our worship and adoration. They deserve 
service and we adore and worship them with the homage 
of ghrta and fragrant havi. 


साध्वीम॑कर्दूववींतिं नो अद्य aaa Rrerfaara गुह्याम्‌। 
स आयुरागात्सुर dart भद्राम॑कर्दवद्रतिं नो अद्य ॥ ३ ॥ 


६ Sadhvimakardevavitim no adya yajnasya jihva- 
mavidama guhyam. Sa ayuragat surabhir-vasano 
bhadramakardevahutim no adya. 


May Agni beatify our yajnic service to the 
assemblage of divinities on the vedi today so that we 
may have their blessings and hear the secret voice of 
divinity by the flames. May the life spirit, harbinger of 
health and happiness, come today bearing the fragrance 
of life and render our divine worship full of blessings 
and all round well being. 


तदद्य वाचः Nerd म॑सीय Sarat अभि देवा stats | 
waite उत य॑ज्ञियासः पञ्च॑ जना ममं होत्रं जुषध्वम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Tadadya vacah prathamam mastya yenasuran 
abhi deva asama. Urjada uta yajniyasah panca 
jana mama hotram jusadhvam. 


I, Agni, presiding power of corporate life by 
yajna, now think and meditate upon that first, highest 
and eternal Word, AUM, by which we, yajnic souls 
dedicated to divinity, may overcome the evil adversaries. 


668 RGVEDA 


Let all those who live on energy foods and join together 
for noble creative works in the spirit of yajna, and the 
people of all the five classes and communities listen 
and follow my call to action. 


पञ्च जना मम॑ होत्रं जुंषन्तां गोजाता उत ये यज्ञियासः 1 
पृथिवी नः पार्थि वात्पात्वंह॑सो ऽ न्तरिश्चं दिव्यात्पात्व- 
स्मान्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Panca jana mama hotram jusantam gojata uta 
ye yajniyasah. Prhivi nah parthivat patvamha- 
so’ntariksam divyat patvasman. 


Let the people of all five classes and 
communities listen to my call to action, children of the 
earth, lovers of the common voice of divinity, and all of 
those dedicated to united action for creativity and 
production, and may mother earth protect us against 
sin and evil earthly, and may the skies protect us against 
all dangers from the space above. 


तन्तुं तन्वत्रज॑सो भानुमन्विहि ज्योतिष्मतः पथो ter धिया 
कृतान्‌ । अनुल्बणं aad जोगुवामपो मनुंभव जनया दैव्यं 
जन॑म्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tantum tanvan rajaso bhanumanvihi jyotis-matah 
patho raksa dhiya krtan. Anulvanam vayata 
jJoguvamapo manurbhava janaya daivyam janam. 


Spinning and expanding the thread of life divine, 
pursue the light of the sun across the skies and space. 
Protect and follow the paths of light created by the wise 
with thought and vision. Weave the web of the sinless 
spontaneous men of word and vision in action. Be Man, 
build up a community of enlightened people, human 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 53 669 
and close to divinity. 


अक्षानहो नह्यतनोत सोम्या इष्कुणुध्वं WT ओत पिंशत | 
अष्टावन्धुरं वहताभितो रथं येन॑ देवासो अनयन्नभि 
प्रियम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


ee Aksanaho nahyatanota somya iskrnudhvam 
rasana ota pimsata. Astabandhuram vahata-bhito 
ratham yena devaso anayannabhi priyam. 


Lovers of Soma, peace and joy, bind the traces, 
harness the horses, tighten the reins and refine them to 
perfection, move on the eightfold chariot all round, the 
chariot by which the divines bring in the dearest 
treasures of life. (This mantra is a metaphor of the 
eightfold path of yoga from the control of senses and 
mind to the attainment of samadhi which marks the 
communion of the soul with divinity.) 


अश्म॑न्वती रीयते सं र॑भध्वमुत्तिष्ठत प्र त॑रता सखायः । stat 
जहाम ये असन्नशेवाः शिवान्वयमुत्तरेमाभि वाजान्‌ ¢ ॥ 
8. Asmanvati riyate sam rabhadhvam-uttisthata pra 
tarata sakhayah. Atra jahama ye asann-asevah 
Sivan vayam-uttaremabhi vajan. 
The rocky river of life flows on in flood. Hold 
on fast together, friends, rise and swim to the shore. let 


us jettison all that is inauspicious here. Let us swim and 
cross over to attain the trophies of victory. 


त्वष्टा माया वेदपसापपस्त॑मो बिश्चत्पात्रा देवपानानि 
शन्त॑मा। शिशीते नूनं प॑र शुं स्वायसं येन॑ वृश्चादेतशो 
ब्रह्मण-स्पतिः ॥ ९ ॥ 


670 RGVEDA 


9. Tvasta maya vedapasamapastamo bibhrat patra 
devapanani Santama. Sisite nunam parasum 
svayasam yena vrscadetaso brahma-nasptatih. 


The cosmic maker Tvashta, supreme expert of 
the artists of the world, knows the mysteries of karma 
and the secrets of fortune or misfortune, and most 
beneficent as he is, he carves and fills the most delicious 
cups of joy for the holies. The lord of cosmic wisdom 
also makes and sharpens the golden axe of knowledge, 
justice and dispensation whereby the man who attains 
to this prize knowledge cuts at the root of his karmic 
tree and drinks the nectar of universal sweets of freedom 
from the divine cup. 


सतो नूनं कवयः सं शिशीत वाशीभिर्या भिर मृताय तक्ष॑थ | 
विद्वांसं: पदा wal कर्तन येन॑ देवासो अम तत्वर्मा- 
WT: NOM 


10. Sato nunam kavayah sam SiSsita vasibhiryabhira- 
mrtaya taksatha. Vidvamsah pada guhyani 
kartana yena devaso amrtatvamanasuh. 


O men of vision and seekers of divinity, sharpen 
and refine your golden axe of knowledge with the voice 
of Brahmanaspati, lord omniscient, by which you 
prepare for the attainment of immortality. O scholars of 
knowledge, carve out the mystical paths to divinity, 
work out the progressive stages by which the seekers 
of divinity attained to the nectar of life eternal. 


TY योषामदंधुर्वत्समासन्य॑पीच्येन मनसोत Rreati स 
विश्वाहा सुमन। योग्या अभि सिषासनिर्वनते कार 
इज्ितिम्‌॥ ९९॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 54 671 


11. Garbhe yosamadadhurvatsamasanyapicyena 
manasota jihvaya. Sa visvaha sumana yogya abhi 


The devas, seekers of divinity, hold the Word 
of omniscience like the sacred vedi fire in the depth of 
their mind alongwith the reality of existence signified 
by the Word, and they hold it with the sense of clarity 
of expression by their tongue controlled and disciplined 
in the mouth. Indeed such a man of divine word and 
action in control is always happy at heart and all round 
efficient, and only such a man wins the victory prizes 
of life. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 54 
Indra Devata, Brhaduktha Vamadevya Rshi 


तां सुते कीर्तिं म॑घवन्पहित्वा यत्त्वा भीते रोद॑सी अहयेताम्‌। 
weal देवां आतिरो दासमोजंः प्रजायै त्वस्यै यदशिंश्च 
इन्द्र ।॥ ९॥ 


ll, Tam su te kirtim maghavan mahitva yat tva bhite 
rodasi ahvayetam. Pravo devan atiro dasamojah 
prajayai tvasyai yadasiksa indra. 


Indra, lord of glory, I celebrate that renown of 
yours by the greatness of which the earth and heaven, 
both struck with awe, call upon you and glorify, by 
which you protect the holy and generous brilliancies, 
subdue the unholy negatives and destroyers, and by 
which you award the strength and lustre of life to your 
people. 


यदचरस्तन्वा वावृधानो ्छानीन्द्र प्रब्रुवाणो जनेषु । 
मायेत्सा ते यानि युद्धान्याहरनाद्य शतं ननु पुरा विवित्से ॥ २ ॥ 


672 RGVEDA 


2 Yadacarastanva vavrdhano balanindra prabru- 
vano janesu. Mayet sa te yani yuddhanyahur- 
nadya Satrum nanu pura vivitse. 


As you pervade among people, self-exalting by 
the power of your presence, and thereby manifest your 
own glory, and as poets and sages sing and celebrate 
your battles against evils within and without in the world 
of humanity, all this glory is but your own essential 
divine potential, and that is why you have had no enemy 
ever before nor do you have any even now. 


क डउनु ते aie: समस्याऽस्मत्पूर्वं ऋषयोऽन्त॑मापुः | 
यन्मातरं च पितरं च साकमज॑नयथास्तन्व4 : स्वायाः ॥ ३ ॥ 


Ka u nu te mahimanah samasya’smat purva 
rsayo’ntamapuh. Yanmataram ca pitaram ca 
sakam-ajanayathas-tanvah svayah. 


Which ancient sages and seers before us could 
ever comprehend the bounds of this absolute glory of 
yours since you brought into existence both earth and 
heaven together as mother and father of life from your 
own material power of Prakrti? 


चत्वारिं ते असुयीणि नामाऽदाभ्यानि महिषस्य सन्ति। 
त्वमङ्क तानि विश्वनि वित्से येभिः कर्मणि 
मघवञ्चकर्थ is ॥ 

4. Catvari te asuryani nama’dabhyani mahisasya 
santi. Tvamanga tani visvani vitse yebhih karmani 
maghavancakartha. 


O great and glorious Indra, four are your states 
of being, four the modifications of existential 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 54 673 


manifestation, all of them living and imperishable, 
which all, O dear lord of life of the universe, you know 
and by which, O lord of cosmic majesty, you perform 
the acts of universal life in existence. 


(The four states of cosmic being are waking, 
dreaming, sleeping and the transcendent Absolute. Four 
states of existence are generation, sustenance, 
withdrawal and the trans-existential state. Four Prakrti 
modifications are Prakrti, mahat, ahankara and the 
specifics of material and mental forms of physical, 
biological and psychic stages of evolution which are 
then absorbed into the Absolute state at the end.) 
Reference may also be made to ‘Om’ which is the divine 
Word, the name of divinity consisting of four matras A, 
U, and M and the fourth is silent and absolute. ‘A’ refers 
to the waking, that is, the objective state of existence 
which is the subject of science. ‘U’ refers to the 
imaginative and subjective state which is the subject of 
psychology and meditation upto the stage of ‘vitark’ 
and ‘vichara’ samadhi, and ‘M’ refers to the sleep state 
which is realisable in ‘Ananda’ state of Samadhi. All 
these are covered under the Samprajnata Samadhi. The 
fourth, transcendent state, is realisable in Asamprajnata 
samadhi which is Transcendental Meditation). 


त्वं विश्वां दधिषे केव॑त्ानि यान्याविर्या च गुहा adr 
काममिन्मे मघवन्मा वि तारीस्त्वमाज्ञाता त्वमिन्द्रासि 
दाता।॥ ५॥ 

a: Tvam visva dadhise kevalani yanyavirya ca guha 
vasuni. Kamaminme maghavan ma vi tari- 


You bear and absolutely comprehend all the 


674 RGVEDA 


treasures of existence, manifest as well as unmanifest. 
Pray do not frustrate my longing for fulfilment. Indra, 
you are the knower, the ordainer and the giver. 


यो अद॑धाज्न्योतिंषि ज्योतिरन्तर्यो असरंजन्मधुना सं ae । 
अधं प्रियं शूषमिन्द्राय मन्म॑ ब्रह्मकृतो' बृहदुक्थाद- 
ara ६॥ 


6. Yo adadhajjyotisi jyotirantaryo asrjanmadhuna 
sam madhuni. Adha priyam Susamindraya manma 
brahmakrto brhadukthadavaci. 


In honour of Indra who vests light in the stars 
and creates honey sweets of life with the honey sweets 
of divinity, and to that Indra, poets of divinity sing with 
love and faith songs of thought, beauty and power from 
their articulate meditation on the Infinite. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 55 
Indra Devata, Vrhaduktha Vamadevya Rshi 


दूरे तन्नाम गुह्यं परायचर्यत्त्वां भीते ह्वयेतां योधे । उद्‌॑- 
स्तभ्नाः पृथिवीं द्यामभीके भ्रातुः पुत्रान्म॑घवन्तित्वि- 
AUT: WU 


I; Dure tannama guhyam paracairyat tva bhite 
ahvayetam vayodhai. Udastabhnah prthivim 
dyamabhike bhratuh putran maghavan titvisanah. 


Far too distant and far too deep is that name 
and lustre, O lord of glory, Indra, for indifferent people 
to understand and appreciate which the heaven and earth 
struck with awe call upon for sustenance. O lord of glory, 
you sustain both heaven and earth in space in 
complementarity with each other and illuminate the rays 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 55 675 


of the sun and lightning of the cloud, both brotherly 
providers of sustenance to life. 


महत्तन्नाम गुह्यं पुरुस्पृग्येन भूतं जनयो येन भव्य॑म्‌ । 
प्रलं जातं ज्योतिर्यदस्य प्रियं प्रियाः सम॑विशन्त पञ्च॑ 1 २॥ 


2. Mahat tannama guhyam purusprg yena bhutam 
jJanayo yena bhavyam. Pratnam jatam jyotirya- 
dasya priyam priyah samavisanta panca. 


Great and deeply glorious is that name and 
divine presence universally loved and adored by which 
you create all that has been and that which would be. 
That light and glory of this Indra is eternal, ever existent 
and dear to all into which all the five people that love 
him and are dear to him and all the five elements of 
nature retire (when the cycle of existence has run a full 
circle). 


आ रोद॑सी अपृणादोत मध्यं पञ्च॑ Sat ऋतुशः AAA | 
चतुस्तिंशता पुरुधा वि च॑ष्टे सरूपेण ज्योतिषा वित्र 
तेन ॥ ३॥ 


3 A rodasi aprnadota madhyam pajica devan rtusah 
saptasapta. Catustrimsata purudha vi caste 
sarupena jyotisa vivratena. 


That glorious presence pervades and fills heaven 
and earth and the middle regions, fills and energises 
the five divine elements, five senses, five pranas, seven 
regions of the universe, seven rays of light, forty nine 
orders of the winds, all according to the seasons of time, 
and it watches and illuminates thirty four orders of 
divine powers of eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve 
Adityas, nature’s nourishment by Prajapati, nature’s 


676 RGVEDA 


energy of fire, electricity and light, and Vak, the 
articulation of consciousness, all in many ways, with 
different functions and effects. 


यदुष ओच्छः प्रथमा विभानामजनयो येनं पुष्टस्य पुष्टम्‌ । 
यत्ते जामित्वमवरं पर॑स्या महन्मं हत्या असुरत्वमेकम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Yadusa aucchah prathama vibhanamajanayo 
yena pustasya pustam. Yat te jamitvamavaram 
parasya mahanmahatya asuratvamekam. 


O Dawn, when you arise and shine first of the 
lights of the lord, Indra, and bring in fresh life for the 
world generated and nourished by Indra, then your 
motherly love for humanity is the one unique and great 
life giving blessing of the supreme spirit of divinity for 
humanity on this earth. 


विधुं दद्राणं waa बहूनां galt सन्तं पलितो ज॑गार । 
देवस्य॑ पश्य काव्यं महित्वाऽद्या ममार स ह्यः स्मान ।॥ ५॥ 


Vidhum dadranam samane bahunam yuvanam 
santam palito jagara. Devasya pasya kavyam 
mahitva’dya mamara sa hyah samana. 


Old age consumes even the youthful man of 
versatile action whom many fear to face in battle and 
flee. Look at the inscrutable power of the lord divine 
by whose inevitable law of mutability the man who was 
living yesterday is dead today, and the one that dies 
today would be living to tomorrow. 


शाक्मना शाको अरूणः सुपर्णं आ यो महः शूर॑ः सना- 
oie: । यच्िकेत॑ सत्यमित्तन्न मोघं वसु स्पार्हमुत जेतोत 
arate 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 55 677 


6. Sakmana Sako arunah suparna त yo mahah Surah 
sanadanilah. Yacciketa satyamit tanna mogham 
vasu sparhamuta jetota data. 


He is Almighty by might supreme, blazing 
lustrous, high flying and all caring, great, brave, 
eternally unbound by space. What he knows is truth 
inviolable, never infructuous, he is universal haven, 
lovable, all conqueror, all giving. 


tude वृष्ण्या dai येभिरौश्च॑दवृत्रहत्याय वज्री । ये 
कर्मणः क्रियमाणस्य मह ऋतेकर्ममुदजायन्त देवाः ॥ ७ ॥ 


ध Aibhirdade vrsnya paumsyani yebhirauksad- 
vrtrahatyaya vajrt. Ye karmanah kriyamanasya 
mahna rte-karmam-udajayanta devah. 


With these potent and positive waves of natural 
energy, the virile Indra, wielder of thunderbolt, assumes 
those powers for breaking the clouds of darkness and 
want by which he brings about the showers of rain for 
the world of existence, which powers too for bringing 
about the showers of positive action and creativity arise 
from the grandeur of the omnipotent original doer of 
cosmic karma. 


युजा कर्माणि जनय॑ न्विश्वौजां अशस्तिहा विश्व्म॑नास्तु- 
राषाट्‌। पीत्वी सोम॑स्य दिव आ वृधानः शुरो निर्युधाध॑- 
Tee ८ ॥ ति 

8. Yuja karmani janayan visvauja asastiha visvama- 
nasturasat. Pitvi somasya diva a vrdhanah suro 
niryudhadhamad-dasyun. 


Originally causing and bringing about the 
dynamics of cosmic karma, the Lord Almighty of the 


678 RGVEDA 


world, destroyer of negatives and despicables, all- 
knowing cosmic mind, instant and total victor, protector 
of soma, augmenter of light, almighty, blows the conch 
and blows away the forces of nescience. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 56 
Vishvedevah Devata, Brhaduktha Vamadevya Rshi 


इदं त एकं पर ऊ त एकं तृतीयेन titer सं विशस्व | 
संवेशने तन्वश्चारुरेधि प्रियो देवानां परमे जनित्रे ।॥ ९॥ 


ly Idam ta ekam para uta ekam trtiyena jyotisa sam 
visasva. Samvesane tanvascaruredhi priyo 
devanam parame janitre. 


This (body, this life time) is one mode of your 
existence. The one next (mind and karma) is another 
such. By the third (spiritual and meditative life) join 
you with life eternal. On merging of the soul, happy 
and darling of the divinities, be free in the presence of 
the supreme creator of the world. 


aye वाजिन्तन्वं १ नय॑न्ती वाममस्मभ्यं धातु शर्म॑ 
तुभ्य॑म्‌। sed महो धरुणाय देवाद्दिवी व ज्योतिः स्वमा 
मिंमीयाः॥ २॥ 


2. Tanuste vajin tanvam nayanti vamamasm-abhyam 
dhatu sarma tubhyam. Ahruto maho dharunaya 
devan diviva jyotih svama mimiyah. 


O dynamic soul, may your life here in the body 
carrying your self bring precious wealth of joy to us 
and peace and comfort to you. Living an honest natural 
life, great in your own self, in service of the sustainer 
of divinities, create your own light and bliss for yourself, 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 56 679 


pursuing the light of the heart within as the light of 
heaven above. 


वाज्य॑सि वाजिनेना सुवेनीः dfaa: स्तोमं सुवितो दिवं 
गाः । सुवितो धर्म प्रथमानु सत्या सुवितो देवान्त्सुंवितोऽनु 
पत्म ।॥। ३॥ 


ध Vajyasi vajinena suventh suvitah stomam suvito 
divam gah. Suvito dharma prathamanu satya 
suvito devantsuvito’nu patma. 


You are the dynamic soul by virtue of your 
innate power and potential. Realising your love of life, 
living in peace and prosperity, rise to the heights of your 
own self-glory, happy and pious, and reach the heights 
of heaven. Happy in rectitude, follow the first, original 
and eternal Dharma. Happy and self-realised, rise to 
the life divine to the joy of the divines, and, a blessed 
soul, attain to the Spirit Eternal of the universe. 


महिम्न एषां पितरश्चनेशिरे देवा देवेष्वदधुरपि क्रतुम्‌ 
समविव्यचुरुत यान्यत्विषुरैषां तनूषु नि विविशुः पुनं: us 


4. Mahinma esam pitarascanesire deva devesva- 
dadhurapi kratum. Samavivyacuruta yanya-tvisu- 
raisam tanusu ni vivisuh punah. 


The forefathers lived in the grand manner of 
these divinities such as light of the sun and moon to 
their own will and desire as if commanding the bliss 
and beauty of these. Divine were they who raised their 
acts and worship to the presence and piety of divinities. 
They join those lights of divinity which shine and then 
again they come back to join life in their existential 
bodies. 


680 RGVEDA 


सहोभिर्विश्वं परि चक्रमू रजः पूर्वां धामान्यमिता मिमानाः | 
तनूषु विश्वा भुव॑ना नि येमिरे प्रासारयन्त पुरुध प्रजा 
अनुं ।॥ ५॥ 


2; Sahobhirvisvam pari cakramu rajah purva dha- 
manyamita mimanah. Tanusu visva bhuvana ni 
yemire prasarayanta purudha praja anu. 

These souls by their own karmic potential roam 
around across all regions of the world, freely ranging 
over boundless worlds of high order, sajourning in 
various body forms across the spaces begetting and 
extending the creativity of life in various ways according 
to the law of karma. 


feat सूनवोऽ सुरं स्वर्विंदमास््थापयन्त तृतीयेन कर्म॑णा | 
स्वां प्रजां पितर : पित्र्यं सह आवरेष्वदधुस्तन्तुमात॑तम्‌॥। & ॥ 


6. Dvidha sunavo’suram svarvidam-asthapayanta 
trttyena karmana. Svam prajam pitarah pitryam 
saha avaresvadadhus-tantum-atatam. 


Children of divinity, creative and procreative 
souls, by their third, familial, karma, vesting the vital 
and spiritual life principle further along with the 
procreative vitality, establish their own progeny in the 
next generation which is the extension of the thread of 
life in natural piety. 
नावा न aid: ufest: पृथिव्याः स्वस्तिथिरतिं दुर्गाणि 
विष्वा । स्वां प्रजां बृहदुक्थो महित्वाऽऽवरेष्वदधादा 
परेषु ॥ ७॥ 

7: Nava na ksodah pradisah prthivyah svastibhirati 
durgani visva. Svam prajam brhaduktho mahi- 
tva’’varesvadadhada paresu. 


MANDAL - 10 /SUKTA - 57 681 


Just as you cross the flood by boat and, with 
noble acts of knowledge, action and piety, cross all 
difficult problems of earthly life, so does the man of 
praise-worthy knowledge, action and piety cross over 
the problems of life and death and leaves his own legacy, 
physical, intellectual and spiritual, by his own grand 
potential vesting it in the next and further generations 
to survive and continue. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 57 


Vishvedevah Devata, Bandhu, Shrutabandhu, 
Viprabandhu Gaupayanah Rshis 


मा प्र गाम पथो वयं मा यज्ञादिन्द्र are: 1 
मान्तः स्थुर्नो अरातयः ॥ ९॥ 


॥ Ma pra gama patho vayam ma yajnadindra 
sominah. Mantah sthurno aratayah. 


Indra, O Lord Almighty, let us, lovers of soma 
peace, enlightenment and life’s joy never deviate from 
the path of rectitude and never forsake the creative way 
of yajnic living. Let no want, malignity, adversity and 
illiberality dwell among us. 


यो यज्ञस्य प्रसाध॑नस्तन्तुंर्देवेष्वातंतः। 
तमाहुतं नशीमहि ॥ २॥ 


2, Yo yajnasya prasadhanas-tantur-devesvatatah. 
Tamahutam nasimahi. 


There is a thread of unity, love, cooperation and 
active continuity in the web of life in nature’s divinities, 
and a similar bond of unity in an enlightened community 
which alone keeps it together and leads it on way to 


682 RGVEDA 


corporate progress. It is created and maintained with 
relentless self sacrifice in the spirit of yajna. Let us attain 
and maintain that very bond of yajnic unity for our 
progress and prosperity. (That is the bond of Agni, vital 
heat and love.) 


मनो न्वा हुवामहे नाराशंसेन BAA । 
पितृणां च मन्म॑भिः॥ ३॥ 

3; Mano nva huvamahe narasSamsena somena. 
Pitrnam ca manmabhih. 


We invoke the mind, alert ourselves and, with 
songs of human approbation and celebration, join with 
the thoughts and wisdom of our parents and ancestors 
to maintain the thread of continuity. 


आ त॑ एतु मनः पुनः क्रत्वे दक्षाय जीवसे । 
ज्योक्च सूर्य दृशो ॥ ॐ ॥ 

4. A ta etu manah punah kratve व4्द)व jivase. 
Jyok ca suryam drse. 


Let your mind and spirit arise and be alert again 
and again, continuously, for noble action, expertise of 
performance, joyous living, and to see the sun for light 
and enlightenment for a long long time of health and 
happiness. 


पुन॑र्नः पितरो मनो ददातु दैव्यो जनंः। 
जीवं व्रातं GaAs ५॥ 


a Punarnah pitaro mano dadatu daivyo janah. 
Jivam vratam sacemahi. 


May our parents, seniors, the spirit and wisdom 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 58 683 


of our ancestors, and men of divine wisdom inspire our 
mind and spirit again and again, continuously for 
refreshment and energy, so that we may live a life of 
discipline and holiness. 


वयं सोम व्रते तव मनस्तनूषु fara: | 
प्रजावन्तः सचेमहि॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Vayam soma vrate tava manastanusu bibhratah. 
Prajavantah sacemahi. 


O Soma, lord of peace and enlightenment, we 
pray that, holding our mind and senses in body in good 
health within your law and discipline and blest with 
noble progeny, we may live a happy life dedicated to 
you. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 58 
Mana avartanam Devata, Bandhu, Shrutabandhu, 
Viprabandhu Gaupayanah Rshis 


The theme of this hymn is ‘Return of the mind’ 
from wandering and depression to normalcy for a 
healthy life. 
ad यमं वैवस्वतं val sore दूरकम्‌। 
तत्त आ वर्तयामसीह erate sitadue 


4. Yat te yamam vaivasvatam mano jagama dura- 
kam. Tat ta a vartayamastha ksayaya jivase. 


O man, that mind of yours that wanders far to 
the sun and broods over time and death, that we restore 
to normalcy, here to stay at peace for the good life. 


यत्ते दिवं यत्प थिवीं मनो serra दूरकम्‌ । 
तत्त आ वर्तयामसीह क्षयाय जीवसे'।॥ २॥ 


684 RGVEDA 
2: Yat te divam yat prthivim mano jagama durakam. 
Tat ta a vartayamastha ksayaya jivase. 

Your mind that wanders far and roams over earth 
and heaven, we bring it back to normalcy, here to be at 
peace for the good life for you. 

यत्ते भूमिं चतुर्भृष्टि मनो sa दूर कम्‌ । 
तत्त आ वर्तयामसीह erate जीवसे ॥ ३॥ 


तः Yat te bhumim caturbhrstim mano jagama 
durakam. Tat ta a vartayamastha ksayaya jivase. 


Your mind that wanders far over lands and 
deserts burning and blazing all round, we bring it back 
for you, to be at peace here for the good life. 
यत्ते ade: प्रदिशो मनो sare exer 
तत्त आ वर्तयामसीह क्षयाय जीवसे'।॥ ४॥ 

4. Yat te catasrah pradiso mano jagama durakam. 
Tat ta a vartayamastha ksayaya jivase. 


Your mind which wanders far over all the four 
directions of space, that we bring back for you, here to 
be at peace for the good life. 


ad समुद्रम॑एविं मनों जगाम दूर कम्‌। 
तत्त आ वर्तयामसीह erate जीवसे ॥ ५ ॥ 


a Yat te samudram-arnavam mano jagama dura- 
kam. Tat ta a vartayamasitha ksayaya jivase. 


Your mind that wanders far over the sea and the 
waters of space, we bring back for you, here to be at 
peace for you for the good life. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 58 685 


यत्ते मरीचीः प्रवतो मनो जगाम दूरकम्‌। 
तत्त आ वर्तयामसीह erate जीवसे ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Yat te maricith pravato mano jagama durakam. 
Tat ta a vartayamastha ksayaya jivase. 
Your mind that wanders far over heavenly 
heights and radiating rays of light, we bring back to 
normalcy here for you to be at peace for the good life. 
यत्ते अपो यदोष॑धीर्मनों sora दूरकम्‌। 
तत्त आ वर्तयामसीह क्षर्याय जीवसे ॥ ७॥ 
a Yat te apo yadosadhirmano jagama durakam. 
Tat ta a vartayamastha ksayaya jivase. 
Your mind that wanders far over waters, herbs 
and trees, we bring back to normalcy for you to be at 
peace for the good life. 
यत्ते सूर्य यदुषसं मनो we दूर कम्‌। 
तत्त आ वर्तयामसीह erate जीवसे ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Yat te suryam yadusasam mano jagama durakam. 
Tat ta a vartayamastha ksayaya jivase. 


Your mind that wanders far to the sun and the 
dawn, we bring back to normalcy, here to be at peace 
for you for the good life. 


यत्ते पर्व'तान्ब्रहतो मनो sare दूरकम्‌। 
तत्त आ वर्तयामसीह क्षर्याय जीवसे ॥ ९॥ 


7, Yat te parvatan brhato mano jagama durakam. 
Tat ta a vartayamastha ksayaya jivase. 


Your mind that wanders far over mighty 


686 RGVEDA 


mountains and vast floating clouds, we bring back to 
normalcy, here to be at peace for your good life. 
यत्ते विश्व॑पिदं जगन्मनो sore दूर कम्‌। 
तत्त आ वर्तयामसीह क्षयाय जीवसे i ९०॥ 
10. = Yat te visvamidam jaganmano jagama durakam. 
Tat ta a vartayamastha ksayaya jivase. 
Your mind that wanders far over this wide world, 
we bring back to normalcy, here to be at peace for you 
so that you may live happy. 
यत्ते पराः परावतो मनो जगाम दूरकम्‌। 
तत्त आ वर्तयामसीह erate जीवसे ।॥। ९९॥ 

11. Yat te parah paravato mano jagama durakam. 
Tat ta a vartayamastha ksayaya jivase. 


Your mind that wanders far and farther over 
regions unknown, we bring back to normalcy, here to 
be at peace for your good life. 


यत्त भूतं च भव्यं च मनो जगामं दूर कम्‌। 
तत्त आ वर्तयामसीह क्रयाय जीवसे ।॥। ९२॥ 


12. Yat te bhutam bhavyam ca mano jagama 
durakam. Tat ta a vartayamastha ksayaya jivase. 


Your mind that wanders far over the past and 
the future that is unpredictable, we bring back to 
normalcy, here to be at peace for your happy life. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 59 687 


Mandala 10/Sukta 59 
Devatah: Nirrti (1-3), Nirrti and Soma (4), Asuniti (5-6), 
Lingokta (7), Dyavaprthivyau (8-9), Dyavaprthivi-Indra 
(10); Rshis: Bandhu, Shrutabandhu, Viprabandhu 
Gaupayanah 


प्र तार्यायुः प्रतरं नवीयः स्थातारेव क्रतुंमता रथ॑स्य | 
अध च्यवान उत्तवीत्यर्थः परातरं सु नितऋतिर्जिंहीताम्‌।॥ ९॥ 


I. Pra taryayuh prataram naviyah sthatareva kratu- 
mata rathasya. Adha cyavan ut tavitya-rtham 
parataram su nurrtirjihitam. 


Let new life and new initiative rise and advance 
higher and higher as the dynamic master of the chariot 
constantly moves forward and as the progressive pioneer 
achieves his goal and moves higher and higher. Let want 
and adversity fall off and depart far and farther. 


ang राये निंधिमच्वन्नं करामहे सु पुरुध श्रवांसि। तानो 
विश्वानि जरिता म॑मत्तु परातरं सु निरऋतिर्जिंहीताम्‌॥ २॥ 


2. Saman nu raye nidhimannvannam karamahe su 
purudha Sravamsi. Ta no visvani jarita mamattu 
parataram su nurrtirjihitam. 

Let us create peace for wealth and food in 
abundance with security and many other forms of life’s 
values and excellence so that the poet, the singer and 
the senior too may enjoy life without worry and want, 
and adversity, fear and insecurity may fall off and depart 
far and farther for good. 


अभी vaya: पौस्यैभ्विम द्यौर्न भूमिं'गिरयो नाजान्‌। ता 
नो विश्वानि जरिता चिकेत परातरं सु निऋ॑तिर्जिं- 
हीताम्‌॥ ३॥ 


688 RGVEDA 


a Abhi svaryah paumsyairbhavema dyaurna 
bhumim girayo najran. Ta no visvani jarita ciketa 
parataram su nirrtirjihitam. 

As the sun overwhelms the earth, as thunder 
overwhelms the clouds and clouds overwhelm the fields 
with rain, so may we overwhelm the negativities and 
enemies of life and society with our natural and essential 
strength, virtues and achievements so that the poet, the 
singer, the senior, the assessor and the admirer may 
know, and want and adversity, fear and insecurity may 
fall off and disappear for good. 


मो षु ul: सोम मृत्यवे परा दाः पश्येम नु सूर्य NTA 
द्युभिवर्हितो ज॑रिमा सू नो अस्तु परातरं सु निऋंतिर्जिं- 
हीताम्‌॥ ४॥ 


4. Mo su nah soma mrtyave para dah pasyema nu 
suryam-uccarantam. Dyubhirhito jarima su no 
astu parataram su nirrtirjihitam. 


O Soma, lord of peace and prosperity, give us 
not up to death and decay. Let us go on and advance 
with the rising sun day by day. Let our growth in time 
be positive for our good day by day. Let want, adversity, 
ill health and death stay far away from us. 


असुनीते मनो! अस्मासु धारय जीवातवे सु प्र तिरा न आयुः 1 
रारन्धि नः सूर्यस्य संदुर्शिं घतेन त्वं तन्वं वर्धयस्व ॥ ५५ ॥ 

2: Asunite mano asmasu dharaya jivatave su pra tira 
na ayuh. Rarandhi nah suryasya samdrsi ghrtena 
tvam tanvam vardhayasva. 


O mother harbinger of pranic energy, bless us 
with the strength of mind and morale, and for our good 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 59 689 


living give us good health and long full age. Mature 
and establish us in the light of the sun and the vision of 
divinity, and with the lustre and energy of nature raise 
our health and age to the heights of perfection. 


असुनीते पुन॑र स्मासु चक्षुः पुन॑ः प्राणमिह नो धेहि भोग॑म्‌। 
ज्योक्पश्येम सूर्य मुच्यरंन्तमनुंमते oat नः स्वस्ति ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Asunite punarasmasu caksuh punah pranamiha 
no dhehi bhogam. Jyok pasyema suryamuccaran- 
tam-anumate mrlaya nah svasti. 


O divine Spirit of life and energy, bless us 
constantly with the faculty of vision, constant pranic 
energy too, and vest in here in the body the capacity 
and faculties to live and enjoy the sweets of life. O 
motherly spirit of love and acceptance, may we see the 
rising sun for a long time. Be pleased and kind and bless 
us with happiness and well being all through in life. 


पुनंनो असुं पृथिवी द॑दातु पुनद्यरदिवी पुन॑र न्तरिंश्चम्‌। 
पुन॑र्नः सोम॑स्तन्वं ददातु पुन॑ः पूषा पथ्यां ३ या स्वस्तिः ॥ ७॥ 


cP Purarno asum prthivi dadatu punardyaurdevi 
punarantariksam. Punarnah somastanvam da- 
datu punah pusa pathyam ya svastih. 


May the earth give us pranic energy of life again. 
So may the divine sun and the generous sky give us life 
again. May Soma, divine spirit of joy and peace, give 
us the body again, and may Pusha, divine spirit of 
nourishment, place us on the journey of life again and 
give us happiness and well being. 


शं रोद॑सी सुबन्ध॑वे यह्यी sated मातरा । भरतामप यद्रपो 
द्यौः पृथिवि क्षमा रपो मो षु ते किं चनाम॑मत्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


690 RGVEDA 


8. Sam rodasi subandhave yahvi rtasya matara. 
Bharatamapa yadrapo dyauh prthivi ksama rapo 
mo su te kim canamamat. 


May the mighty heaven and earth, mother spirits 
of truth and waters of life bring peace and joy for the 
holy child and loving brother of living beings. May the 
sun and earth, father and mother, make up whatever be 
wanting in body, mind and spirit and the child’s senses 
of values. May they strengthen the child against sin and 
evil and forgive him for his pitfalls in the struggle for 
self-realisation. O man, may nothing whatever, sin or 
sorrow, hurt and violate you ever against your self- 
identity. 


अवं gh अवं त्रिका दिवश्च॑रन्ति भेषजा । क्षमा च॑रिष्ण- 
वेककं भरतामप यद्रपो द्यौः पुंथिविक्चषमारपोमोषुतेकिं 
चनाम॑मत्‌॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Ava dvake ava trika divascaranti bhesaja. Ksama 
carisnvekakam bharatamapa yadrapo dyauh 
prthivi ksama rapo mo su te kim canama-mat. 


In two’s (as the Ashvins or prana and apana) 
and in three’s (as Ila, Sarasvati and bharati, or as light, 
electric energy and water) the sanatives for life and 
health flow from the heavenly region of light and one 
by one be active on earth. May the sun and earth make 
up what is wanting in body, mind and spirit. May they 
strengthen humanity against sin and evil and forgive us 
in the struggle for self-realisation. O man, may nothing 
whatever, sin or sorrow, hurt and violate you ever against 
your self-identity. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 60 691 


समिन्द्रेरय गाम॑नड़ाहं य आवहदुशीनराण्या अन॑ः 1 भरतामप 
यद्रपो द्यौः पुंथिवि क्षमा रपो मो षु ते किं चनामम॑त्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10.  Samindreraya gamanadvaham ya avahadu- 
Sinaranya anah. Bharatamapa yadrapo dyauh 
prthivi ksama rapo mo su te kim canamamat. 


O Lord omnipotent, Indra, O Sun, inspire and 
energise the pranic force of the body, inspire and 
energise the vitality of passion, will and understanding 
of the body. May the sun and earth make up what is 
wanting in body, mind and spirit. May they strengthen 
humanity against sin and evil and forgive us where we 
fail in our struggle. O man, may nothing whatever, sin 
or sorrow, hurt and violate you in your struggle for 
perfection. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 60 
Asamati (1-4, 6), Indra (5), Jiva (7-11), Hasta (12) 
Devatah; Bandhu, Shrutabandhu, Viprabandhu 
Gaupayanah (1-5, 7-12), Agastya’s sister, their mother 
(6) Rshis 
आ जनं त्वेषसं॑न्दूषां माही नानामुपस्तुतम्‌। 
अग॑न्म बिभ्र॑तो नम॑ः॥ ९॥ 
ie A janam tvesasamdrsam mahinanamupastu-tam. 
Aganma bibhrato namah. 
Bearing gifts of homage we come to the man of 


radiant glory, honoured and celebrated by the greatest 
of the great. 


अस॑मातिं नितोशनं त्वेषं निययिनं रथ॑म्‌ । 
भजेस्थस्य सत्प॑तिम्‌ २॥ 


692 RGVEDA 


px Asamatim nitosanam tvesam niyayinam ratham. 
Bhajerathasya satpatim. 


We come to the incomparable lord and protector 
of the true and the good, destroyer of evil and darkness, 
radiant illustrious, commander of the chariot of victory 
in the battles of rectitude. 


यो जनान्मदहिषां इवाऽतितस्थौ पवीरवान्‌ । 
उतापवीरवान्युधा ॥ ३ ॥ 


2 Yo janan mahisan iva’ titasthau paviravan. 
Utapaviravan yudha. 


We have come to the mighty hero who, whether 
armed or without arms, overthrows adversaries as a lion 
overthrows wild buffaloes. 


aalearcped व्रते रे वान्म॑राय्येधंते | 
दिवीव पञ्च॑ pea: ॥ ४॥ 

4. Yasyeksvakurupa vrate revan marayyedhate. 
Diviva panca krstayah. 


We have come to the ruling lord under whose 
order of law, justice and discipline, the enlightened, the 
opulent and the brilliant fighters and indeed all the five 
classes of people in their own professional fields live 
happy and free as in heaven on earth. 


इन्द्र aarearfay रथप्रोष्ठेषु धारय । 
दिवीव सूर्य" दशो ॥ ५ ॥ 


3, Indra ksatrasamatisu rathaprosthesu dharaya. 
Diviva suryam drse. 


Indra, lord of light and law, ruler of the world, 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 60 693 


first among exceptional equals of the chariot 
commanders of the world, pray hold and rule the order 
of the commonwealth of humanity as the lord supreme 
holds the sun in heaven for all the worlds to see. 


अगस्त्य॑स्य नद्यः Gat युनश्चि रोहिता । 
पणीन््य॑क्रमीरभि विश्वात्राजन्नराधसंः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Agastyasya nadbhyah sapti yunaksi rohita. 
Panin nyakramirabhi visvan rajannaradhasah. 


For the supporters and admirers of the simple, 
sinless, enlightened and disciplined ruling soul of the 
order, you harness two nimble bright forces of internal 
discipline and external defence, and, O refulgent ruler 
of the system, you control all the greedy, selfish, 
uncreative and uncommitted elements of the world 
order. 


अयं मातायं पिताऽयं जीवातुराग॑मत्‌। 
इदं तव॑ प्रसर्पणं सुब॑न्धवेहि निरिंहि॥ ७॥ 


7. Ayam matayam pita’ yam jivaturagamat. 
Idam tava prasarpanam subandhavehi nirihi. 


O holy brother, O friend, O brilliant soul of the 
system, this systemic order is your mother, your father, 
come up as your life giver. Come in, come here, O soul 
and ruler of the system, this is your haven and home for 
life’s advancement, its meaning and purpose. 


यथा युगं वर्‌ त्रया नद्य॑न्ति धरुणाय कम्‌। एवा दाधार ते 
मनो! जीवातवे न मृत्यवेऽथो अरिष्टतातये ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Yatha yugam varatraya nahyanti dharunaya kam. 


Eva dadhara te mano jivatave na mrtyave’tho 
aristatataye. 


694 RGVEDA 


As they bind the yoke fast with thongs for the 
balance and stability of the chariot on the move, so does 
the lord hold fast your mind and spirit, not for death but 
for your life, fulfilment and freedom from evil and 
misfortune. 


यथेयं पुंथिवी मही दाधारे मान्वनस्पतींन्‌। एवा दाधार ते 
मनो! जीवातवे न मृत्यवेऽथो अरिष्टतातये ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Yatheyam prthivi mahi dadhareman vanaspatin. 
Eva dadhara te mano jivatave na mrtyave’tho 
aristatataye. 


O man, just as this great earth holds and bears 
these herbs and trees (for the sustenance of life), so does 
the soul hold and bear your mind and spirit, not for death 
but for your life, fulfilment and freedom from evil and 
misfortune. 


यमादहं वैवस्वतात्सुबन्धोर्मन आभ॑रम्‌। 
जीवातवे न मृत्यवेऽथो अरिष्टतातये ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Yamdaddaham vaivasvatat subandhormana 
abharam. Jivatave na mrtyave’tho aristatataye. 


I, the spirit of man, holy and blessed, bear my 
mind from Yama, lord of light and law, I receive my 
spirit of energy from the sun, I bear and hold it in 
equipoise, not for death but for the pleasure and 
fulfilment of life and freedom from sin and evil. 


न्य4ग्वातोऽ व॑ वाति न्य॑क्तपति wel: 1 
नीचीन॑मघ्न्या दुहे न्यग्भवतु ते रप॑ः ue 


11. Nyagvato’va vati nyak tapati suryah. Nicinam- 
aghnya duhe nyagbhavatu te rapah. 


MANDAL - 10 / ऽ <^ - 61 695 


The wind blows downwards, the heat of the sun 
goes downwards to the earth, the holy cow lets her milk 
flow down. O man, let your sin and evil too go down, 
leaving you free. 


अयं मे हस्तो ward मे भगंवत्तरः। 
अयं मे विर्वभेंषजोऽ यं शिवाभिमर्शनः ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Ayam me hasto bhagavanayam me bhagavatta- 
rah. Ayam me visvabhesajo’yam sivabhimar- 
Sanah. 


This my hand is the hand of good fortune, this 
is even the hand of greater good fortune, this is the 
solution to all my problems of the world. This hand is 
for the touch of holiness with life, the instrument of 
action for fulfilment. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 61 
Vishvedevah Devata, Nabhanedishtha Manava Rshi 


इदमित्था रौद्रं गूर्तवचा ब्रह्म heal शच्यामन्तराजौ । क्राणा 
यद॑स्य पितरा मंहनेष्ठाः पर्षत्पक्थे अहन्ना TA SATU ९॥ 


I, Idamittha raudram gurtavaca brahma kratva 
Sacyamantarajau. Kranad yadasya pitara mam- 
hanesthah parsat pakthe ahanna sapta hotrn. 


The eloquent scholar displays his knowledge, 
in theory and practice, of this divine Vedic voice of the 
mysterious truth of nature and divinity in relation to 
Rudra, lord omnipotent of natural justice and 
dispensation, in the assembly of the wise and brave 
where his parents, teachers and eminent scholars are 
present on the day of academic accomplishment and 


696 RGVEDA 


satisfies all the seven high priests of his educational 
yajna with a sense of fulfilment. 


स इद्ानाय दभ्याय वन्वञ्च्यवानः सूदैरमिमीत वेदि॑म्‌। 
तूर्वयाणो गूर्तवचस्तमः श्चोदो न रेत॑ इतऊति सिञ्चत्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Sa iddanaya dabhyaya vanvancyavanah sudai- 
ramimita vedim. Turvayano gurtavacastamah 
ksodo na reta ita uti sincat. 


Thus accomplished for a creative and corrective 
role in life, equipped with right means and methods of 
art and science, he prepares the vedi, 1.e., a full 
programme of family life and social action, for himself. 
Dynamic and assertive in action, bold in speech, 
agreeable in tone and deep in meaning, he collects the 
spirit of virility in the mind as in a deep reservoir and 
expresses it for the protection and promotion of human 
dignity and happiness. 


मनो न येषु हव॑नेषु तिग्मं विपः great वनुथो द्रव॑न्ता । आ 
यः शयी भिस्तुविनुम्णो अस्याऽश्रींणीतादिशं गभ॑स्तौ ॥ ३ ॥ 


a: Mano na yesu havanesu tigmam vipah sacya 
vanutho dravanta. A yah saryabhis-tuvinrmno 
asya’$srinitadisam gabhastau. 


O men and women of the land, O Ashvins, O 
sun and moon, with voice and action, honour the call of 
this vibrant scholar and master of ample wealth and 
power who, with all the means and methods on hand, 
exhorts you to join the yajnic programmes of 
development to which you rush at the speed of the fastest 
and sharpest mind. 


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 61 697 


कृष्णा यद्रोष्व॑रूणीषु सीद॑दिवो नर्पाताश्विना हुवे aT | 
वीतं मे यज्ञमा ग॑तं मे अन्नं ववन्वांसा नेषमस्मृतध्रू ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Krsna yadgosvarunisu sidad divo napatasvina 
huve vam. Vitam me yajnama gatam me annam 
vavanvamsa nesamasmrtadhru. 


Ashvins, children of light, when the darkness 
of night mingles with the crimson lights of the morning, 
I call upon you, come and join the lovely yajna for me, 
forget about all undesirables and negativities, enjoy 
yourselves and partake of the holy food to your heart’s 
desire. 


प्रथिष्ट यस्य॑ वीरकर्ममिष्णदनुं्ठितं नु नर्यो अपौहत्‌ । 
पुनस्तदा वृहति यत्कनाया दुहितुरा अनुभृतमनर्वा ॥ ५ ॥ 


Prathista yasya virakarmamisnadanusthitam nu 
naryo apauhat. Punastada brhati yat kanaya 
duhitura anubhrtamanarva. 


That most expansive creativity and generative 
vitality of Rudra Prajapati, lord creator, animated and 
vested in nature, which also is an irresistible human 
impulse, further expands into life when it is received 
and borne to maturity by the loving youthful maiden, 
motherly agent of nature’s innate urge for self- 
fulfilment. 


मध्या यत्कर्त्वमभ॑वद्‌भीके कामं कृण्वाने पितरि युवत्याम्‌। 
मनानग्रेतो जहतुर्वियन्ता सानौ निषिक्तं सुकृतस्य योनौ ।। & ॥ 
6. Madhya yat kartvam-abhavad-abhike kamam 


krnvane pitari yuvatyam. Mananagreto jahatur- 
viyanta sanau nisiktam sukrtasya yonau. 


698 RGVEDA 


When the generator, father, and the youthful 
maiden, the mother, both joined in love and marriage 
with the desire to fulfil their obligation to Prajapati, lord 
of the household, have begot and brought up the progeny 
and have fulfilled their obligation in common, they give 
up and retire. All this, love, desire, accomplishment and 
fulfilment, is an extension of the process of divine 
creativity initiated on top of heaven at the centre of 
cosmic generation. 


पिता यत्स्वां दुहितर॑मधिष्कन्क्ष्मया रेत॑ः संजग्मानो नि 
षिंञ्चत्‌। स्वाध्यो.ऽ जनयन्ब्रह्मं देवा वास्तोष्पति व्रतपां 
निर॑तश्चन्‌॥ ७॥ 


7: Pita yat svam duhitaram-adhiskan ksmaya retah 
sanyagamano ni sincat. Svadhyo ’janayan brahma 
deva vastospatim vratapam nirataksan. 


As the father, the sun, covers the skies and the 
earth, his counterpart, and, shedding his living light and 
lustre, fills them with the vitality of life, then the devas, 
radiant divinities of nature, create and form Agni, keeper 
of the vows of the law and master of the earthly home. 


स ई am न फेनमस्यदाजौ स्मदा ated ewelar: | 
सर॑त्यदा न दश्चिणा परावृङ्न ता नु में पृटान्यो जगृभ्रे ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Saim vrsa na phenamasyadajau smada paraidapa 
dabhracetah. Sarat pada na daksina paravrn na 
ta nu me prsanyo jagrbhre. 


That master of the home, Agni, like a mighty 
generous cloud, showers the vitality of life in the process 
of nature and sends our homage of oblations to far off 
distances from us except that if some small minded 


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 61 699 


person of stingy character takes no step forward and 
neglects the ordinances of charity, then Agni, otherwise 
all embracing, does not accept our oblations. 


aaa até: प्रजायां उपदब्दिरयिं न aa उप॑ सीददूधः 1 
सनिं तेध्मं सनितोत वाजं स धर्ता ज॑ज्ञे सह॑सा यवीयुत्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


+ १ Maksi na vahnih prajaya upabdiragnim na nagna 
upa sidadudhah. Sanitedhmam sanitota vajam sa 
dharta jajne sahasa yaviyut. 


The master of the home is the leader, burden 
bearer and the voice of the people. He must never defile 
the common wealth of this earthly home like a stingy 
selfish man defiling the sacred fire. In fact he is arisen 
as the protector, sharer and trustee of the common assets, 
energy, honour and progress of the nation, who works 
for its unity and advancement with his power, patience 
and fortitude. 


मक्षू कनायाः सख्यं नवग्वा ऋतं वद॑न्त seca aaa | 
द्विबर्हसो य sa गोपमागुरदक्षिणासो अच्युता दुदु- 
क्चन्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. Maksu kanayah sakhyam navagva rtam vadanta 
rtayuktimagman. Dvibarhaso ya upa gopa-magu- 
radaksinaso acyuta duduksan. 


Just as fresh waves of solar radiations in the 
morning, manifesting the laws of nature and flow of 
living energy, meet with homogeneity of the beautiful 
earth and, in contact with both the sun and earth, join 
the all sustaining gravitational life force, and, without 
taking anything for themselves create and give universal 
showers of imperishable creative and motherly fertility 


700 RGVEDA 


to the earth. (So do new generations of youthful men 
from institutions of education, knowing, proclaiming 
and living the laws of nature and the land with loyalty 
to both find the love and friendship of their dear choice 
maidens in marriage and, dedicated to both the family 
and humanity, join the high priest of the land and create 
permanent gains for the nation without any selfish 
considerations.) 


मक्षु कनायाः सख्यं नवीयो राधो न रेत॑ ऋतपिनत्तरण्यन्‌। 
शुचि यत्ते रेक्ण आय॑जन्त सबर्दघायाः पय॑ उस्तरि- 
यायाः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Maksu kanayah sakhyam naviyo radho na reta 
rtamit turanyan. Suci yat te rekna ayajanta 
sabardughayah paya usriyayah. 


Soon the solar radiations in unison with the 
homogeneity of fertile earth stimulate the vital process 
of nature’s creativity and produce the liquid living 
energy, pure life seed, latest prize like the legacy of 
divinity for you, O yajamana, the gift of generous earth 
and the mother’s milk. (Similarly the young men who 
win the love and friendship of the lovely maidens of 
their choice and earnestly observe the laws and 
discipline of nature and maintain the purity of their seed 
of life receive the generous mother’s gift of noble 
progeny.) 


पश्चा यत्श्चा fader बुधन्तेति ब्रवीति वक्तरी wu: | 
वसोव॑सुत्वा कारवोंऽ नेहा विश्वं विवेष्टि द्रविंणामुप 
क्षु॥ ९२॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 61 701 


12. Pasva yat pasca viyuta budhanteti braviti vaktari 
raranah. Vasorvasutva karavo’neha visvam 
vivesti dravinamaupa ksu. 


After the fulfilment of family obligations, the 
man having renounced the life of senses and materiality 
and exulting in the joy of divine revelation exclaims : 
O friends of knowledge and divine law, O celebrants of 
songs of divinity, the lord giver of the highest wealth 
and haven of peace, immaculate and free, brings us the 
ultimate food of divine joy and supreme wealth of 
existence. 


तदिन्रव॑स्य परिषद्वानो अग्मन्पुरू सदन्तो नार्षदं बिंभित्सन्‌। 
वि शुष्ण॑स्य संग्रथितमनर्वा विदत्पुरुप्रजातस्य गुहा 
यत्‌॥ ९३॥ 

13. Tadinnvasya parisadvano agman puri sadanto 
narsadam bibhitsan. Vi Susnasya samgrathi- 
tamanarva vidat puruprajatasya guha yat. 

Then the mind, pranic energies and senses, 
present all round, vested variously in the body, come 
into divine animation, having dissolved all carnal 
desires, when the man fulfilled in the soul knows and 
realises the presence of the all-mighty, all-pervasive 
supreme spirit in the depth of the heart and soul, 
interwoven indeed in the web of life itself. 


भर्गो ह नामोत यस्य॑ देवाः स्वधैर्ण ये aera निषेदुः | 
अगिर्ह नामोत जातवेदाः श्रुधी नो होतक्तस्य होता- 
TRUS 


14. Bhargo ha namota yasya devah svarna ye 
trisadhasthe niseduh. Agnirha namota jatavedah 
srudhi no hotarrtasya hotadhruk. 


702 RGVEDA 


Blazing brilliant and mighty sublime is that 
Spirit indeed whose refulgent and divine powers like 
paradisal bliss abide in the three regions of heaven, earth 
and the middle spaces. Agni, light and fire of the 
universe, is its name, animating all that is born in 
existence. O high priest of the yajnic dynamics of 
existence, clarion call of the universe, all love free from 
hate and animosity, pray listen to our call and prayer. 


उत त्या मे रौद्रावर्चिमन्ता arenes गृर्तये यजंध्ये । 
मनुष्वद्‌ वृक्तबर्हिषे रराणा मन्दू हितप्रयसा विश्च 
SLU १५॥ 


15. Uta tya me raudravarcimanta nasatyavindra 
gurtaye yajadhyai. Manusvad-vrktabarhise 
rarana mandu hitaprayasa viksu yajyu. 


Indra, lord almighty, pray may those two 
offsprings of Rudra, lord of mercy, justice and 
dispensation, Ashvins, twin powers of natural 
complementarity, commanding the light of life, 
dedicated to infallible truth, both happy, givers of joy, 
adorable in yajna with homage, come to me, ready on 
the holy grass with my people, advance our yajna and 
acknowledge our homage and prayer among our 
community of celebrants. 


अयं स्तुतो राजां वन्दि वेधा अपश्च विप्र॑स्तरति स्वसेतुः | 
स कक्षीवन्तं रेजयत्सो अभि नेमिं न चक्रमर्वतो रघुद्रु ॥ ९६ ॥ 
16. Ayam stuto raja vandi vedha apasca viprastarati 


svasetuh. Sa kaksivantam rejayat so agnim 
nemim na cakramarvato raghudru. 


This adored and refulgent ruler is worshipped. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 61 703 


All knowing, all doing, all vibrant pranic and soma force 
of divinity, all saviour bridge, by itself crosses all waters 
and spaces. It moves all spatial energies and all fiery 
elements just as horses move the centre and the circle 
of a fast whirling wheel. 


स द्विबन्धुर्कैतर णो ast सबर्धुं धेनु मस्वं दुहध्यै । सं 
यन्मित्रावरुणा वृञ्ज SOAS ANAT वरूथे: ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Sa dvibandhurvaitarano yasta sabardhum 
dhenumasvam duhadhyai. Sam yanmitravaruna 
vrnja ukthair-jyesthebhir-aryamanam varuthaih. 


He that holds the two worlds of heaven and earth 
in bond, the high priest of cosmic yajna, all pervasive 
power that helps us to cross over the flood of existence, 
gives us the immortal gift of eternal Word and vision 
when a person, with the best of chant and meditative 
practice, realises together Mitra, centripetal, and Varuna, 
centrifugal, processes of cosmic dynamics, and also 
Aryaman, the all-controlling spirit that controls both 
the centre and the circle of the wheel of existence. 


Tera: सूरिर्दिवि ते धियन्धा नाभानेदिष्ठो रपति प्र वेन॑न्‌। 
सानो नाभिं; परमास्य वां घाऽहं तत्पश्चा कतिथणज्चिं- 
दास ।॥ ९८ il 
18. Tadbandhuh surirdivi te dhiyandha nabhanedi- 
stho rapati pra venan. Sa no nabhih parama-sya 
va gha’ham tat pasca katithascidasa. 
O soul, says the celebrant in love with divinity, 
that binding bond, the sun in heaven, is the giver of 


your will and intelligence and also its guardian, your 
closest link of nature to life eternal. That navel link is 


704 RGVEDA 


our highest centre of existence and of that, in 
consequence, I am the devoted celebrant among many. 


इयं मे नाभिरिह मे सधस्थमिमे मे देवा अयमस्मि सर्व 1 
द्विजा अहं प्रथमजा ऋतस्येदं धेनुरदुहज्नाय॑माना 11 ९९ ॥ 


19. Iyam me nabhiriha me sadhasthamime me deva 
ayamasmi sarvah. Dvija aha prathamaja rtasye- 
dam dhenuraduhajjayamana. 


This is my navel link with life, here is my haven 
and ultimate home, all these divine brilliancies, winds 
and pranic energies are mine, here I am all, complete. 
Whether first born of divinity or twice born of nature 
and education, all this universe is born of Prakrti in 
motion and action under the law of divinity. The divine 
cow, Vak, nature coming into existential manifestation 
gives birth to it and to all we need. 


अर्धासु मन्द्रो अरतिर्विभावाऽवं स्यति द्विवर्तनिर्वनेषाद्‌। 
ऊर्ध्वां यच्छ्रेणिर्न शिशुर्दन्मक्षू स्थिरं शेवृधं सूत माता ॥ २०॥ 


20. Adhasu mandro aratirvibhava’va syati dvivarta- 
nirvanesat. Urdhva yacchrenirna sisurdan maksu 
sthiram Sevrdham suta mata. 


And in the directions of space pervades Agni, 
joyous, dynamic, bright, moving across heaven and 
earth, lord of woods, high power admirable, lovely, 
which, like an army array, destroys in no time. That 
stable power, giver of comfort and joy, too, Mother 
Nature generates. 


अधा गाव उप॑मातिं कनाया अनु श्वान्तस्य कस्य॑ Fara: | 
श्रुधि त्वं सुद्रविणो नस्त्वं याव्ठाश्वश्चस्य॑ वावृधे सूनू- 
ताभिः॥ २९॥ 


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 61 705 


21. 447८ gava upamatim kanaya anu svantasya kasya 
cit pareyuh. Srudhi tvam sudravino nastvam 
yalasvaghnasya vavrdhe sunrtabhih. 


And as the prayers of some veteran saint reach 
you, lord of love and favour, O holy lord of wealth and 
glory, listen to our prayer: Give us the yajnic gifts of 
life, you who feel exalted by the joyous and truthful 
adorations of devotees who have risen above their senses 
and passions of the mind. 


अध त्वमिन्द्र fae स्मान्महो राये Ae वज्र॑बाहुः | Laat 
च नो मघोन॑ः पाहि सूरीनं नेहस॑स्ते हरिवो अभिष्टौ ।॥ २२॥ 


22. Adha tvamindra viddhyasman maho raye nrpate 
vajrabahuh. Raksa ca no maghonah pahi suri- 
nanehasaste harivo abhistau. 


And O lord of might and glory, Indra, 
magnanimous lord protector of humanity, wielder of 
thunder arms, pray know us and grant us our prayers 
for wealth, honour and excellence. O lord of nature’s 
forces and destroyer of suffering, protect us, promote 
us, all dedicated to the power and honour gifts of divine 
favour. We pray let us enjoy your love and good will 
that we may live in a state of freedom from sin and evil. 


अध यद्राजाना गविष्टौ सरत्सरण्युः कारवे VLU: | 
विप्रः प्रेष्ठः स dat बभूव परा च वक्च॑दुत पंषदेनान्‌ ॥ २३ ॥ 
23. Adha yadrajana gavistau sarat saranyuh karave 


jJaranyuh. Viprah presthah sa hyesam babhiuva 
para ca vaksaduta parsadenan. 


And then, O men of light and wisdom, the 
person who is keen to rise and is rising in the search for 


706 RGVEDA 


the lord’s love and good will, who seeks to adore and 
serve the lord creator, such a vibrant devotee becomes 
the dearest of all these seekers for the lord, crosses the 
flood of existence and, speaking of the highest absolute 
and inspiring them, helps others too to seek divine 
fulfilment. 


अधा न्व॑स्य जेन्य॑स्य पुष्टौ वृथा रेभ॑न्त ईमहे तदू नु | 
सर ण्युर॑स्य सूनुरश्वो विप्रश्चासि श्रव॑सश्च सातौ ॥ २४॥ 


24. Adha nvasya jenyasya pustau vrtha rebhanta 
tmahe tadu nu. Saranyurasya sunurasvo vipra- 
Scasi Sravasasca satau. 


And so for the sake of our growth and progress 
under the protection of this lord absolute and all 
victorious master of the universe, we spontaneously sing 
and pray : you are the creator and sole mover of this 
universe, all pervasive and dominant, all providing giver 
of fulfilment and most renowned harbinger of success 
and victory. 


युवोर्यदि सख्यायास्मे धीय स्तोमं जुजुषे नम॑स्वान्‌ । 
विश्वत्र यस्मिन्ना गिरः समीचीः gdfa गातुर्दाशंत्सू- 
नताय ॥ २५॥ 


25. Yuvoryadi sakhyayasme sardhaya stomam jujuse 
namasvan. Visvatra yasminna girah samicth 
purviva gaturdaSsat sunrtayai. 


O enlightened men and women of the world, if 
for your love and friendship and the growth of our 
strength, the devotee were to offer a song of adoration 
with homage, humility and love to the lord to whom all 
earnest voices of prayer converge and reach for 


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 61 707 


fulfilment all over the world, and the lord of all might 
were pleased to accept, he would bless us with a vision 
of the path of truth and progress. 


स Wort अद्धिर्देववानिति सुबन्धुर्नमसा सूक्तैः | वर्ध 
दुक्थर्वचोभिरा हि नूनं व्यध्वैति पय॑स shear: ॥ २६ ॥ 


26. Sa grnano adbhir-devavaniti subandhur-namasa 
suktath. Vardhad-ukthair-vacobhira hi nunam 
vyadhvaiti payasa usriyayah. 


Say the lord almighty adored by holies is a friend 
of the divines. Noble brother and all unifier, He is to be 
worshipped and exalted with homage of love, hymns 
of faith, rituals of service and words of praise. His grace 
rains in showers by paths of love in piety and meditation 
as the mother cow’s milk flows for the calf. 


ASH yu महो य॑जत्रा भूत dara ऊतये सजोषाः | 
ये वाजँ अन॑यता वियन्तो ये स्था निचेतारो अमूराः ॥ २७॥ 


27. Ta usu no maho yajatra bhiuta devasa utaye 
sajosah. Ye vajan anayata viyanto ye stha nicetaro 
amurah. 


Great and glorious divinities, loving friends, 
adorable visionaries, decisive and discriminative in 
wisdom and judgement, pray ever abide by us for our 
protection and progress, you who are leading lights and 
harbingers of abundant food, energy, victory and 
ultimate fulfilment of life. 


708 RGVEDA 


Mandala 10/Sukta 62 
Vishvedevah or Angirasas (1-6), Vishvedevah (7), 
Savarni’s Danastuti (8-11) Devatah, Nabhanedishtha 
Manava Rshi 


ये aaa दश्चिणया सम॑क्ता इन्द्र॑स्य सख्यममृतत्वमानश । 
तेभ्यो भद्रमद्धिरसो वो अस्तु प्रतिं गृभ्णीत मानवं 
सुमेधसः ॥ ९॥ 


५ Ye yajnena daksinaya samakta indrasya sakhyam- 
amrtatvam-anasa. Tebhyo bhadram-angiraso vo 
astu prati grbhnita manavam sumedhasah. 


Brilliant divinities of light and wisdom, 
Angirasas, self-realised souls dear as breath of life, who, 
distinguished and beautified by performance of yajna, 
self-sacrifice and liberal giving, have won the love and 
friendship of Indra, lord almighty, and attained the 
freedom of immortality, may there be all round 
auspicious good fortune for you in life. O sagely divines, 
pray take man under your kind care for spiritual 
refinement. 


य उदाजन्पितरो गोमयं वस्वृतेनाभिंन्दन्परिवत्सरे वलम्‌ | 
दीर्घायुत्वमद्धिरसो वो अस्तु प्रति गृभ्णीत मानवं सुमे- 
धसः॥ २॥ 


2. Ya udajan pitaro gomayam vasvrtenabhindan 
parivatsare valam. Dirghayutvam-angaraso vo 
astu prati grbhnita manavam sumedhasah. 


O parental sages and scholars, Angirasas, who 
research, recover and create the wealth of knowledge 
and the divine voice and thereby, through yajna and the 
study of nature’s law, break through and dispel the 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 62 709 


darkness of loss and ignorance all the year round in the 
seasonal cycle, may Indra bless you with a long happy 
life. Pray take the son of Manu under your kind care, 
sages of holy wisdom and knowledge. 


य ऋतेन सूर्यमारो'हयद्दिव्यप्र॑थयन्पृथिवीं मातरं वि। 
सु प्रजास्त्वमङ्धिरसो at अस्तु प्रति गृभ्णीत मानवं सुमे- 
धसः॥ ३॥ 


a Ya rtena suryamarohayan divyaprathayan 
prthivim mataram vi. Suprajastvamangiraso vo 
astu prati grbhnita manavam sumedhasah. 


Angirasas, nature’s powers of creation and 
evolution who, by the divine law and cosmic yajna of 
nature, raised the sun and set it there and formed and 
expanded mother earth, may you have the wealth of 
noble progeny. Enlightened sages of noble intellect and 
wisdom who study and research the laws of nature, pray 
take the children of humanity under your kind care. 


अयं नाभा वदति वल्गु al गृहे SAT AT ऋषयस्तच्छुणोतन । 
सुब्रह्मण्यमंद्धिरसो वो अस्तु प्रति गृभ्णीत मानवं सुमे- 
धसः॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ayam nabha vadati valgu vo grhe devaputra 
rsayas-tacchrnotana. Subrahmanyam-angiraso 
vo astu prati grbhnita manavam sumedhasah. 


O children of divinity, seers and visionaries, this 
central soul speaks the voice divine in your yajnic home, 
in the core of your heart. Listen to that. O Angirasas, 
may this divine voice be yours and your heritage to your 
posterity. O sages of holy mind and wisdom, pray take 
the children of humanity under your care. 


710 RGVEDA 


विरूपास इदुष॑यस्त इद्रम्भीरवेपसः। 
ते अ्धिरसः सूनवस्ते अः परि जज्ञिरे ॥ ५ ॥ 


त Virupasa idrsayasta idgambhiravepasah. 
Te angirasah sunavaste agneh pari jajnire. 


Rshis are seers of various forms of existence 
including the structures and meanings of the voice 
divine. They are powers and performers of serious and 
mysterious actions. They are all Angirasas, children of 
the cosmic soul born as waves of cosmic energy. O 
cosmic soul, O cosmic energy, O Agni, they are your 
children, creators too in their own natural ways, born 
of you like sparks from the yajna fire. 


ये aa: oR जज्ञिरे विरूपासो दिवस्परि । 
नवग्वो नु दरछग्वो अङ्धिरस्तमः wat देवेषु मंहते ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ye agneh pari jajnire virupaso divaspari. Navag- 
vo nu dasagvo angirastamah saca devesu mam- 
hate. 


Of these various forms of existence born of Agni 
in the regions of light, the waves called navagu and 
dashagu being most powerful excel among the divine 
forms of nature. 


Similarly among the living forms of existence 
born of the divine soul and divine energy, the human 
form of five elements and four powers of the self, 1.e., 
mana, buddhi, chitta and ahankara, all together nine, 
and further, ten pranas and ten senses, excels as the 
highest and most powerful of the divine forms of life. 


इन्द्रेण युजा निः Gard वाघतो व्रजं गोम॑न्तमश्विन॑म्‌। 
सहस्रं मे दद॑तो अष्टकण्य4 : श्रवो! देवेष्वक्रत ॥ ७ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 62 711 


7. Indrena yuja nih srjanta vaghato vrajam goma- 
ntamasvinam. Sahasram me dadato astakar-nyah 
57410 devesvakrata. 


The wise and visionary yajakas with the 
inspiration of Indra, lord ruler, create knowledge relating 
to senses, mind and will, and with their senses raised to 
eighfold power and sensitivity, giving me a thousand 
gifts, win praise among brilliant scholars. 


प्र नूनं जायतामयं मनुस्तोक्मेव रोहतु । 
यः सहस्त्रं शताश्वं सद्यो दानाय मंह॑ते ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Pra nunam jayatamayam manustokmeva rohatu. 


Yah sahasram satasvam sadyo danaya mamhate. 


May this man, for sure, arise and grow like a 
germinating seed in fertile soil, who creates and gives a 
thousand gifts of hundred horse-power achievement 
straight to be dedicated to charitable good. 


न तम॑र्नोति कश्चन feaga सान्वारभम्‌ । 
सावर्ण्यस्य afaton वि सिन्धुरिव पप्रथे॥ ९॥ 

9. Na tamasnoti kasScana diva iva sanvarabham. 
Savarnyasya daksina vi sindhuriva paprathe. 


No one can approach even the fringe of this 
wonder worker’s achievement as the sun’s on top of 
heaven. After all, the versatility and generosity of this 
man of universal competence flows ceaselessly like the 
flood of a river and expands as the sea. 


उत दासा परिविषे स्प्दिष्टी गोप॑रीणसा । 
यदुस्तुर्वश्च मामहे ॥ ९०॥ 


712 RGVEDA 


10. Uta dasa parivise smaddisfi goparinasa. 
Yadusturvasca mamahe. 


And the giver, the visionary, the prosperous, the 
industrious and the victorious, all exalt him and feel 
honoured to serve and support him. 


सहस्रदा ग्रामणीर्मां रिषन्मनुः सूर्येणास्य adarig 
दक्चिणा। सावंणर्दिवाः प्र तिर न्त्वायुर्यस्मिन्नश्रान्ता 
असनाम वाज॑म्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Sahasrada gramanirma risanmanuh suryenda-sya 
yatamanaitu daksina. Savarnerdevah pra 
tirantvayur-yasminn-asranta asanama vajam. 


The giver of thousands, leader of the community, 
must not be hurt, nor would he hurt anyone. May this 
generosity, active and advancing, rise with the sun day 
by day. May the divinities prolong and elevate the health 
and age of the man of versatile generosity and 
competence, and may we, under his guidance and 
leadership, relentlessly advancing, win the goal and 
victory of our aspirations. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 63 
Vishvedevah (1-14, 17), pathyasvasti (15-16) Devatah, 
Gaya Plata Rshi 
परावतो ये दिधिषन्त आप्यं मनुप्रीतासो जनिमा विवस्व॑तः। 
ययातेर्ये न॑हुष्य॑स्य बर्हिषि देवा आसते ते अधिं ब्रुवन्तु 
नः VU 
ie Paravato ye didhisanta a4pyam manupritaso 


jJanima vivasvatah. Yayaterye nahusyasya barhisi 
deva asate te adhi bruvantu nah. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 63 713 


May those divinities of humanity and bounties 
of nature that love humanity and come from afar anxious 
to meet and talk to the children of light under the sun, 
those who join the yajna on the vedi of dynamic and 
aspiring humanity bound and dedicated to karma across 
time through birth and death, may they all speak to us 
of the light divine and eternal wisdom. 


विश्वा हि वों नमस्यानि वन्द्या नामानि देवा उत arate 
वः। ये स्थ जाता अदितेर द्धयस्परि ये पुंथिव्यास्ते म॑ इह 
श्रुता हव॑म्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2: Visva hi vo namasyani vandya namani deva uta 
yajniyani vah. Ye stha jata aditer-adbhyaspari 
ye prthivyaste ma iha Sruta havam. 


O Devas, brilliancies of nature and humanity, 
all your names, nature and functions are venerable, 
adorable and worthy of yajnic communion. May all of 
you who are born of the earth, over the sky and space 
and mother Infinity may hear my call and invocation 
here on the vedi. 


येभ्यो माता मधुंमत्पिन्व॑ते पय॑ः: पीयूषं einfefearRae: । 
उक्थशुष्मान्वृषभरान्त्स्वप्र सस्ता आदित्यां अनु मदा 
स्वस्तये ।॥ २ ॥ 

a Yebhyo mata madhumat pinvate payah piyusam 
dyauraditir-adribarhah. Ukthasusman vrsabha- 
rantsvapnasastan adityan anu mada svastaye. 


Serve, exhilarate and replenish those Adityas, 
children of light on earth and brilliancies of nature for 
whom mother earth yields and augments honey sweets 
of the milk of life, the sun, mother infinity and the cloud 


714 RGVEDA 


bearing sky shower nectar sweets of rain. Be grateful 
and rejoice with those, Adityas, who bring the resonance 
of mantric power to yajna, who move the mighty clouds 
of rain and who perform the noblest creative acts for 
the good, happiness and all round well being of life. 


Tatar अनिमिषन्तो अर्हणां बृहदेवासो अमृतत्वमानशुः | 
ज्यो तीरंथा अहिमाया अनागसो दिवो वर्ष्माणं वसते 
स्वस्तये ॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Nrcaksaso animisanto arhana brhaddevaso 
amrtatvamanasuh. Jyotiratha ahimaya anagaso 
divo varsmanam vasate svastaye. 


Ever watchful inspirers of humanity, active 
without a wink, adorable in their own right, mighty 
brilliant and generous, they attain to the freedom of 
immortality. They ride the chariot of light and, inviolable 
of might and free from sin and evil, they abide on top 
of heaven. May they come and bless our yajna for the 
good and all round well being of life. Serve them, 
exhilarate them, be grateful and rejoice. 


सम्राजो ये सुवृधो! यज्ञमाययुरपंरि eet दधिरे दिवि क्षय॑म्‌ | 
at आ विवास नम॑सा सुवृक्तिभिरर्महो आदित्याँ अदितिं 
स्वस्तये ॥ ५ ॥ 


a Samrajo ye suvrdho yajnamayayur-aparihvrata 
dadhire divi ksayam. Tan ठ vivasa namasa 
suvrktibhirmaho adityan aditim svastaye. 


Those illustrious children of light, self-refulgent 
and steadily rising in knowledge and wisdom, who come 
and grace the yajna and, straight and unassailable in 
action and character, abide in the sphere of the light of 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 63 715 


divinity, those great children of inviolable mother 
Infinity and Mother Nature, serve, exhilarate and 
replenish with homage and humility for the good and 
all round well being of life. Be grateful with holy words 
of praise and rejoice. 


को वः स्तोमं राधति यं जुजोषथ fase देवासो मनुषो 
यति sa । को वोऽध्वरं तुविजाता अरं करद्यो नः पर्षदत्यंहः 
स्वस्तये ।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ko vah stomam radhati yam jujosatha visve 
devaso manuso yati sthana. Ko vo’dhvaram 
tuvijata aram karad yo nah parsadatyamhah 
svastaye. 


O Vishvedevas, brilliancies of nature and 
humanity, O thoughtful people, all of you born on the 
earth that abide on the vedi, who leads your song of 
divinity to success? Whom do you love and serve with 
adoration? Who leads your yajna to auspicious 
completion? He that cleanses us of sin and evil. That 
same divinity whom you love and adore, that same lord 
of yajna, serve and exhilarate for the sake of the good 
and all round well being of life. Be grateful and rejoice. 


येभ्यो होत्रां wears मनुः समिद्धागिर्मनंसा aa 
होतुंभिः। त आदित्या अभ॑यं शर्म! यच्छत सुगा न॑; कर्तं 
सुपथा स्वस्तये ॥ ७॥ ति 

Te Yebhyo hotram prathamamayeje manuh sami- 
ddhagnirmanasa sapta hotrbhih. Ta aditya abha- 
yam sarma yacchata suga nah karta supatha 
svastaye. 


Those Adityas, children of eternal light blest 


716 RGVEDA 


with knowledge and wisdom of divinity, for whom 
Manu, omniscient creator, lighted the first fire of 
creative yajna with thought and tapas and conducted 
the yajna with seven priests (five elements with mahat 
and Ahankara, seven pranas, sevenfold sense and mind 
complex, seven rays of the sun, seven sages and seven 
chhandas of the Veda) may, we pray, bring a peaceful 
life and home with freedom from fear and make our 
paths of life simple, straight and clear from darkness 
and evil for the good and all round well being of life. 


य ईशिरे भुव॑नस्य प्रचेतसो विश्व॑स्य स्थातुर्जग॑तश्च 
मन्त॑वः । ते न॑: कृतादकतादेन॑सस्पर्खद्या देवासः पिपृता 
स्वस्तये ।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ya isire bhuvanasya pracetaso 115145१८ sthatur- 
jagatasca mantavah. Te nah krtadakrtadena- 
sasparyadya devasah piprta svastaye. 


Those divine, brilliant and generous powers of 
nature and humanity with a noble heart and mind that 
know and rule the entire moving and unmoving world 
of existence may, we pray, save us today and protect us 
from sin and evil whether past or future for the good 
and all round well being of life. 


भरेष्विन्द्रं सुहवं eames Aas सुकृतं दैव्यं जन॑म्‌। अथं 
fast वरुणं सातये भगं द्यावापृथिवी wed: स्वस्तये ॥ ९ ॥ 
9. Bharesvindram suhavam havamahe’homucam 


sukrtam daivyam janam. A gnim mitram varunam 
sataye bhagam dyavaprthivi marutah svastaye. 


For success in our yajnic struggles of life and 
for victory against negativity and evils of the world, we 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 63 717 


call upon and pray to Indra, mighty ruler of the world, 
instant listener, noble doer and deliverer from sin and 
adversity. We call upon Agni, spirit of light and fire, 
Mitra, loving power of friendship, Varuna, power of 
judgement and discrimination, Bhaga, lord of power and 
prosperity, earth and heaven, Maruts, tempestuous 
forces, and the noble and brilliant people dedicated to 
positive good action so that we may enjoy the good life 
of all round well being. 


सुत्रामाणं पृथिवीं arsed सुशमीणमदितिं सुप्रणीतिम्‌ | 
दैवीं नावं स्वरित्रामनांगसमस्त्र॑वन्तीमा रुहेमा स्वस्तये 1 ९०॥ 


10.  Sutramanam prthivim dyamanehasam susarma- 
namaditim supranitim. Daivim navam svaritra- 
managasamasravantima ruhema svastaye. 


In order to cross the oceanic flood of life and its 
challenges, let us board the boat of life equipped with 
sure safety measures, vast like earth, high and bright 
like the regions of light, free from sin and evil, 
comfortable and peaceful, unbreakable, well structured 
and well steered, divine and brilliant, fitted with fine 
oars, faultless and free from leakage, so that we may 
cross the flood with ease and enjoy the good life with 
all round well being. 


विश्वे यजत्रा अधि वोचतोतये त्राय॑ध्वं नो दुरेवाया 
अभिहतः । सत्यया वो देवहूत्या हुवेम शृण्वतो देवा अव॑से 
स्वस्तये ।॥ ९९॥ 

11. Visve yajatra adhi vocatotaye trayadhvam no 
durevaya abhihrutah. Satyaya vo devahitya 
huvema Srnvato deva avase svastaye. 


718 RGVEDA 


O Devas, brilliant and venerable sagely scholars 
of the science and vision of yajna, pray enlighten us on 
our defence and protection. Protect us from chronic evils 
and strengthen us with safe-guards against sudden 
calamities. In earnest truth we call upon you with words 
of divinity, pray listen and come for our protection so 
that we may live the good life with all round well being 
and happiness. 


अपामीवामप विश्वामर्नाहुतिमपाराति दुर्विंदर््रामघायतः। 
आरे dar gal अस्मद्युयोतनोरु णः शर्म॑ यच्छता स्व- 
स्त्ये ।॥ ९२॥ 


12. = Apamivamapa visvamanahutimaparatim durvi- 
datramaghayatah. Are deva dveso asmadyu- 
yotanoru nah Sarma yacchata svastaye. 


Brilliant divinities of nature and humanity, pray 
remove all sickness and disease of the world, eliminate 
indifference and opposition to divine service, remove 
selfishness and miserliness, remove the malignance of 
the sinner souls, throw off hate and jealousy far from 
us and give us a spacious peaceful happy home so that 
we may live the good life with happiness and all round 
well being. 


ais: स मर्तो fava एधते प्र प्रजाभिर्जायते धर्मणस्परि । 
यमादित्यासो नय॑था सुनीतिभिरति विश्वानि दुरिता 
स्वस्तये ।॥ ९३॥ 


13. Aristah sa marto visva edhate pra prajabhir- 
jayate dharmanaspari. Yamadityaso nayatha 
sunitibhirati visvani durita svastaye. 


Unhurt does the mortal advance in the world, 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 63 719 


rises in values and practice of Dharma and thrives with 
family and progeny whom you, O brilliant divines, lead 
by noble paths of rectitude. Indeed, he crosses over all 
evils of the world whom you enlighten and guide for 
the good life and well being all round. 


यं दैवासोऽ da वाज॑सातौ यं शूर॑साता मरुतो हिते et 
प्रातर्यावाणं रथ॑मिन्द्र सानसिमरिष्यन्तमा रुहेमा स्व- 
स्तयें 1 ९४ ॥ 


14. Yam devaso’vatha vajasatau yam Ssurasata 
maruto hite dhane. Prataryavanam rathamindra 
sanasimarisyantama ruhema svastaye. 


O Lord Almighty, Indra, O Maruts, vibrant and 
enlightened heroes of nature and humanity, let us ride 
that chariot of life, unhurt, inviolable and victorious, 
taking off early morning at dawn, which you protect in 
the battle of the brave when the action is on for the 
victory and attainment of food, energy, culture and 
advancement of all for the good life and well being all 
round. (The chariot here is the human body for the 
individual, and the social, economic and the organismic 
commonwealth of humanity on the political level.) 


स्वस्ति न॑: पथ्यासु धन्व॑सु स्वस्त्यप्सु वृजने स्व॑व॑ति। 
स्वस्ति न॑ः पुत्रकृथेषु योनिषु स्वस्ति राये म॑रुतो दधा- 
ATU ९९५५ ॥ 

|  Svasti nah pathyasu dhanvasu svastyapsu vrjane 


svarvati. Svasti nah putrakrthesu yonisu svasti 
raye maruto dadhdatana. 


O winds, O vibrant scientists and engineers, let 
there be peace, security and well being on the highways 


720 RGVEDA 


and desert lands, all well over the waterways, rivers 
and seas, all good and well being in our programmes of 
enlightened advancement for general happiness. Let 
there be general good and universal well being among 
our women’s lives and in family development 
programmes. O Maruts, bring us auspiciousness in our 
programmes of economic development for the growth 
of national wealth. 


स्वस्तिरिद्ि प्रप॑थे श्रेष्ठा रेक्णस्वत्यभि या वाममेतिं। सा 
नोंअमासो अर॑णे नि पातु स्वावेशा भ॑वतु देवगोपा ॥ १६ ॥ 


16. Svastiriddhi prapathe srestha reknasvatyabhi ya 
vamameti. Sd no ama so arane ni patu svavesa 
bhavatu devagopa. 


Let there be peace, goodness and all round well 
being of the highest order in our long term programmes 
of development, only that which brings abundant wealth, 
noble success and honour and splendour of grace. May 
that peace and splendour strengthen us at home and 
protect us abroad and may that peace, protected by noble 
and brilliant divine souls, have the rightful passion and 
pride of self-confidence. 


एवा wd: सूनुस्वीवृधद्ौ विश्वं आदित्या अदिते मनीषी । 
ईशानासो नरो अमर्त्येनाऽस्तावि जनों दिव्यो गयेन i ९७॥ 


17. Eva plateh sunuravivrdhadvo visva aditya adite 
manist. Isanaso naro amartyen@’ stavi jano divyo 
gayena. 


O brilliant divine Adityas, children of light, O 
mother Aditi, thus does the intelligent and inspiring son 
of the fulfilled household and prosperous community 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 64 721 


exalt you. Thus are ruling masters of themselves and 
their wealth and power, leading lights, the people, the 
enlightened, praised and celebrated by the liberated 
immortal and the intelligent rising generation. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 64 
Vishvedevah Devata, Gaya Plata Rshi 


कथा देवानां कतमस्य याम॑नि सुमन्तु नामं श्रुण्वतां म॑नामहे | 
को Gara कतमो नो मयस्करत्कतम ऊती अभ्या 
व॑वर्तति।॥ ९॥ 


iP Katha devanam katamasya yamani sumantu nama 
Srnvatam manamahe. Ko mrlati katamo no 
mayaskarat katama uti abhya vavartati. 


In the course of our life, which gracious name 
of the divinities that hear our prayer shall we adore and 
how? Who is kind to us first and most? Who brings us 
peace and pleasure? Who cares for us and turns to us 
with protection constantly? 


क्रतूयन्ति क्रत॑वो eq धीतयो वेन॑न्ति वेनाः पतयन्त्या 
fest: । न afer विद्यते अन्य एभ्यो देवेषु मे अधि कामां 
अयंसत ॥ २॥ 


2. Kratuyanti kratavo hrtsu dhitayo venanti venah 
patayantya disah. Na mardita vidyate anya ebhyo 
devesu me adhi kama ayamsata. 


Thoughts, desires and resolutions arise in the 
heart and mind anxious to do honour to divinity. 
Dedicated celebrants love the objects of their love and 
ambition and their desires and ambitions fly in various 
directions. For them, there is no other source of comfort 


222 RGVEDA 


and happiness than the object of these desires, be it 
divine, human or material. I pray may my desires, 
ambitions and prayers converge and concentrate on the 
divinities. 
नरा वा शंसं पूषणमगोह्यमयिं देवेब्द॑मभ्यर्चसि गिरा। 
सूर्यामासा चन्द्रम॑सा यमं दिवि त्रितं वात॑मुषसंमक्तु- 
मण्विनां ॥ २॥ ति 


3: Nara va Samsam pusanam-agohyam-agnim 
deveddhamabhyarcase gira. Suryamasa cadra- 
masa yamam divi tritam vatam-usasam-aktum- 
asvina. 

O man, with holy words worship the divine spirit 
adored by humanity, study, honour and celebrate Pusha, 
divine unfathomable source of nourishment, Agni 
present in direct experience and lighted by noble and 
brilliant yajakas, sun and moon and their relative 
monthly movements, the heavenly energy operative in 
the three regions of the sun, sky and the earth, the dawn, 
the night and day and the Ashvins, complementary 
dynamics of natural energy in motion. 


कथा कविस्तुवीरवान्कया गिरा बृहस्पतिंर्वावुधते 
सुवृक्तिभिः | अज एकपात्सुहवे भि ऋक्व भिरदहिः श्रुणोतु 
बुध्न्यो ३ हवीमनि ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Katha kavistuviravan kaya gira brhaspatirva- 
vrdhate suvrktibhih. Aja ekapat suhavebhir- 
rkvabhir-ahih srnotu budhnyo havimani. 


How, by what words, with which mantric voices 
and yajnic actions is the omniscient poet, master ruler 
and almighty commander of infinite forces studied, 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 64 723 


celebrated and known in his infinite nature and 
presence? In yajnic acts of search for knowledge, with 
holy words of celebrative language used with honest 
intention, unambiguous resolution and faithful purpose, 
is the one absolute power, unborn and undying, 
thunderous presence in space, celebrated and, if you 
use that language with that resolution in those actions, 
he would listen and respond. 


दक्च॑स्य वादिते Sa व्रते राजाना मित्रावरुणा faarara | 
अतूतैपन्थाः पुरुरथो अर्यमा ससहोता विषुरूपेषु 
जन्म॑सु NG 


5. Daksasya vadite janmani vrate rajana mitrava- 
runa vivasasi. Aturtapanthah pururatho aryama 
saptahota visurupesu janmasu. 


And O mother Aditi, eternal nature, at the dawn 
of the day, you energise and illuminate both Mitra and 
Varuna, complementarities of unity and diversity of 
energy and light, both luminant and bound in law like 
day and night, and you bring into action the all ordaining 
cosmic law, Aryama, like the sun ordaining the day and 
night, which is unobstructed in its course, which 
commands the many chariots of the universe such as 
solar systems and galaxies, and which has seven high 
priests in the dynamic universal yajna, like the seven 
rays of the sun showing up the infinite forms of things 
as they come to light. 


ते नो अर्वन्तो हवनश्रुतो हवं विश्वे शृण्वन्तु वाजिनो 
पितद्र॑वः। सहस्रसा मेधसाताविव त्मना महो ये धनं सपिथेषुं 
clr ca ६ ॥ 


724 RGVEDA 


6. Te no arvanto havanasruto havam visve S$rnvan- 
tu vajino mitadravah. Sahasrasa medhasdataviva 
tmana maho ye dhanam samithesu jabhrire. 


May all those veteran scholars and scientists 
who listen to the call of the nation and, moving at 
measured speed, win victories in their fields, who in 
their pioneering adventures discover and produce great 
wealth in all sincerity by their own competence while 
they bring us a thousand gifts in our yajnic programmes, 
listen to our invocation and exhortation at this juncture 
too. 


val ar tags पुर॑न्धिं स्तोभः कृणुध्वं Ceara पूषण॑म्‌। 
ते हि देवस्य सवितुः सवीमनि ऋतुं सच॑न्ते सचितः 
सचेतसः ॥ ७॥ 


7. Pra vo vayum rathayujam purandhim stomaih 
krnudhvam sakhyaya pusanam. Te hi devasya 
savituh savimani kratum sacante sacitah sace- 
tasah. 


O yajakas, by your programmed yajnic sessions 
of scientific endeavour, study the munificent Vayu and 
Pusha, realise and harness the motive energy of wind 
usable in chariot and also the nourishing and 
invigorating power of nature as friends of life for the 
service of humanity. Both Vayu and Pusha in this cosmic 
yajna of Savita, lord creator and sustainer, are efficacious 
and together take life’s growth and evolution forwards. 


त्रिः सस सस्त्रा नद्यो महीर पो वनस्पतीन्पर्वताँ अभिमूतयें | 
Pure त्तिष्यं सधस्थ आ रुद्रं ead रुद्रियं हवा- 
Aue ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 64 725 


8. Trih sapta sasra nadyo mahirapo vanaspatin 
parvatan agnimutaye. Krsanumastrn tisyam 
sadhastha ठ rudram rudresu rudriyam havamahe. 


For our protection and advancement, in our 
yajnic sessions we invoke and exalt thrice seven rays 
of energy active in the three regions of heaven, earth 
and the sky, the flowing streams, floods of water and 
vapour great and greater, herbs and trees, clouds and 
mountains, various orders of fire energy, electric energy, 
catalytic currents of cloud breaking energy, solar energy 
and the yajnic fire which destroys the negativities of 
the environment. 


सर॑स्वती सरयुः सिन्धुरूमिंभिरर्महो महीरवसा य॑न्तु वक्षणीः | 
देवीरापो मातरं: सूदयिल्न्वो' घुतवत्पयो मधुमन्नो 
अर्चत ॥ ९॥ 


9. Sarasvati sarayuh sindhururmibhirmaho mahira- 
vasa yantu vaksanih. Devirapo matarah suda- 
yitnvo ghrtavat payo madhumanno arcata. 


For our protection and progress may Sarasvati, 
cloud forming vapour streams, Sarayu, torrents of falling 
rain, rivers flowing on earth, and all mighty floods 
rushing and rolling at tempestuous speed flow for our 
benefit. O divine rivers, mother streams of nourishing 
waters full of living energy, ghrta, nectar and honey, 
pray flow shining and roaring and bring us honour and 
grandeur. 


उत माता defear शणोतु नस्त्वष्टा देवेधिर्जनिंभिः पिता 
वच॑ः । ऋ भुश्षा वाजो रथस्पतिर्भगो रण्वः शंस॑ः शशमानस्य 
पातु A: Noll 


726 RGVEDA 


10. Utamata brhaddiva srnotu nastvasta devebhirja- 
nibhih pita vacah. Rbhuksa vajo rathaspatirbhago 
ranvah Samsah Sasamanasya patu nah. 


And may mother Infinity of boundless light and 
father Tvashta, maker of body forms, with all divine 
generative forces, listen to our words of prayer and 
celebration. May Rbhuksha, light and energy sustaining 
the intelligent and wise, Vaja, spirit of nourishment and 
energy, the master lord of the cosmic chariot, Bhaga, 
spirit of grandeur, honour and power, all happy givers 
of felicity worthy of adoration by the celebrants, sustain, 
protect and promote us on the way forward. 


रण्वः सन्दुष्टौ पितुमाँ इव क्षयो! भद्रा रुद्राणां मरूतामुपं- 
स्तुतिः । गोभिः ष्याम यशसो जनेष्वा wat देवास इच्छया 
सचेमहि ९९॥ 


11. Ranvah sandrstau pituman iva ksayo bhadra 
rudranam marutam-upastutih. Gobhih syama 
yasaso janesva sada devasa ilaya sacemahi. 


The celebration of Maruts and Rudras, scholars 
of the science of health and pranic energies, is full of 
blessings, joyous and beatific to the celebrant’s vision 
like a haven of peace and total fulfilment. O divinities, 
we pray, may we always adore you with holy songs of 
celebration, enjoy your love and friendship and, blest 
with honour and wealth, live happy among the people 
of the world. 


यां मे धियं मरुत इन्द्र देवा अद॑दात वरूण मित्र यूयम्‌ तां 
पीपयत पय॑सेव धेनुं कुविद्विरो अधि रथे वहौथ ॥ ९२॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 64 727 


12. Yam me dhiyam maruta indra deva adadata 
varuna mitra yuyam. Tam pipayata payaseva 
dhenum kuvidgiro adhi rathe vahatha. 


O Maruts, vibrancies of divinity, O Indra, lord 
of honour and power, O divinities of nature and 
humanity, O Varuna, spirit of judgement, Mitra, spirit 
of love and friendship, let my intelligence and 
imagination, which is your gift to me, grow and overflow 
with exuberance like the cow’s milk. You do always 
carry our prayers on the chariot and convey these to the 
Lord Supreme, don’t you? 


कुविदङ्क प्रति यथा चिदस्य न॑: सजात्यस्य मरुतो बुबोधथ | 
नाभा यत्र प्रथमं संनसामहे तत्र॑ जापित्वमदिंतिर्दधातु 
नः॥ ९३॥ 


13. Kuvidanga prati yatha cidasya nah sajatyasya 
maruto bubodhatha. Nabha yatra prathamam 
samnasamahe tatra jamitvamaditirdadhatu nah. 


Dear Maruts, wise sages, you know and we pray 
enlighten us of our divine affinity and essential 
relationship with this Lord Supreme whatever way it is 
possible. May Aditi, mother Infinity, lead us to find our 
essential nature and identity and guide us to reach there 
where we may regain our first and original centre of 
being. 
ते हि द्यावापृथिवी arent मही देवी देवाञ्जन्म॑ना यज्जियें 
इतः । उभे बिभृत उभयं भरीमभिः पुरू रेतांसि पितृभिश्च 
सिञ्चतः ॥ ९४ ॥ 

14. Te hi dyavaprthivi matara mahi devi devanja- 
nmana yajniye itah. Ubhe bibhrta ubhayam 
bharimabhih puru retamsi pitrbhisca sincatah. 


728 RGVEDA 


Heaven and earth, both of them great, divine, 
venerable mothers of life from their very birth in 
existence, are united with generative vitalities of nature 
here itself. Both sustain the moving and unmoving forms 
of life with their nourishing powers and both pour out 
abundant fertility and generative vitalities replete with 
the seeds of life essence in natural form. 


विषा होत्रा विश्व॑मश्नोति वार्य ब॒हस्पतिर रम॑तिः पनीयसी । 
ग्रावा यत्र॑ मधुषुदुच्यते बृहदवीवशन्त मतिभिंर्मनी- 
fact: ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Vi sa hotra visvamasnoti varyam brhaspatira- 
ramatih pantyasi. Grava yatra madhusuducyate 
brhad-avivasanta matibhir-manisinah. 


That wonderful voice of divinity, the Vedic 
Word, which comprehends and corresponds to the entire 
world of cherished forms of existence is inviolable and 
sublime. Brhaspati, dedicated preserver and promoter 
of the divine Word adores it. Therein the master speaker 
and teacher of it is honoured as harbinger of honey 
sweets of joyous knowledge. Men of reason and faith 
with best of thought and action love and serve it beyond 
measure. 


एवा कविस्तुवीरवं† ऋतज्ञा द्रविणस्युर््रविंणसश्चक्ानः। 
उक्थेभिरत्र मतिभिश्च विप्रोऽ पींपयद्रयो दिव्यानि 
Wa eeu 

16. Eva kavistuviravan rtajna dravinasyur-dra- 
vinasas-cakanah, Ukthebhir-atra matibhisca 
vipro ‘pipayad-gayo divyani janma. 


Thus does the poetic visionary, celebrant of 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 65 729 


divinities and the divine Word, vibrant devotee of the 
laws of Truth, worshipper of the highest wealth of 
Divinity, lover of the wealth and values of existence, 
with thoughts, words and songs of piety in a state of 
inspiration and ecstasy serve and celebrate the divinities 
here in the congregation of the learned in this life. 


एवा प्ठतेः Gata विश्वं आदित्या अदिते मनीषी । 
ईशानासो नरो अमर्त्येनाऽस्तावि जनों दिव्यो गयेन ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Eva plateh sunuravivrdhadvo visva aditya adite 
manist. Isanaso naro amartyena’stavi jano divyo 
gayena. 


O Adityas, children of the inviolable light of 
the universe, O Aditi, mother Infinity, thus does the 
inspirer of the swimmer across the flood of existence 
adore you. O ruling powers of the world, O leading lights 
of humanity, thus is the brilliant and divine humanity 
celebrated by the inspired poet in a mood of ecstasy. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 65 
Vishvedevah Devatah, Vasukarna Vasukra Rshi 


अशिरिन्द्रौ वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा वायुः पूषा सर॑स्वती 
सजोष॑सः। आदित्या विष्णुर्मरुतः cada सुद्र 
अदितिर्ब्रह्यण- स्पतिः ॥ ९॥ 


ie Agnirindro varuno mitro aryama vayuh pusa 

sarasvati sajosasah. Aditya visnur-marutah 
svarbrhat somo rudro aditir-brahmanaspatih. 

May the cosmic spirit of divinity in its various 

and harmonious manifestations integrated in nature and 

humanity...: Agni, fire and magnetic energy of the earth, 


730 RGVEDA 


Indra, wind and electric energy of the skies, Varuna, 
beauty of the moon, peace of night and depth of oceans, 
Mitra, warmth of the sun and freshness of the day, 
Aryama, cosmic gravity that orders the stars and planets 
in the united orbit of existence, Vayu, cosmic energy, 
Pusha, life energy of nourishment and growth, Sarasvati, 
cosmic enlightenment and universal speech vibrant in 
universal mind, Adityas, inviolable light energy of the 
stars, Vishnu, centre-hold of existence and omnipresence 
of sustaining divinity, Maruts, various versions of wind 
energy in currents, Svah, cosmic light and universal 
bliss, Brhat, expansive space home of the universe, 
Soma, cosmic spirit of peace and divine ecstasy 
pervasive from the sun to earth, Rudra, thundering 
clouds and the voice of sublimity, Aditi, imperishable 
infinity of existence, and Brahmanaspati, the ultimate 
immanent and transcendent, evolution and involution 
of life, may all these together in love and unison bless 
the life of nature and humanity in spirit, awareness and 
expression in thought, word and deed. 


San वु॑त्रहत्यैषु सत्प॑ती मिथो हिन्वाना तन्वा ३ समोकसा | 
अन्तरिंश्चं मह्या पंघ्रुरोज॑सा सोमो! घृतश्रीर्महिमानंमीर- 
य॑न्‌॥ २॥ 


2: Indragni vrtrahatyesu satpati mitho hinvana 
tanva samokasa. Antariksam mahya papru-rojasa 
somo ghrtasrir-mahimanam-irayan. 


In the dispelling of darkness and want and in 
the breaking of the clouds for rain, Indra and Agni, 
electric and fire energy, both protectors and promoters 
of the reality of substances, enhancing each other by 
their own essential power, work together in the same 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 65 731 


system, and these together and Soma, the great and 
soothing life-promoting spirit with its harmonious 
power and lustre, all fill, energise and vitalise the great 
middle spaces. 


तेषां हि wat म॑हताम॑नर्वणां स्तोमां उयंम्युतज्ञा ऋता- 
वृर्धाम्‌। ये अंप्सवम॑ण्विं चित्रराधसस्ते नो रासन्तां महये 
समित्याः ॥ ३॥ 


3. Tesam hi mahna mahatam-anarvanam stoman 
iyarmyrtajna rtavrdham. Ye apsavam-arnavam 
citraradhasaste no rasantam mahaye sumitryah. 


By the grandeur of these mighty, irresistible, 
self-sufficient powers of nature which observe and 
advance life’s evolution by the laws of divinity, I, 
knowing the laws of nature and exigencies of the 
environment, structure, realise and accomplish my 
programmes of development and social advancement 
within the specifics of the Vishvedevas which, 
harbingers of wondrous possibilities, friendly and 
helpful, may, we pray, give us rain showers of liquid 
prosperity and progress for our honour and glory. 


स्व॑णरिमन्तरिक्षाणि रोचना arate पृथिवीं स्कम्भु- 
aster ganda महय॑न्तः सुरातयो देवाः ara मनुषाय 
सूरयः ॥ war 

4. Svarnaram-antariksani rocana dyavabhumi 
prthivim skambhurojasa. Prksa iva mahayantah 
suratayo devah stavante manusaya surayah. 


These Vishvedevas, cosmic powers, by their 
glorious lustre and power, hold and sustain the bright 
sun, the shining stars, heaven and earth and the 


732 RGVEDA 


expansive universe. Brilliant celebrants adore and exalt 
them as divine powers, munificent givers and generous 
friends for humanity. 


सित्राय॑ शिक्ष वरुणाय दाशुषे या सम्राजा मन॑सा न 
प्रयुच्छतः | ययोर्धाम धर्म॑णा रोच॑ते बृहद्ययोरुभे रोद॑सी 
नाध॑सी वृतौ!  & ॥ 


5. Mitraya siksa varunaya dasuse ya samraja 
manasa na prayucchatah. Yayordhama dharmana 
rocate brhad yayorubhe rodasi nadhasi vrtau. 


Offer homage to Mitra and Varuna, 
complementary centripetal and centrifugal currents of 
cosmic energy, both sovereign and self-lustrous which 
never fault on their observance of law and generosity 
by their very nature. Their abode and sphere of operation 
shines by their law of Dharma and the great heaven and 
the great earth both abide in their vast sphere of cosmic 
dynamics. Offer homage to these generous givers of 
the light of day and peace of the night. 


या गौर्वर्तनिं पर्येतिं निष्कृतं पयो दुहाना व्रतनीर॑वारत॑ः | 
सा Vea वरुणाय दाशुषे देवेभ्यो दारब्दविषा 
विवस्व॑ते॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ya gaurvar-tanim paryeti niskrtam payo duhana 
vratanir-avaratah. Sa prabruvanad varunaya 
dasuse devebhyo dasaddhavisa vivasvate. 


The earth which goes about in her well defined 
orbit, ceaselessly moving on over the orbital stages of 
the revolution and yielding milky nourishments for life 
on the way for living beings, expresses her thanks to 
generous Varuna and does homage to Vivasvan, the 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 65 733 


refulgent sun, Varuna dispelling it and the sun attracting 
it, both holding it in balance for the worshipful 
humanity. 


दिवक्षसो अभिजिह्ा ऋतावृध ऋतस्य योनिं" विमृशन्तं 
आसते | द्यां स्क॑भित्व्य१प आ च॑क्रुरोजंसा यज्ञं जनित्वी 
तन्वी इनि मामजुः॥ ७॥ 


7. Divaksaso agnijihva rtavrdha rtasya yonim vimr- 
Santa asate. Dyam skabhitvyapa a cakrurojasa 
yajnam janitvi tanvini mamrjuh. 


Cosmic divinities clothed in light with tongues 
of fire observe and augment the law of cosmic yajna, 
and together, in a spirit of grateful union, sit at the centre 
with the central cause of all cosmic evolution. Holding 
the heavens high with their lustre, creating the waters 
of life, and lighting up and sustaining the yajna fire, 
they anoint themselves with divine grace. 


URfarat पितरा पूर्वजावरी ऋतस्य योनां क्षयतः समोकसा । 
द्यावापृथिवी वरुणाय wad घृतवत्पयो महिषाय 
पिन्वतः ॥ ८. ॥ 


8. Pariksita pitara purvajavari rtasya yona ksayatah 
samokasa. Dyavaprthivi varunaya savrate 
ghrtavat payo mahisaya pinvatah. 


Extending and expanding, all embracing, each 
in its own sphere but both abiding together in the same 
one space, heaven and earth, earliest parents of life, rest 
in the original cause of cosmic evolution and both, 
dedicated to the law of divinity, replete with the waters 
of life, create and augment living energy for the great 
Varuna, pranic spirit of life. 


734 RGVEDA 


पर्जन्यावाता वृषभा पुरीषिणेन्द्रवायू वरुणो पित्रो अर्यमा। 
देवों आदित्याँ अदितिं हवामहे ये पार्थिवासो दिव्यासो 
अप्सु ये॥९॥ 


9. Parjanyavata vrsabha purisinendravayu varuno 
mitro aryama. Devan adityan aditim havamahe 
ye parthivaso divyaso apsu ye. 


Clouds and winds, mighty water bearer vapours, 
Indra and Vayu, currents of electric energy and the 
winds, Varuna, Mitra and Aryama, centrifugal, 
centripetal and all controlling cosmic energy, the devas, 
Adityas, rays of solar emissions, Aditi, mother nature, 
all we invoke, adore and exalt, all that pervade and abide 
by earth, heaven and the middle regions of the sky, for 
knowledge and its application in practice. 


त्वष्टारं वायुम्र॑भवो य ओहं ते दैव्या होतारा उषसं tae । 
बरहस्पतिं' वृत्रखादं सुमेधसंमिद्धियं सोमं धनसा उ 
ईमहे।॥ oll 


10. Tvastaram vayumrbhavo ya ohate daivya hotara 
usasam svastaye. Brhaspatim vrtrakha-dam 
sumedhasamindriyam somam dhanasa u imahe. 


O learned scholars of the science of yajna, for 
our achievement of wealth and all round well being, let 
us study and adore Tvashta, the specific natural energy 
that creates and shapes the forms of life, Vayu, wind 
and electric energy, the solar energy of the dawn, the 
vast space, the catalytic force that breaks the cloud and 
the soma energy which energises the heavenly yajakas, 
prana and apana, and enhances the efficacy of brain and 
the senses. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 65 735 


ब्रह्म गामश्वं जनयन्त ओष॑धीर्वनस्पतीन्पृथिवीं पर्वतां 
अपः । सूर्य दिवि रोहयन्तः Gara आय व्रता विसृजन्तो 
अधि श्चमि॥ ९९॥ 


11. Brahma gamasvam janayanta osadhir-vanas- 
patin prthivim parvatan apah. Suryam divi 
rohayantah sudanava arya vrata visrjanto adhi 
ksami. 


Let us invoke, study and adore for extension 
and improvement the natural processes producing and 
enhancing the quality of food, cows, horses, herbs and 
trees, earth, mountains, waters, and the facts of nature 
which shine and rise to the sun in heaven, all highly 
productive and generous givers, creating, causing and 
stimulating the best actions on earth. 


wae: पिपृथो Pian श्यावं पुत्रं afer 
अंजिन्वतम्‌। कमद्युवं विमदायो'हथुयुंवं विष्णाप्वं 
विश्व॑कायावं सृजथः ॥ ९२॥ 


^ = ~ ^ - 


12. Bhujyum-amhasah piprtho nirasvinad syavam 
putram vadhrimatya ajinvatam. Kamadyuvam 
vimadayohathur-yuvam visnapvam visvakayava 
srjathah. 


Ashvins, complementary powers of divine light 
and regeneration, you save the man of suffering and 
sufferance from sin and evil, refertilise the barren land 
and revitalise the seed to germinate, raise the genetic 
quality of seeds and plants for better taste and 
nourishment, and raise the general capacity of the seeker 
of knowledge to higher competence. 


736 RGVEDA 


पावीरवी तन्यतुरेकपादजो दिवो erat सिन्धुरापः समुद्वियंः | 
विश्वे card: श्णवन्वचांसि मे सर॑स्वती सह धीभिः 
पुर॑न्ध्या ।॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Paviravi tanyaturekapadajo divo dharta sindhu- 
rapah samudriyah. Visve devasah srnavan 
vacamsi me sarasvati saha dhibhih purandhya. 


Thunder and lightning, the one absolute unborn 
eternal sustainer of heaven, the sun, flowing rivers, 
Oceanic waves and waters, rain bearing clouds, all the 
divinities of nature and the seasons, and the divine 
mother of knowledge and speech with the cosmic 
intelligence and will may hear my prayer and respond. 


विश्वे देवाः सह धीभिः पुर॑न्ध्या मनोर्यजत्रा अमरतां ऋतज्ञाः | 
रातिषाचो! अभिषाचः स्वर्विदः cai PR ब्रह्मं सूक्तं 
जुषेरत ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Visve devah saha dhibhih purandhya manor- 
yajatra amrta rtajnah. Ratisaco abhisacah svar- 
vidah svargiro brahma suktam juserata. 


May all divinities of nature and humanity, with 
their thoughts, intentions and will and actions, adorable 
at heart in yajna, immortal, self-established in divine 
truth and law, givers of intelligence and competence 
for accomplishment, loving and sociable, the very voice 
and vision of divinity, soul of bliss divine, listen and 
accept my song of divine adoration. 


देवान्वसिष्ठो अमृतान्ववन्दे ये विश्वा भुव॑नाभि प्रतस्थुः 1 
ते नो रासन्तामुरूगायमद्य यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः wat 
नः॥ ९५॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 66 737 


15. Devan vasistho amrtan vavande ye visva bhuva- 
nabhi pratasthuh. Te no rasantamuru-gayamadya 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


The most brilliant sage celebrates and adores 
the immortals who abide in all regions of the world. 
May they now give us universal knowledge and vision 
of the highest adorable lord divine. O Vishvedevas, pray 
always protect and promote us with all that is good for 
total well being of life. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 66 
Vishvedevah Devata, Vasukarna Vasukra Rshi 


देवान्हुवे बृहच्छ वसः स्वस्तये! ज्योतिष्कृतो अध्वरस्य 
प्रचेतसः । ये वावृधुः प्र॑तरं विश्ववेदस इन्द्रज्येष्ठासो अमृतां 
ऋतावृधः ॥ ९॥ 


i, Devan huve brhacchravasah svastaye jyotiskrto 
adhvarasya pracetasah. Ye vavrdhuh prataram 
visvavedasa indrajyesthaso amrta rtavrdhah. 


For the good and well being of life all round, I 
invoke the Vishvedevas, all bounties and divinities of 
nature and humanity. Abundant and renowned are they, 
refulgent givers of light, enlightened promoters of the 
yajna of love and non-violence, who enhance the 
creative and productive processes of overcoming 
ignorance, injustice and poverty. Immortal observers and 
promoters of universal law with Indra, the omnipotent, 
as their supreme leader, they know, command and 
promote the entire wealth and well being of the world. 


738 RGVEDA 


इन्द्रप्रसूता वरुणप्रशिष्टा ये सूर्य॑स्य ज्योतिषो भाग- 
TAR: । मरुद्र॑णे वृजने मन्म॑ धीमहि माघोने यज्ञं ज॑नयन्त 
सूरय॑ः॥ २॥ 


2. Indraprasuta varunaprasista ye suryasya jyotiso 
bhagamanasuh. Marudgane vrjane manma 
dhimahi maghone yajnam janayanta surayah. 


Created, inspired, commanded and controlled 
by Indra, supreme ruler, instructed by Varuna, lord 
supreme of wisdom and judgement, the Maruts have 
attained to their share of the light of the sun. The wise 
and the brave institute yajna for the sake of divine 
bounties. May we too concentrate and dedicate our heart 
and soul to the strength and liberality of the Maruts. 


इन्द्रो वसुभिः परि पातु नो गय॑मादित्यैर्नो अदितिः शर्म 
यच्छतु । रुद्रो रुद्रेभिर्दवो doara नस्त्वष्टा नो ofa: 
सुविताय जिन्वतु ॥ ३ ॥ 
ai Indro vasubhih pari patu no gayamddityairno 
aditih sarma yacchatu. Rudro rudrebhirdevo 
mrlayati nastvasta no gnabhih suvitaya jinvatu. 
May Indra protect and promote our home with 
the wealth of the eight Vasus. May Aditi, mother Infinity, 
give us peace by all the twelve Adityas. May Rudra, 
lord of justice and mercy, with the eleven Rudras be 
pleased with us. May Tvashta promote us with the power 
of all the divinities for happiness and peace. 


अदितिद्यांवापृथिवी ऋतं महदिन्द्राविष्णु मरुतः tated | 
देवाँ आदित्याँ अव॑से हवामहे वसुं नुदरान्त्संवितारं सुदंस॑- 
PLUS 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 66 739 


4. Aditirdyavaprthivi rtam mahadindravisnu maru- 
tah svarbrhat. Devan adityan avase havamahe 
vasun rudrantsavitaram sudamsasam. 


For our protection and promotion, we invoke 
Aditi, mother Nature, heaven and earth, the great cosmic 
law of Rtam, Indra, cosmic energy, Vishnu, omnipresent 
divinity that sustains the universe, Maruts, wind 
energies, cosmic joy, eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, Savita, 
lord of life and giver of light, lord supreme of cosmic 
action, and the twelve Adityas, all refulgent divinities 
of the universe. 


सर॑स्वान्धीभिर्वरुणो yada: पूषा विष्णुर्महिमा वायु- 
रश्विना । ब्रह्मकृतो अमृतां विश्ववेदसः शर्म नो यंसच्तरि- 
वरूथमंहंसः ॥ ५॥ 


a Sarasvan dhibhirvaruno dhrtavratah pusa visnur- 
mahima vayur-asvina. Brahmakrto amrta 
visvavedasah §arma no yamsan trivarutham- 
amhasah. 


The rainy sky with its actions of showers, Varuna 
with its own laws of functioning, Pusha, nature’s energy 
of nourishment and growth, the mighty all pervasive 
Vishnu, the winds, and the Ashvins, all dedicated to the 
supreme spirit of the universe, immortal powers in direct 
contact with the Supreme Divine, may, we pray, give us 
peace and rest for body, mind and soul free from sin 
and evil. 


वृषा यज्ञो वृष॑णः सन्तु afar वृष॑णो देवा वृष॑णो 
हविष्कृतं: । वृष॑णा द्यावापृथिवी ऋतावरी वृषा पर्जन्यो 
वृष॑णो वृषस्तुभः ॥ ६ ॥ 


740 RGVEDA 


6. Vrsa yajno vrsanah santu yajniya vrsano deva 
vrsano haviskrtah. Vrsana dyavaprthivi rtavari 
vrsa parjanyo vrsano vrsastubhah. 


May yajna bring us showers of peace and 
prosperity, may the yajakas be generous and abundant, 
may the divinities be generous and abundant, may the 
bearers of havi be generous and abundant, may heaven 
and earth replete with waters be generous and abundant, 
may the clouds be generous and abundant, may the 
celebrants of the generous divinities too be generous 
and abundant and bring us showers of peace and 
prosperity. 


अग्रीषोमा वृष॑णा वाज॑सातये पुरुप्रशस्ता वृष॑णा sd ब्रुवे । 
यावीजिरे वृष॑णो देवयज्यया ता नः ore’ त्रिवरूथं वि 
यंसतः ॥ ७ ॥ 


ve Agnisoma vrsana vdjasataye purupraSsasta vrsana 
upa bruve. Yavijire vrsano devayajyaya ta nah 
Sarma trivarutham vi yamsatah. 


Agni and Soma, heat and cold, two 
complementarities of nature, both generous and 
abundant for the achievement of food, energy and 
advancement in knowledge and culture, universally 
praised and adored as generous and abundant, both of 
which others too serve and adore as generous and 
abundant by yajna, I glorify, and pray they may give us 
threefold peace and protection for body, mind and soul. 


धृतव्रताः क्षत्रियां यज्ञनिष्कृतो बृहद्दिवा अं॑ध्वराणांमभि- 
fara: | अगिोतार ऋतसापों streets पो staat 
aad ue ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 66 741 


8. Dhrtavratah ksatriya yajnaniskrto brhaddiva 
adhvaranamabhisriyah. Agnihotara rtasapo 
adruho’po asrjannanu vrtraturye. 


Dedicated Kshatriyas consecrated in yajna, 
brilliant in the knowledge of divinity, meticulous 
performers of yajna with beauty and grace with Agni as 
their high priest of yajna in observation and exaltation 
of the laws of divinity, free from hate and enmity, move 
forward in their battle against darkness and evil and set 
the waters of life aflow like rain showers on the break 
of dark clouds. 


द्यावापृथिवी ज॑नयन्नभि व्रताऽऽप ओषधीर्वनिनानि यज्ञियां । 
अन्तरिश्चं स्व१रा पप्रुरूतये वशं देवासस्तन्वी नि 
TT: We 


9. Dyavaprthivi janayannabhi vrata’’pa osadhir- 
vaninani yajniya. Antariksam svara papruritaye 
vasam devasastanvi ni mamryjuh. 


Vishvedevas, divinities of nature and humanity, 
dedicated to their duties and discipline, creating and 
promoting herbs and trees and forests for nature’s sacred 
purpose of protection and promotion of life, fill the 
regions of earth, sky, the sun and the highest heaven 
with replenitude and add beauty to their own body and 
the environment to their heart’s desire. 


धारो दिव ऋभवः सुहस्ता वातापर्जन्या म॑हिषस्य॑ तन्यतोः | 
आप ओष॑धीः प्रतिरन्त नो गिरो भगो रातिर्वाजिनो यन्तु 
मे हव॑म्‌ ९०॥ 

10. Dhartaro diva rbhavah suhasta vataparjanya 


mahisasya tanyatoh. Apa osadhih pra tirantu no 
giro bhago ratirvajino yantu me havam. 


742 RGVEDA 


May the divine powers, sustainers of bright 
heaven, roaring winds and thundering clouds, faultless 
perfect waves of light and Rbhus, formative intelligence 
of nature and expert humanity, waters, herbs and trees 
listen, enjoy and augment our mantric voice, and may 
Bhaga, abundant spirit of highest grace, Rati, mother 
nature’s generosity, and the Vajins, fire, wind and sun, 
life energies of the three regions, listen to my invocation 
and join our yajna with abundance of gifts and teeming 
JOY. 

समुद्रः सिन्धू रजो अन्तरिक्षमज एकपात्तनयिलुर॑र्णवः। 
stede-d: श्वणवद्वचांसि मे विश्वे cara उत सूरयो 
मम॑।॥ ९९॥ 


11. Samudrah sindhu rajo antariksamaja ekapat 
tanayitnurarnavah. Ahirbudhnyah srnavadva- 
camsi me visve devasa uta surayo mama. 


May the ocean, the sea and rivers, the middle 
regions of vapour and air, the one absolute eternal 
sustainer of the universe, the thunder, the spatial ocean, 
the region of dark clouds, and all divinities and eminent 
sages and scholars of the world, listen to my invocation 
and prayer and respond. 


स्याम॑ वो मन॑वो देववीतये प्राञ्चं नो यज्ञ प्रणयत साधुया । 
आदित्या रुद्रा ada: सुदानव इमा ब्रह्य शस्यमानानि 
जिन्वत ॥ १२॥ 


12. Syama vo manavo devavitaye prancam no yajnam 
pra nayata sadhuya. Aditya rudra vasavah 
sudanava ima brahma Sasyamanani jinvata. 


O men of thought and enlightenment, may we 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 66 743 


all be for your advancement and well being on the path 
of holiness and rectitude. Please take our yajnic 
endeavours forward in the right direction in a simple 
and straight manner. O Vasus, Rudras and Adityas, 
scholars of the first, higher and highest order, noble and 
generous, please refresh, promote and advance these 
hymns of adoration to higher achievement in the 
programmes. 


दैव्या होतारा प्रथमा पुरोहिंत ऋतस्य पन्थामन्वेमि साधुया । 
क्षेत्रस्य पतिं प्रतिवेशमीमहे fasateat अमरतां अप्र॑यु- 
च्छतः॥ ९३॥ 


13. Daivya hotara prathama purohita rtasya pantha- 
manvemi sadhuya. Ksetrasya patim prative- 
samimahe visvan devan amrtan aprayucchatah. 


O divine yajakas, O high priests of nature and 
humanity, I follow the straight path of rectitude and 
universal law of nature’s creativity. And we pray to the 
lord ruler and protector of the universe immanent in 
every form of existence, and, join all the divine powers, 
immortal and relentlessly active in the universal process, 
for study and advancement through yajna. 


वसिष्ठासः पितृवद्वाचमक्रत cat dott ऋषिवत्स्वस्तये | 
प्रीताडव ज्ञातयः काममेत्याऽस्मे देवासोऽव धूनुता 
वसुं ।॥ ९४॥ 

14. Vasisthasah pitrvadvacamakrata devan ilana 
rsivat svastaye. Prita iva jnatayah kamametya 
*sme devaso’va dhunuta vasu. 


Brilliant sages and scholars studying the divine 
powers and researching the divine resources of nature 


744 RGVEDA 


like the seers and, like parents and protectors, creating 
the knowledge and the language of knowledge for life’s 
well being, and, O noble benefactors, having known 
our cherished needs and desires like loving friends and 
relations, pray energise our economy and create wealth 
for the community. 


देवान्वसिष्ठो अमृतान्ववन्दे ये विश्वा भुव॑नाभि प्रतस्थुः 1 
ते नो रासन्तापमुरुगायमद्य यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा 
नः ॥ ९९५ ॥ 7 

15. Devan vasistho amrtan vavande ye visva bhuva- 
nabhi pratasthuh. Te no rasantamurugaya-madya 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


The brilliant sage of the first and highest order 
adores and celebrates the immortal Vishvedevas who 
abide in all regions of the world. May they give us 
universal knowledge and vision of the highest adorable 
lord divine. O Vishvedevas, pray protect and promote 
us for all time with all that is good for the total well 
being of life. 

Mandala 10/Sukta 67 

Brhaspati Devata, Ayasya Angirasa Rshi 


इमां धियं aasitwif पिता न॑ ऋतप्रजातां बृहतीम॑- 
विन्दत्‌। तुरीयं स्विज्जनयद्धिश्वज॑न्योऽ यास्य॑ उक्थ- 
fiesta शंस॑न्‌ ॥ ९॥ 

iL Imam dhiyam saptasirsnim pita na rtaprajatam 
brhatimavindat. Turtyam svijjanayadvisva- 
jJanyo’yasya ukthamindraya Samsan. 


Our father creator, omniscient lord divine, 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 67 745 


revealed for us this universal voice of knowledge 
spontaneously. Structured in seven metres, it is born of 
the lord’s awareness of Satyam and Rtam, 1.6., the eternal 
and mutable truth of existence and its laws of evolution, 
sustenance and involution. He, the original source of 
the birth of the universe and its knowledge and language, 
also revealed the fourth and silent mode of existence in 
the transcendent state of Moksha beyond the earlier three 
of Dharma, Artha and Kama without effort and spoke it 
for Indra, the soul. 


ऋतं शंस॑न्त ऋजु दीर्ध्याना दिवस्पुत्रासो असुरस्य वीराः | 
विप्रं पदमद्धिरसो दधाना यज्ञस्य धाम प्रथमं म॑नन्त ॥ २॥ 


2. Rtam samsanta rju didhyana divasputraso 
asurasya virah. Vipram padamangirso dadhana 
yajnasya dhama prathamam mananta. 


Speaking the Word of eternal knowledge, 
meditating on the natural, eternal spirit of omniscience, 
the Rshis, children of light, brave offsprings of divine 
virility, self-disciplined souls established in the position 
of vibrant sages among humanity, realise in direct 
experience the first and original presence of the adorable 
lord Supreme. 


हंसैरिव सखिंभिर्वावंदद्धिरश्मन्मयानि नहना व्यस्य॑न्‌। 
लरहस्पतिरथिकनिंक्रदद्रा उत प्रास्तौदुच्च fast अंगा- 
यत्‌॥ ३॥ 


3 Hamsairiva sakhibhir-vavadadbhir-asmanma- 
yani nahana vyasyan. Brhaspatir-abhikanikra- 
dadga uta prastauducca vidvan agayat. 


Chanting with friends as with hansa-like simple 


746 RGVEDA 


sinless souls of purity, breaking the adamantine chains 
of karmic bondage, loudly proclaiming the divine Word 
of omniscience, Brhaspati, master celebrant of the 
Infinite Spirit, blest with knowledge and vision divine, 
sings and adores the lord divine. 


अवो द्वाभ्यां पर एकया गा Wet तिष्ठन्तीरनु तस्य सेतौ । 
लृहस्पतिस्तम॑सि ज्योतिरिच्छन्नुदुस््रा आकविं हि तिस्त्र 
आवः ॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Avo dvabhyam para ekaya ga guha tisthantira- 
nrtasya setau. Brahaspatis-tamasi jyotiriccha- 
nnudusra akarvi hi tisra avah. 


Brhaspati, master of language, wishing for the 
light of knowledge and expression in the midst of the 
darkness of the web of the world of mutability, expresses 
the two upper levels of language, i1.e., madhyama and 
vaikhari, which he expresses by two media of thought 
and word, and the one hidden below, i.e., Pashyanti, he 
apprehends through one, the deeper mind in meditation. 
Thus he reveals the three modes of language. (The fourth 
is Para, the silent mode of language in its originality 
beyond the world of mutability which can be realised 
in the highest state of Samadhi.) 


विभिद्या पुरं शयथेमपाचीं निस्त्रीणि साकमुंदधेरंकृन्तत्‌। 
बरहस्पतिरुषसं सूर्य गामर्कं विवेद स्तनयन्निव द्यौः ॥ ५५ ॥ 
त, Vibhidya puram Sayathemapacim nistrini saka- 
mudadherakrantat. Brhaspatirusasam suryam 
gamarkam viveda stanayanniva dyauh. 


Brhaspati, the seeker of light, in the state of 
turiya beyond deep sleep, breaks through the three bonds 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 67 747 


of the city of darkness of the mutable world like thunder 
and lightning breaking the dark cloud and directly 
realises the dawn, the sun rays, the sun and the light 
beyond the sun. 


इन्द्रो वल्कं tat दुघानां करेणेव fa deat रवेण । 
स्वेदाज्िभिराशिर॑मिच्छमानोऽ रोदयत्यणिमा गा अपु 
ष्णात्‌॥ & ॥ 


6. Indro valam raksitaram dudhanam kareneva vi 
cakarta ravena. Svedanjibhir-asiram-icchama- 
no’rodayat panima ga amusnat. 


Indra, mighty ruling soul, wishing to taste the 
sweetness of milk mixed with soma, 1.e., divine ecstasy 
with vibrations of grace, removes the veil of darkness 
covering the light of knowledge and divine speech with 
an act of will as if with a stroke of thunder and lightning, 
throws the demon away lamenting, recovers and enjoys 
the light of knowledge with the voice of divinity and 
showers of bliss in a state of clairvoyance. 


ae सत्येथिः सखिभिः शुचद्धिर्गोर्धायसरं वि ध॑नसेरंदर्दः | 
ब्र्मणस्पतिर्वृष॑भियर्वराहैर्घ्मस्वेदेभिर््रविंणं व्यानट्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


अ Saim satyebhih sakhibhih sucadbhir-godhayasam 
vi dhanasair-adardah. Brahma-naspatirvrsabhir- 
varahair-gharmasvedebhir-dravinam vyanat. 


Brahmanaspati, master, protector, promoter and 
ruler of the world of existence, blest with divine light, 
vision and speech breaks down the thief of cows, Le., 
hoarders, exploiters and destroyers of the wealth of life. 
He breaks them down with the help and cooperation of 
friends and associates who are generous, self-fulfilled, 


748 RGVEDA 


fervently dedicated to truth, purity of conduct, laws of 
Dharma and rectitude, and blest with ample means and 
materials for the achievement of their goal. Thus does 
he recover and establish wealth and common wealth 
for the individual and the society. 


ते सत्येन aden गोप॑तिं गा sara इषणयन्त धीभिः 1 
बहस्पतिर्मिथोअंवद्यपेभिरुदुस्तरियां अस्रजत स्वयुग्भिः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Te satyena manasa gopatim ga tyanasa isana- 
yanta dhibhih. Brhaspatirmitho avadyapebhiru- 
dusriya asrjata svayugbhih. 


They, friends and associates, with dedication to 
truth and with honest mind, intentions, thoughts and 
actions, wishing to promote the cows, 1.e., the wealth 
and culture of the nation as a system, approach the 
‘gopati’, 1.e., the head of the commonwealth, and he, 
Brhaspati, master, protector and ruler of the expansive 
system, together with his associates at his full command, 
with safeguards against negativity, scandal and calamity, 
creates and organises a nation of freedom and progress 
ranging over the earth in peace and joy. 


तं वर्धय॑न्तो मतिभिः शिवाभिः feta नान॑दतं Gera । 
बृहस्पतिं वृष॑णं शूर॑सातौ भरेभरे अनुं मदेम जिष्णुम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Tam vardhayanto matibhih sivabhih simhamiva 
nanadatam sadhasthe. Brhaspatim vrsanam 
Surasatau bharebhare anu madema jisnum. 


Exalting him with our thoughts and actions 
dedicated to peace, freedom and all round well being 
of life, supporting him waxing and roaring victorious 
as a lion in the world’s hall of yajnic freedom and 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 67 749 


progress, let us join Brhaspati, mighty and generous 
protector, for the sake of victory in every battle worthy 
of the brave, and win our goals and enjoy life with him. 


यदा वाजमसंनद्धिश्वरूपमा दद्यामरुक्चदुत्तराणि सद॑ । 
ब्रहस्पति वृष॑णं वर्धयन्तो नाना सन्तो बिभ्र॑तो ज्योतिं- 
रासा॥ ९०॥ 


10. Yada vajam-asanad-visvarupama dyamaru-ksad- 
uttarani sadma. Brhaspatim vrsanam vardha- 
yanto nana santo bibhrato jyotirasa. 


When Brhaspati achieves food, energy and 
victories and higher possibilities of universal order and, 
like the sun, reaches and illuminates the heavens with 
light, then those who receive and shine with light like 
the planets, being many and various, exalt the mighty 
generous master ruler with words of adoration. 


सत्यामाशिषं कृणुता वयोधै कीरिं चिब्दयव॑थ CARA: 1 
पश्चा yet अप॑ भवन्तु विश्वास्तद्रोदसी श्रुणुतं faya- 
पिन्वे॥ eeu 


11. Satyamasisam krnuta vayodhai kirim ciddhya- 
vatha svebhirevaih. Pasca mrdho apa bhavantu 
visvastadrodast Srnutam visvaminve. 


O Brhaspati, O leading lights of humanity, for 
food and energy, good health and age, fulfil the hopes 
and ambitions of the people and justify your words of 
purpose to the point of truth without compromise. 
Protect the cooperator and celebrant with your own 
power and security. Then let all violence, enmity and 
sabotage be overcome and cast off totally far away. And 
may the heaven and earth, givers of universal fulfilment 


750 RGVEDA 
listen to our prayer and adoration. 


इन्द्रो wat teat अर्णवस्य वि मूर्धानंमभिनदर्बुंदस्यं | 
अहन्नहिमरिणात्सप् सिन्धून्देवैद्यीवापुथिवी प्राव॑तं नः ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Indro mahna mahato arnavasya vi murdhanama- 
bhinad-arbudasya. Ahannahim-arinat sapta 
sindhun devair-dyavaprthivi pravatam nah. 


Indra with his might breaks the top of the great 
ocean of waters in space and, breaking the dark cloud, 
releases the seven seas and sets the rivers aflow. May 
the heaven and earth protect us by the divinities. 


(The metaphor has been explained also as 
revelation of the Vedas in seven metres at the time of 
the creation of humanity. The revelation breaks through 
the darkness of ignorance and releases the light of 
knowledge to radiate in seven chhandas of the Vedas.) 


Mandala 10/Sukta 68 
Brhaspati Devata, Ayasya Angirasa Rshi 


उदप्रुतो न वयो रक्च॑माणा वाव॑दतो अश्िय॑स्येव घोषाः | 
गिरिभ्रजो नोर्मयो मद॑न्तो बृहस्पति पभ्यर्का अंनावन्‌॥ ९॥ 


I Udapruto na vayo raksamana vavadato abhriya- 
syeva ghosah. Giribhrajo normayo madanto 
brhaspatim-abhyarka anavan. 


Like aquatic birds playing on water, like 
watchful guards raising their voice, like the rolling 
rumble of rain clouds, like rippling streams flowing 
down mountain slopes, the celebrants raise their hymns 
of adoration to Brhaspati. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 68 751 


SRS cet नश्च॑माणो aa इवेदर्यमणं निनाय ise 
सित्रो न दम्प॑ती अनक्ति बृह॑स्पते वाजयाशूँरिवाजौ ॥ 2 


2 Sam gobhirangiraso naksamano bhaga ivedar- 
yamanam ninaya. Jane mitro na dampati anakti 
brhaspate vajayasunrivajau. 


Just as Angirasa, enlightened disciple of the sage 
of living knowledge, like Bhaga, divine lord of light 
and grandeur, leads his friend to knowledge and 
prosperity, as a friend leads a couple in the community 
to come together in marriage, so O Brhaspati, inspire 
and energise the aspirants to go forward and win their 
goal by the light and words of divinity. 


meat अतिथिनीरिषिराः स्पार्हाः qautl अनवद्यरूपाः | 
aeeafa: पर्वतेभ्यो वितूर्या fot ऊपे यव॑मिव स्थि- 
fava: nau 


a Sadhvarya atithinirisirah sparhah suvarna 
anavadyarupah. Brhaspatih parvatebhyo viturya 
nirga upe yavamiva sthivibhyah. 


Replete with pure, living energy, ever on the 
move, loved, coveted, brilliant golden, beautiful in form, 
such are the rays of light and vitality which Brhaspati, 
the sun, recovers from the deep caverns of darkness 
and sends them down to clouds and earth as a farmer 
sows the seeds of barley in the field. 


आप्रुषायन्मधुन ऋतस्य योनिंमवधश्चिपन्न्कं उल्कामिव aM: | 
लहस्पतिरुब्दरन्रश्म॑नो गा भूम्यां उद्नेव वि त्वचं विभेद ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Aprusayan madhuna rtasya yonimavaksipa- 


nnarka ulkamiva dyoh. Brhaspatir-uddhara- 
nnasmano ga bhumya udneva vi tvacam bibheda. 


752 RGVEDA 


Sprinkling the womb of life with the honey 
sweets of vitality like the sun radiating the rays of light 
from the regions of heaven, Brhaspati recovers the 
showers of life from the clouds and, as showers of water 
seep into the crust of earth, so the seeds of life are vested 
and borne in the earth. 


अप ज्योतिषा तमो' अन्तरिश्चादुद्नः शीपालमिव ard 
आजत्‌ | बहस्पर्तिरनुमृश्या वल्स्याऽश्रमिंव वात आ च॑क्र 
आ गाः॥ ५॥ 


2; Apa jyotisa tamo antariksad-udnah sipalamiva 
vata ajat. Brhaspatir-anumrsya valasya’bhra- 
miva vata ठ cakra a gah. 


As the sun removes darkness with light from 
the middle regions, as the wind removes the cover of 
moss and grass from the surface of water, so does 
Brhaspati, lord of the expansive universe, with deep 
thought, remove the cover of the darkness of nescience 
and sets in motion the dynamics of nature’s creativity 
in circuits of energy as the motions of the wind. 


यदा वलस्य पीय॑तो जसुं भेद्‌ ब॒ हस्प्तिरथितपोभिर कः । 
दद्भिर्न जिह्वा परिविष्ट माद॑दाविर्निधीर॑कृणोदुस्िर्या- 
णाम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yada valasya piyato jasum bhed brhaspatir- 
agnitapobhir-arkaih. Dadbhirna jihva parivista- 
madada-virnidhinrakrnod-usriyanam. 


When Brhaspati with the flames of fire and rays 
of the light of his creative will breaks through the 
darkness of nescience covering the primeval potential 
existence and takes it over as the tongue takes over the 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 68 753 


food crushed by teeth, then he opens up and reveals the 
vast reservoir of his energies of the dynamics of creative 
nature. 


बृहस्पतिरमत हि त्यदासां नाम॑ स्वरीणां सद॑ने Wet यत्‌। 
आण्डेव भित्त्वा शकुनस्य गर्भमुदुस्रियाः पर्व॑तस्य त्मना - 
जत्‌॥। ७॥ 


7. Brhaspatiramata hi_tyadasam nama svarinam 
sadane guha yat. Andeva bhittva sakunasya 
garbham-udusriyah parvatasya tmanajat. 


Brhaspati knows the name and identity of these 
voluble facts and processes of existence which are 
present but hidden in the deep womb of nature and 
which, radiating like rays of light and flowing like 
streams, grow and come into being as chicks on maturity 
break the bird’s egg and spring into full life. 


अश्नापिनन्दरं मधु पर्य पश्यन्मत्स्यं न दीन Sart ्चियन्त॑म्‌। 
निष्टज्ज॑भार चमसं न वृक्षाद्‌ बहस्पतिर्विर वेणा। विकृत्य ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Asnapinaddham madhu paryapasyan-matsyam na 
dina udani ksiyantam. Nistajjabhara camasam na 
vrksad brhaspatir-viravena vikrtya. 

Brhaspati sees the sweetness and beauty of 
human life caught up in the bonds of pleasure and 
sufferance in the body like a fish caught up in shallow 
waters, and he raises and refines it like a cup of soma 
for the divinities, crafted from rough wood, having 
refined and blest it by the resounding voice of revelation. 


सोषाम॑विन्दत्स ta: सो sift सो अर्केण fa ब॑बाधे 
तमांसि । बृहस्पतिगोविपुषो वलस्य निर्मज्नानं न पर्वणो 
जभार॥ ९॥ 


754 RGVEDA 


9. Sosamavindat sa svah so agnim so arkena vi 
babadhe tamamsi. Brhaspatir-govapuso valasya 
nirmajjanam na parvano jabhara. 


The blessed man realises the light of the dawn 
of knowledge, the light and bliss of heaven, the vision 
of refulgent divinity, and with that light wards off the 
darkness of evil and ignorance. Indeed, Brhaspati raises 
the man subject to body, senses and mind, now blest 
with divine vision like a real man, otherwise completely 
sinking in the depths of darkness and evil. 


हिमेव पर्णा मुषिता वनानि बृहस्पति नाकृपयद्ुलो गाः | 
अनानुकृत्यमंपुनश्च॑कार्‌ यात्सूर्यामासा मिथ उच्य- 
रातः॥ ९०॥ 


10. Himeva parna musita vanani brhaspatina- 
krpayadvalo gah. Ananukrtyam-apunascakara 
yat suryamasa mitha uccaratah. 


Just as the leaves of forest trees are made to fall 
by winter, so darkness is dispelled and light is created, 
so is ignorance dispelled and the light of Vedic revelation 
revealed by Brhaspati, and that is an act he does 
unparallelled and unrepeated as long as the sun and 
moon shine together and illuminate the days and nights. 


अभि श्यावं न asia नक्ष॑त्रेभिः पितरो द्याम॑पिंशन्‌ | 
रात्र्यां तमो अद॑धुर्ज्यो तिरहन्बृ हस्पतिंर्भिनदद्रि विदद्राः ॥ ९९ ॥ 
11. Abhi Syavam na krsanebhirasvam naksatrebhih 
pitaro dyamapimsan. Ratryam tamo adadhur- 
Jyotirahan brhaspatirbhinadadrim vidadgah. 


Like a dark horse adorned with golden 
trappings, the rays of light adorn the heavens with stars. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 69 755 


Brhaspati vests darkness in the night and light in the 
day, breaks the cloud, releases the light and showers 
recovering the light of existence from the night of 
annihilation, and enlightens the heart of darkness with 
revelations of the light of divinity. 


इदम॑कर्म नमो अधियाय यः पूर्वीरन्वानोन॑वीति । बहस्पतिः 
a fe गोधिः सो अश्वैः स वीरेभिः स नृभिर्नो वयों 
धात्‌॥ ९२॥ 


12. Idamakarma namo abhriyaya yah purviran- 
vanonaviti. Brhaspatih sa hi gobhih so asvaih sa 
virebhih sa nrbhirno vayo dhat. 


This homage we offer to Brhaspati, lord of living 
waters and thunder, who reveals the eternal words of 
divine knowledge. May that lord bless us with good 
health and long age with lands, cows and the light of 
knowledge, horses, transport and advancement, brave 
progeny, leading lights and enlightened people. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 69 
Agni Devata, Sumitra Vadhryashva Rshi 
भद्रा अगरर्वश्यश्वस्यं सन्दशों वामी प्रणीतिः सुरणा 
उपेतयः । यदी सुमित्रा विशो अग्रं इन्धते घुतेनाहंतो जरते 
दविद्युतत्‌ ९॥ 

1. Bhadra agner-vadhryasvasya samdrso vami 
pranitih surana upetayah. Yadim sumitra viso 
agra indhate ghrtenahuto jarate davidyutat. 

May the controlled and directed radiations of 
light and yajna fire, Agni, be auspicious, may its 
inspiration and guidance be auspicious and rewarding, 


756 RGVEDA 


may its associations and functioning mutualities be 
auspicious. When noble and friendly people kindle and 
install it in the prime position in the vedi of yajna then, 
raised and fed on oblations of ghrta, it rises and shines, 
adored and exalted by the celebrants. 


(This metaphor of physical fire and light, of 
which the flames and radiations are controlled and 
directed, is extendable to the socio-political and 
educational life of the human community. In this context 
Agni is to be interpreted as the leader, ruler, commander 
and teacher, leading the people to auspicious 
attainments. And, as in the case of all words indicative 
of divinity, Agni is the supreme lord of light and life 
whose divine functions are all self-refulgent and self- 
controlled, leading us all to auspicious attainments.) 


घृतमगनर्वशध्यश्वस्य वर्ध॑नं घृतमन्नं घृतम्व॑स्य मेद॑नम्‌। 
घृतेनाहुत उर्विया वि पप्रथे सूर्यं इव रोचते सर्पिरासुतिः ॥ २॥ 


0 Ghrtamagner-vadhryasvasya vardhanam ghrta- 
mannam ghrtamvasya medanam. Ghrtenahuta 
urviya vi paprathe surya iva rocate sarpirasutih. 

Ghrta means and is the rise and exaltation of 
self-controlled self-directed Agni, ghrta is the food, and 
ghrta is the growth and expansion with love and grace. 

Fed on ghrta it rises and expands unbounded and, 

kindled, energised and exalted with ghrta, it shines 

glorious and beatific like the sun. 


यत्ते मनुर्यदनीकं सुमित्रः date sth तदिदं नवीयः। स 
रेवच्छोच स गिरो जुषस्व स वाजं eff स इह श्रवों 
धाः॥ ३॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 69 757 


a Yat te manuryadanikam sumitrah samidhe agne 
tadidam naviyah. Sa revacchoca sa giro jusasva 
sa vajam darsi sa iha Sravo dhah. 


O prime and pioneering power, Agni, the bright 
and blazing light and flame of yours which Manu, 
thoughtful intellectual and noble friend, kindles with 
positive intention and purpose is new and it is adorable. 
Let it shine rich in wealth. Listen and respond to our 
words and voices of hope and prayer. Destroy negative 
forces. Create and bring us honour and prosperity here 
and now. 


यंत्वा पूर्वमीच्छितो व॑ध्यश्वः dite sit स इदं जुंषस्व । 
स न॑ः स्तिपा उत भ॑वा तनूपा दात्रं र॑क्षस्व यदिदं a 
अस्मे ॥ ४॥ 


4. Yam tva purvamilito vadhryasvah samidhe agne 
sa idam jusasva. Sa nah stipa uta bhava tanupa 
datram raksasva yadidam te asme. 


Agni, you have been loved, studied and adored 
since the earliest times. The same you, I study and adore 
with controlled and concentrated mind, senses, 
intentions and motivations in my yajnic performance. 
Pray listen to my words and respond to this endeavour 
of mine. Be the protector of our homes and families 
and of our health of body and community, and protect 
this gift of yours which you have given to us. 


भवां द्युम्नी वा्ष्यश्वोत गोपा मा cat तारीदभिमातिर्जना- 
नाम्‌। शूर॑ इव धूष्णुश्च्यव॑नः सुमित्रः प्र नु वोचं वाश्य॑श्वस्य 
ATA ५॥ 


758 RGVEDA 


5. Bhava dyumni vadhryaSsvota gopa ma tva tari- 
dabhimatirjananam. Sura iva dhrsnuscyavanah 
sumitrah pra nu vocam vadhryasvasya nama. 


Agni, power of controlled light and flames of 
fire, be our protector and harbinger of splendour, and 
let no enemy of humanity challenge and assail you. Like 
a mighty warrior, Agni is all surpassing, all inspirer, a 
noble friend, and this is how I celebrate the name of the 
blazing power of self-control and splendour. 


समच्या wdears वसूनि दासां वत्राण्यायीं जिगेथ । शूरं इव 
धृष्णुश्च्यवनो जनानां त्वमग्रे पृतनायूरभि ष्याः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Samajrya parvatya vasuni dasa vrtranyarya 
Jigetha. Sura iva dhrsnuscyavano jananam 
tvamagne prtanayunrabhi syah. 


Agni, you win the wealth of clouds and 
mountains, plains and seas, conquer destructive and 
darkening forces, and win over noble and dynamic 
powers. O mighty power of light and fire, like a mighty 
warrior all surpassing, inspirer of people, you challenge 
and defeat the adversaries. 


दीर्घत॑न्तुर्बृहदुश्चायमभिः सहस्रस्तरीः शतनीथ ae । 
द्युमान्द्युमत्सु नृभिर्मृज्यमानः सुमित्रेषु दीदयो देवयत्सु ॥ ७ ॥ 


a, Dirghatanturbrhaduksayamagnih sahasras-tarth 
satanitha rbhva. Dyuman dyumatsu nrbhirmrjya- 
manah sumitresu didayo devayatsu. 


This Agni, of expansive unending life, vastly 
generous burden bearer, thousandfold protected, 
mysterious and revealing, a hundred ways dynamic 
leader, excellent expert wise, most radiant among 


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 69 759 


brilliants, adored and exalted by leading lights among 
friends of noblest mind, shines among the lovers of 
divinity. 


त्वे धेनुः सुदुघां जातवेदोऽ सश्चतेव समना सबर्धुक्‌ | 
त्वं नुथिर्दक्चिणावद्धिरगे सुपित्रेभि।रिध्यसे देवयद्धिः॥ ८ ॥ 


8. 117८ dhenuh sudugha jatavedo’sascateva samana 
sabardhuk. Tvam nrbhir-daksinavad-bhir-agne 
sumitrebhir-idhyase devayadbhih. 


O Jataveda, omniscient lord of all existence, in 
you abides the perennial, inexhaustible mother cow, 
nature, the divine Word, agreeable and spontaneous 
giver of ceaseless streams of life sustaining light and 
natural energy. You are enkindled and adored by all 
leading lights of humanity bearing homage in 
abundance, noble friends, devotees who love and 
worship divinity. 


देवाण्चिंत्ते अमरतां जातवेदो महिमानं वाध्यश्व प्र वोचन्‌। 
यत्संपृच्छं मानुषीर्विश आयन्त्वं नृभिरजयस्त्वावृधेभिः॥ ९ ॥ 


शरः Devascitte amrta jatavedo mahimanam vadhr- 
yasva pra vocan. Yat samprccham manu-sirvisa 
ayan tvam nrbhirajayas-tvavrdhebhih. 


O Jataveda, lord of infinite power and motion, 
the immortal divines proclaim your greatness and glory, 
and when mortal humans come and ask who destroys 
the dark and the wicked, the answer is: You win over 
the dark and the wicked with those noble people who 
adore and exalt you as the master, leader and 
commander. 


760 RGVEDA 


fare पुत्रम॑लिभरूपस्थे त्वामग्रे asage: संपर्यन्‌। जुषाणो 
अस्य समिधं यविष्ठोत पूर्वा अवनो्व्राध॑तज्चित्‌॥ १०॥ 


10. = Piteva putramabibharupasthe tvamagne vadhrya- 
§vah saparyan. Jusano asya samidham yavisthota 
purvan avanorvradhatascit. 


As the father bears the child in his lap with love 
and supports it, so does the dedicated celebrant with 
controlled mind and sense place you in the vedi in the 
lap of mother earth, serving you with faith, reverence 
and awe. O power most youthful, loving and accepting 
his lighted faith, reverence and service, pray ward off 
all his enemies old as well as new. 


शश्व॑दभिर्वश्यश्वस्य शत्रूञ्भिर्जिगाय greiner: । सम॑नं 
चिददहश्चित्रभानोऽ व व्राध॑न्तमभिनद्‌ वृधण्चिंत्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Sasvadagnir-vadhryasvasya Satrin nrbhirjigaya 
sutasomavadbhih. Samanam cidadaha-scitrabha- 
no’va vradhantam-abhinadvrdhascit. 


Agni, divine leader of light and life, always wins 
over the enemies of the self-controlled man of dynamic 
mind and senses by heroic men who distil the soma with 
faith and reverence and offer it to Agni in homage. O 
wondrous lord of light and fire, eliminate conflict 
wherever it be and, yourself rising in glory, break down 
violence and destruction when it is raising its head. 


अयमयिर्वश्यश्वस्यं वृत्रहा संनकात्प्े्धो नपम॑सोपवाक्य॑ः। 
स नो अजामींरुत वा विजामीनभि fas शर्धतो वाश्य- 
श्व ॥ ९२॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 70 761 


12. Ayamagnir-vadhryasvasya vrtraha sanakat pre- 
ddho namasopavakyah. Sa no ajaminruta va 
vijaminabhi tistha sardhato vadhryasva. 


This Agni, lord of self-refulgent light, all time 
invoked and lighted with prayer and homage, is the 
dispeller of darkness for the devotee of controlled mind 
and senses. O lord and leader of light and life, face upto 
and overthrow our enemies whether they are united as 
acommunity of saboteurs or as a hoard of heterogeneous 
antisocial destroyers. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 70 


Apriyah (Idhma or Samiddhagni-1,Narashasa-2, Iah-3, 
Barhi-4, Davidvara-5, Ushasanakta-6, Daivyau 
Prachetasau-7, Sarasvati-Ila, Bharati-8, Tvasta-9, 
Vanaspati-10, Svahakrti-11)Devatah, Sumitra 
Vadhryashva Rshi 


इमां मे अग्ने समिधं जुषस्वेव्टस्पदे प्रतिं eat घुताचींम्‌। 
वर्ष्मन्पृथिव्याः सुदिनत्वे starqedt भ॑व सुक्रतो देव- 
यज्या ॥ ९॥ 


ie Imam me agne samidham jusasvelaspade prati 
harya ghrtacim. Varsman prthivyah sudinatve 
ahnamurdhvo bhava sukrato devayajya. 


O divine spirit of light and life, harbinger of 
knowledge and wisdom, on the sacred vedi of this holy 
earth, pray accept this homage of holy fuel and cherish 
this ladleful of ghrta and, O divine fire of noblest action, 
during this happy time of fine season rise on top of the 
world and shine by our faithful service to divinity by 
yajna. 


762 RGVEDA 


आ देवानामग्रयावेह यांतु नराशंसो विश्वरूपेभिरणश्वैः | 
ऋतस्य पथा नम॑सा पियेधो। देवेभ्यो देवत॑मः सुषूदत्‌ ॥ २॥ 


Zz. A devanamagrayaveha yatu narasamso visvari- 
pebhirasvaih. Rtasya patha namasa miyedho 
devebhyo devatamah susudat. 


May Agni, prime pioneer of divinities, 
universally valued, praised and adored, come here to 
yajna with all its universal powers of light and energy 
and, as highest of divine agents of yajna, catalyse, 
manage and carry our homage with holy offerings to 
nature’s bounties for their service and replenishment 
by the paths of natural laws and bring their blessings 
for us by the same paths of nature. 


शश्वत्तममीं कते दूत्याय Baraat ASMA STATA | 
afesrwa: सुवृता रथेनाऽऽ carrafar नि षं देह होतां ut ३ ॥ 


Sasvattamamilate dutyaya havismanto manu- 
syaso agnim. Vahistairasvaih suvrta rathena’’ 
devan vaksi ni sadeha hota. 


Men with homage of yajnic offerings always 
invoke, serve and pray to Agni to carry their offerings 
to the divinities and bring in their blessings. O high 
priest of yajna, pray come, bring in the divinities by the 
strongest fastest chariot drawn by most radiant carriers 
of natural dynamics, sit on the vedi and, by the same 
powers, transmit our fragrances to nature’s bounties. 


fa deat casts तिरश्चा दीर्घं द्राघ्मा सुरभि aera 
stad मन॑सा देव बर्हिरिन्द्र॑ज्येष्ठां Sor afar देवान्‌॥ ४ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 70 763 


4. Vi prathatam devajustam tirasca dirgham dra- 
ghma surabhi bhitvasme. Ahelata manasa deva 
barhirindrajyesthan uSsato yaksi devan. 


May the yajnic light, fire and prosperity loved 
by the divinities, grow, expand and rise all round, long, 
wide and lofty in space and time so that there may be 
sweet fragrance for us all time. O divine light, fire and 
fragrance of yajna, O lord of space and divine bliss, 
help us with a gracious mind free from hate and anger 
to join the brilliant divinities with Indra, omnipotent 
Supreme, first and highest of them. 


दिवो वा सानुं स्पृशता वरीयः पृथिव्या वा मात्रया वि 
soe उशातीद्वीरो महिना महद्धि देवं रथं रथयुधी- 
रयध्वम्‌॥ ५॥ 


a, Divo va sanu sprsata variyah prthivya va matraya 
vi Srayadhvam. USsatirdvaro mahina mahadbhir- 
devam ratham rathayurdharaya-dhvam. 


O divinities of yajnic energy of nature, treasure 
troves of prosperity, touch the highest top of heavenly 
light and open and expand the fertility of earth in ample 
measure. Loving, passionate and gracious, ride the 
cosmic chariot of Infinity with the great divinities by 
virtue of your own grandeur and open the doors of 
boundless prosperity and enlightenment for humanity. 


देवी दिवो deat सुशिल्पे उषासानक्ता सदतां नि योनौ । 
आ वां dara उशती उशन्त उरौ सीदन्तु सुभगे उपस्थं ।॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Devi divo duhitara suSsilpe usasanakta sadatam 


ni yonau. A vam devasa uSati usanta urau sidantu 
subhage upasthe. 


764 RGVEDA 


O divine daughters of heaven, dawn of the busy 
day and restful night, both dexterous accomplishers of 
yajna, abide in the midst of the creative endeavours of 
humanity. Loving as you are, generous and gracious, 
may the dedicated and enthusiastic celebrants of divine 
nature come and abide in the boundless bosom of your 
love and good fortune. 


ऊर्ध्वो oret बृहदभिः समिंब्दः प्रिया धामान्यर्दितेरुपस्थें | 
पुरोहितावृत्विजा यज्ञे अस्मिन्विदुष्टरा द्रविणमा य॑जे- 
थाम्‌।॥ ७॥ 


ip Urdhvo grava brhadagnih samiddhah priya 
dhamanyaditerupasthe. Purohitavrtvija yajne 
asmin vidustara dravinama yajetham. 


When the sounding stone for soma goes up, the 
lighted fire rises in flames, and the havi vessels shine 
bright and lovely on the vedi in the lap of mother Infinity, 
then may the priest and the yajaka, Agni and Adityas, 
both brilliant and divine more and ever more create the 
wealth of life for humanity. (Yajna here is a metaphor 
of the creative endeavour of noble humanity in corporate 
action. ) 


fret देवीर्बर्हिरिदं वरीय आ सीदत चकृमा व॑: स्योनम्‌। 
मनुष्वद्यज्ञं सुधिता sitet देवी घृतपदी जुषन्त ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. 17570 devir-barhiridam vartya ठ sidata cakrma 
vah syonam. Manusvad-yajnam sudhita havimsila 
devi ghrtapadi jusanta. 
O triple divinities, Ila, Sarasvati and Bharati, 


mother Infinity, vibrant spirit of knowledge, language 
and culture, and Bharati, all bearing nature and mother 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 70 765 


earth overflowing with ghrta, we pray, come and grace 
this lovely vedi which we have created for you with 
adoration, prayer and meditation. May divine Ia, 
transcendent Infinity, Sarasvati, inexhaustible spirit of 
light and stream of knowledge vested in awareness, well 
ordered, and Bharati, spirit of earthly prosperity, come, 
join the vedi as humans and partake of our homage with 
love and grace. 


देव॑ asda चारुत्वमानड्यदद्धिरसामभ॑वः सचाभूः । स 
देवानां पाथ उप प्र विद्धानुशन्यंश्चि द्रविणोदः सुरलन॑ः ॥ ९ ॥ 


0 Deva tvastaryaddha carutvamanad-yadangi- 
rasamabhavah sacabhuh. Sa devanam patha upa 
pra vidvan usan yaksi dravinodah suratnah. 


O divine Tvashta, creator and maker of the forms 
of existence, when you create the beauty and graces of 
life and become a friend and associate of the Angirasas, 
spirit and energy of the life of humanity, then O generous 
lord of the world’s wealth, loving and all knowing, pray 
give food and living sustenance for the holy creative 
people on their paths of life. 


वन॑स्पते रशनया Feat देवानां पाथ sd afer विद्धान्‌ । 
स्वदाति देवः कृणवंद्धरवींष्यवंतां द्यार्वापृथिवी हवं मे ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Vanaspate raSanaya niyuya devanam patha upa 
vaksi vidvan. Svadati devah krnavadd-havim- 
syavatam dyavaprthivi havam me. 


O lord of vanaspatis, life giving sun rays, and 
herbs, trees and forests which provide food for living 
beings, you are the light giver, all watching and 
energising, you create the food for divinities and give it 


766 RGVEDA 


the right form for their living systems. The generous 
lord of light makes the food palatable and thus forms 
the sacred materials as food for the living yajna of life’s 
evolution. May heaven and earth listen to my voice of 
prayer and exhortation and bless us with the right forms 
of food for us and for our yajna and protect us. 


आगे वह वरुणपिष्टयें न इन्द्रं दिवो मरुतो! अन्तरिंश्चात्‌। 
सीद॑न्तु बर्हिर्विश्व आ यज॑त्राः स्वाहा देवा अमृता 
मादयन्ताम्‌ ९९॥ 


11.  Agne vaha varunamistaye na indram divo maruto 
antariksat. Sidantu barhirvisva a yajatrah svaha 
deva amrta madayantam. 


Hey Agni, lord of cosmic light and living energy, 
bring us Varuna, water from the ocean and the clouds 
for our cherished yajna of the good life, Indra, light and 
power from the heavens, and Maruts, winds from the 
middle regions. May all divine yajna powers and holy 
yajakas of the world come and join our vedi with the 
chant of svaha, in truth of thought, word and deed. May 
all the immortal divinities rejoice and may they give us 


JOY. 
Mandala 10/Sukta 71 
Jnana (Knowledge) Devata, Brhaspati Angirasa Rshi 
बृह॑स्पते प्रथमं वाचो अग्रं ada नामधेयं दधानाः 1 
यदेषां श्रेष्ठं यद॑रिप्रमासींत्प्रेणा तदेषां निहितं गुहाविः ॥ ९॥ 


Ls Brhaspate prathamam vaco agram yat prairata 
namadheyam dadhanah. Yadesam srestham 
yadaripramasit prena tadesam nihitam guhavih. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 71 767 


O lord of Infinite Speech, Brhaspati, the first 
and original form of eternal speech, which is the 
integration of name, word and factual reality, which the 
sages receive and bear in mind and articulate at the dawn 
of human creation, lies immanent in the universal mind. 
It is borne in the best and immaculate minds of the sages 
who make it manifest from there by divine inspiration 
in a state of grace. 


सक्तुमिव तित॑उना पुनन्तो यत्र धीरा मन॑सा वाचमक्रत | 
अत्रा सखायः सख्यानि जानते भद्रैषां लक्ष्मीर्निहिताधिं 
वाचि।॥ २॥ 


2: Saktumiva titauna punanto yatra dhira manasa 
vacamakrata. Atra sakhayah sakhyani janate 
bhadraisam laksmir-nihitadhi vaci. 


When the sages of patient and transparent mind, 
with their thought and imagination, conceive, visualise 
and articulate the divine word, crystallising it to the state 
of purity as they sift the grain of truth from the chaff of 
local variety, then the friends and associates come to 
know of the idea and the word and the union of word 
and meaning in communication, and then noble and holy 
is their knowledge manifested and received from the 
depth of the sage’s language. 


यज्ञेन वाचः प॑दवीय॑मायन्तामन्व॑विन्दन्रषिंषु प्रविष्टाम्‌ | 
तामाभृत्या व्य॑दधुः पुरुत्रा तां सप्त रेभा अभि सं न॑वन्ते॥ ३॥ 


a Yajnena vacah padaviyamayan tamanvavinda- 
nnrsisu pravistam. Tamabhrtya vyadadhuh 
purutra tam sapta rebha abhi sam navante. 


By yajna and meeting of minds on the vedi, they 


768 RGVEDA 


get to the form and meaning of language, tracing it word 
by word in the structure, realising the reality of meaning 
hidden in the mind of the sages. And having reached, 
realised and received it, they bear it around and 
communicate it in many ways widely in many places at 
various times. Thus do seven eloquent sages honour, 
serve and worship it, structured and articulated in seven 
poetic forms. 


उत त्वः पश्यन्न द॑दरशं वाच॑मुत ca: श्युण्वन्न श्यंणोत्येनाम्‌ | 
उतो त्व॑स्मै तन्वं वि संस्र जायेव पत्य॑ उशती सुवासाः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Uta tvah pasyan na dadarsa vacamuta tvah 
Srnvan na Srnotyenam. Uto tvasmai tanvam vi 
sasre jayeva patya usati suvasah. 


However, even in association, in spite of 
discussion, someone having seen the language, let us 
say, in print, or having seen the meaning in practical 
reality, may not acknowledge it, some one having heard 
the language by the ear may not hear it in the soul. But 
Speech to someone, some honest, conscientious 
dedicated soul, opens up and reveals its hidden meaning 
as a loving wife beautifully clad opens and reveals 
herself, her very soul to her loving and faithful husband. 


उत त्वं सख्ये स्थिरपीतमाहुर्ननं हिन्वन्त्यपि वाजिनेषु | 
अधेन्वा चरति माययैष वाचं शुश्रुवाँ अफलत्काम॑पुष्पाम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


3. Uta tvam sakhye sthirapitamahurnainam hinvan- 
tyapi vajinesu. Adhenva carati mayayaisa vacam 
Susruvan aphalamapuspam. 


Such a realised soul, they say, is a sober scholar 
on solid foundations in matters of language, meaning 


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 71 769 


and vision of reality. In scholarly meets they do not trifle 
with him, nor contradict him. But some may not even 
come to the fringe of his attainment. And another one 
moves around like a barren cow, struck by the magic of 
mere sound of words, hearing language without fruit or 
flower. 


यस्तित्याज सचिविदं सखायं न तस्य॑ वाच्यपि भागो अं॑स्ति। 
यर्दीश्रुणोत्यल्॑कं श्रृणोति नहि प्रवेदं सुकृतस्य पन्थाम्‌ ॥ & ॥ 


6. Yastityaja sacividam sakhayam na tasya vacyapi 
bhago asti. Yadim srnotyalakam 5111017 nahi pra- 
veda sukrtasya pantham. 


If someone forsakes the divine speech of the 
Veda, a real intimate friend for life and after, there 
remains no substance even in his speech of daily wear, 
and whoever listens to him listens in vain because he 
does not know the path of well being and of well doing. 


अश्चण्वन्तः क्णैवन्तः सखायो मनोजवेष्वसमा बभूवुः | 
आ दश्रासं उपकक्षास उत्वे Sasa areal उ त्वे 
ददूश्रे॥७॥ 


a Aksanvantah karnavantah sakhayo manoja- 
vesvasama babhuvuh. Adaghnasa upakaksasa u 
tve hrada iva snatva u tve dadrsre. 


Indeed friends and companions equal of eyes 
and ears are unequal in mind and intellectual efficiency. 
Some are like tanks just waist deep, others neck deep, 
and yet others are deep as lakes, rivers or even seas 
wherein you bathe and feel sanctified and absolved. 


दा तष्टेषु मन॑सो जवेषु यद्‌ ब्राह्यणाः संयजन्ते Grats: | 
अत्राहं त्वं वि जंहूर्वेद्याथिरोह॑ब्रह्माणो वि च॑रन्त्यु त्वे ॥ ८ ॥ 


770 RGVEDA 


8. Hrda tastesu manaso javesu yadbrahmanah 
samyajante sakhayah. Atraha tvam vi jahurve- 
dyabhirohabrahmano vi carantyu tve. 


When scholars in close friendly association join 
in intellectual meets organised with careful thought and 
heartfelt good intentions, even there, some they leave 
aside as ignorant while others, scholars of valuable 
subjects, actively move on with discussions of latest 
knowledge worth attaining. 


इमे ये नार्वाङ्न परश्चरन्ति न ब्राह्मणासो न सुतेकरासः। 
त एते वाच॑मथिपद्य॑ पापयां सिरीस्तन्त्रं तन्वते अप्र॑ज- 
ज्ञयः॥ ९॥ 


o. Ime ye narvan na parascaranti na brahmanaso 
na sutekarasah. Ta ete vacamabhipadya papaya 
siristantram tanvate aprajajnayah. 


Those there are who pursue neither the 
knowledge of this material world nor the knowledge of 
the spiritual world, nor are they Brahmanas interested 
in the holiness of the world of reality, nor even do they 
follow ritual and worldly life consciously with open 
mind. So being ignorant people they use only the non- 
holy language of impiety and merely extend the thread 
of physical existence at the human level in their life. 


ae नन्दन्ति यशसागतेन सभासाहेन सख्या arate: | 
कि ल्विषस्पृत्पिंतुषणिर्येषामरं हितो भव॑ति वाजिं- 
नाय UW Qo il त 

10. Sarve nadanti yasasagatena sabhasahena sakhya 
sakhayah. Kilbisasprt pitusanir-hyesamaram hito 
bhavati vajinaya. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 72 771 


All friends feel happy and celebrate with a 
learned person who comes as a friend with honour, 
reputation and social prestige, and such a person, 
eliminator of sin and evil, provider of food and 
knowledge, rises to the position of leadership among 
them, being good for their honour and enlightenment. 


ऋचां त्वः पोषमास्ते पुपुष्वान्गांयत्रं त्वो गायति शक्व॑रीषु | 
wan त्वो वदंति जातविद्यां यज्ञस्य मात्रां वि मिंमीत उ 
त्वः॥ ९९॥ 


11. Rcam tvah posamaste pupusvan gayatram tvo 
gayati Sakvarisu. Brahma tvo vadati jatavidyam 
yajnasya matram vi mimita u tvah. 


Of the devotees of the divine voice of the Veda, 
one chants, celebrates and maintains the energy and 
enthusiasm of life vibrating in the Rks, one, the udgata, 
sings the gayatri verses in the Shakvari hymns of power, 
the Brahma, presiding high priest, proclaims the verses 
of universal knowledge from all the Vedas, and another, 
the adhvaryu, orders and organises the entire programme 
of the yajna in all details. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 72 


Devah Devatah, Brhaspati Laukya, or Brhaspati 
Angirasa, or Aditi Dakshayani Rshi 


देवानां नु वयं जाना प्र वोचाम विपन्यया 1 
उक्थेषु! शस्यमनिषु यः पश्यादुत्तरे युगे ॥ ९ ॥ 


L. Devanam nu vayam jana pra vocama vipanya- 
ya. Ukthesu Sasyamanesu yah pasyaduttare yuge. 


Let us proclaim in clear words of grateful 


772 RGVEDA 


adoration the birth and evolution of nature’s divine 
manifestations which, when the verses are chanted, one 
may see and appreciate in later ages to come. 


ब्रह्मणस्पतिंरेता सं कर्मार इवाधमत्‌। 
देवानां पूर्व्ये युगेऽ संतः सद॑जायत ॥ २॥ 


2 Brahmanaspatireta sam karmara ivadhamat. 
Devanam purvye yuge’satah sadajayata. 


Brahmanaspati, lord, master and ordainer of the 
cycle of existence, sets these devas in motion like an 
artisan in the earliest age of evolution and they awake 
from the unmanifest state of Being into the manifest 
state of Becoming in existence. (The Avyakta, 
intangible, becomes the Vyakta, tangible, mode of 
Prakrti or Nature.) 


देवानां युगे प्र॑थमेऽ da: सद॑जायत | 
तदाशा अन्व॑जायन्त तद्ुत्तानप॑दस्परिं ti ३॥ 


3 Devanam yuge prathame’satah sadajayata. 
Tadasa anvajayanta taduttanapadaspari. 


In the first age of the devas, the manifest stage 
of existence arose from the unmanifest Zero stage, 1.e., 
the Zero state emerged into the first positive state of 
existence after Zero. Then in consequence arose space 
and the quarters of space. Thereafter arose Uttanapada, 
the open ended possibilities of boundless evolution 
further. (The one Vyakta gives rise to potential 
multiplicity.) 


भूर्जज्ञ उत्तानप॑दो भुव आशा अजायन्त | 
अदितेर्दक्षो अजायत दक्षाद्वदितिः oR ॥ ४॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 72 773 


4. Bhurjajna uttanapado bhuva asa ajayanta. 
Aditerdakso ajayata daksadvaditih pari. 


From Uttanapada arose Bhu, specific possibility, 
and many more such arose in space in the spatial 
quarters. From Aditi, inviolable nature, arose Daksha, 
will and intelligence, and from will and intelligence, 
Aditi, the desire to grow and procreate further. 


अदितिर्द्यज॑निष्ट दश्च या दुहिता तवं । 
तां देवा अन्व॑जायन्त भद्रा अमरत॑बन्धवः॥ ५॥ 


a, Aditirhyajanista daksa ya duhita tava. 
Tam deva anvajayanta bhadra amrtabandhavah. 


O Daksha, lord of will and intelligence, Aditi is 
born which is your offspring, indeed your desire to be 
many. In consequence, the devas are born, the noble 
fraternity of the immortal (Nature and divinity). 


The order of the birth of the devas is thus 
described in the Upanishads and in Sankhya philosophy 
of natural evolution it is this: From avyakta Prakrti 
evolves Mahan or Pradhana which is vyakta Prakrti. 
From Mahan arises Ahankara which is described here 
as Uttanapad or the tree of the universe. From Prakrti 
are also manifested the three qualilative modes of 
existence: Sattva or intelligence, Rajas or energy, and 
Tamas or solid matter. This same is the order here in a 
different terminology. From Ahankara are born the five 
subtle bhutas and both mental and perceptive organs. 
From five subtle bhutas are born the five gross bhutas: 
Akasha, Vayu, Agni, Apah and Prthivi which all are 
composed of paramanus, the smallest units. 


7714 RGVEDA 


ada अदः dies सुसंरब्धा अतिं्ठत। 
stat वो नृत्य॑तामिव तीव्रो रेणुरपायत ।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yaddeva adah salile susamrabdha atisthata. 
Atra vo nrtyatamiva fivro renurapayata. 


O Devas, when you abide and play together 
dancing as if joyously in that vast space, then your 
radiant energy and ecstasy rises high (to receive the 
descent of life as the ripe gift of the sun on high). 


यदवा यत॑यो यथा भुव॑नान्यपिन्वत। 
अत्रा समुद्र आ गृठ्न्ह॑मा सूर्य मजभरर्तन ॥ ७ ॥ 


५५ Yaddeva yatayo yatha bhuvananyapinvata. 
Atra samudra व gulhama suryamajabhartana. 


O Devas, working joyously together as you 
energise and enliven the regions of the world, so here 
too in the ocean of matter, energy and prana, you hold, 
support and cherish the bright sun, the soul deep under 
the mysterious fivefold cover of existential body form. 


अष्टौ पुत्रासो अदितेर्ये जातास्तन्वस्परि । 
देवां उप प्रैत्सप्तथिः परां मार्ताण्डर्मास्यत्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Astau putraso aditerye jatastanvaspari. 
Devan upa prait saptabhih para martandamasyat. 


Eight are the divine modes of Aditi, eternal 
inviolable Prakrti, which are evolved from her 
personality like children born of the mother (these being 
Mahan, Ahankara, five material forms and the sense- 
mind complex which is called Martanda because it bears 
the soul which passes through the birth and death 
stages). With seven of these it goes on evolving and the 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 73 7715 


eighth, Martanda, it leaves aside free (to grow by itself 
with the soul in the human form). 


सप्तभिः पुत्रैरदितिरुप प्रत्पूर्व्य युगम्‌ । 
प्रजायै मृत्यवे त्वत्युन॑मर्ताण्डमाभ।रत्‌॥ ९ ॥ 


o. Saptabhih patrairaditirupa prait purvyam yugam. 
Prajayai mrtyave tvat punarmar-tandama-bharat. 


With seven of her children mother Aditi retires 
to the post-pre-creation stage of the Avyakta absolute, 
but she continues to bear the Martanda, the soul with 
the subtle body cover during Pralaya, for birth and death 
again and again in the eternal cycle of existence. (For 
8-9, further, refer to Gita, 7, 4-5, and Aitareya 
Upanishad, 1, 2, 3-5.) 


Mandala 10/Sukta 73 
Indra Devata, Gauriviti Shatya Rshi 


जनिं्ठा उग्रः सह॑से तुराय॑ मन्द्र ओजिष्ठो बहुलाभिमानः | 
staeifa-s vedas माता यद्वीरं दधनब्डनिं्ठा ।॥ ९॥ 


I, Janistha ugrah sahase turaya mandra ojistho 
bahulabhimanah. Avardhannindram marutasci- 
datra mata yadviram dadhanaddhanistha. 


Indra, ruler of humanity and the world, adorable, 
most illustrious, blazing brilliant, highly self-confident, 
is born to subdue pride and opposition to humanity, and 
when mother Infinity, or humanity, fortunate and 
rightfully proud, bears such a brave hero, leader and 
ruler, the Maruts, leading lights, adore and exalt him. 


get निष॑त्ता usrit चिदेवैः पुरू शंसेन वावृधुष्ट SAH | 
अभीवंतेव ता म॑हापदेनं ध्वान्तात्प्र॑पित्वादुदरन्त गभी: ॥ २॥ 


176 RGVEDA 


2: Druho nisatta prsani cidevaih puru Ssamsena 
vavrdhusta indram. Abhivrteva ta mahapadena 
dhvantat prapitvadudaranta garbhah. 


The armies of the enemy of darkness and pride 
stand round him well ordered and deployed with fighting 
forces ready for the move, and they abundantly exalt 
Indra with universal songs of praise. The people safe 
all round covered with mighty defence and security rise 
and progress like showers of rain released from the depth 
of dark and dense expansive clouds. 


ऋष्वा ते पादा प्र यज्िगास्यवंर्धन्वाज। उत ये चिदत्र । 
त्वमिन्द्र सालावृकान्त्सदहस्त्र॑मासन्द॑धिषे अश्विना 
व॑वृत्याः ॥ ३॥ 


Rsva te pada pra yajjigasyavardhan vaja uta ye 
cidatra. Tvammindra salavrkantsahasr-amasan 
dadhise asvina vavrtyah. 


Indra, great and elevated are the columns and 
constituents of the system you rule over. When you 
advance and win your goal, the most eminent leaders, 
scientists and technologists, warriors and whoever 
others are here, all praise and exalt you. You appoint 
and maintain thousands of vigilant guards on the 
forefronts of the land. Indra, keep the social economy 
and all subsystems of the order moving, keep the circuit 
live without relent. 


समना Cred यासि यज्ञमा नास॑त्या TD वस्षि। 
वसाव्यामिन्द्र धारयः सहस्राश्विना शूर ददतुर्मघानि ii ४ ॥ 

4. Samana turnirupa yasi yajnama nasatya sakhyaya 
vaksi. Vasavyamindra dharayah sahasra’svina 
sura dadaturmaghani. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 73 777 


Going fast forward in the struggle of life, you 
move close by the ways of yajna, holding on to the 
common creative values of corporate life and bringing 
all complementary forces of the system together for 
friendship ever in action for advancement. Indra, brave 
hero and ruler, hold and manage the wealth of the nation 
while the Ashvins, complementary forces of the system, 
create and contribute a thousand forms of honour, wealth 
and all round prosperity to the commonwealth. 


मन्द॑मान ऋतादधि प्रजायै सखिभिरिन्द्र sheave 
आभिर्हि माया उप दस्युमागान्मिहः प्र तम्रा अवपत्त- 
मांसि।॥ ५॥ 


2, Mandamana rtadadhi prajayai sakhibhirindra 
isirebhirartham. Abhirhi maya upa dasyumaga- 
nmihah pra tamra avapat tamamsi. 


Further, happy and joyous with the rule of 
inviolable law and dispensation of justice, Indra creates, 
holds, manages and provides wealth and well being for 
the people with the cooperation of his friendly and 
enthusiastic colleagues, and with these very cooperative 
forces faces the negative elements, negates their 
mischief and dispels all fog, depression and oppressive 
darkness from the land, uproots all these. 


सनामाना चिद्‌ ध्वसयो न्य॑स्पा अर्वाहननिन्द्र उषसो 
aor: । ऋष्वैरगच्छः सखिंभिर्निकमिः साकं प्रतिष्ठा cet 
जघन्थ UE ॥ 

6. Sanamana ciddhvasayo nyasma avahannindra 


usaso yathanah. Rsvairagacchah sakhibhirni- 
kamaih sakam pratistha hrhya jaghantha. 


778 RGVEDA 


Indra, dispel the darkness of the forces of equal 
name and power and subdue them with your light like 
the sun which overtakes the car of the dawns and turns 
it to day. Move forward with heroic friends who are 
brilliant and ambitious and with them together win the 
firmness and stability of your heart’s desire. 


त्वं ज॑घन्थ नमुचिं मखस्युं दासं कृण्वान ऋष॑ये विमायम्‌। 
त्वं deed मन॑वे स्योनान्पथो देवत्राञ्जसेव यानान्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


7. Tvam jaghatha namucim makhasyam dasam 
krnvana rsaye vimayam. Tvam cakartha manave 
syonan patho devatranjaseva yanan. 


You subdue the miserly hoarder and the 
negative, destructive clever trickster and convert him 
to be a lover of yajna and social generosity, living a 
simple natural life for the advancement of the seer. You 
make the paths of human progress peaceful and 
enjoyable, holy, simple and natural to follow for the 
pilgrims of divinity. 


wane पप्रिषे fa ares इन्द्र दधिषे गभ॑स्तौ । 
अनुं त्वा देवाः शव॑सा मदन्त्युपरिंबुध्नान्वनिनंश्चकर्थ ।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tvametani paprise vi namesana indra dadhise 
gabhastau. Anu tva devah savasa madantyu- 
paribudhnan vaninascakartha. 


Indra, you fill up all these agents of positivity 
with strength. Ruling and controlling, you hold the rule 
and justice like the thunderbolt in hand. Consequently 
all the divinities of nature and humanity rejoice and exalt 
you with power and joy. Indeed you turn all the clouds 
above downwards to release the showers of life giving 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 73 7719 


rain. 
चक्रं यद॑स्याप्स्वा निष॑त्तमुतो तद॑स्मै मध्िच्च॑च्छद्यात्‌। 
पृथिव्यामतिषितं यदूधः पयो गोष्वद॑धा ओष॑धीषु ॥ ९ ॥ 
i, Cakram yadasyapsva nisattamuto tadasmai 


madhviccacchadyat. Prthivyamatisitam yadu- 
dhah payo gosvadatha osadhisu. 


His wheel of power and presence which operates 
across the spaces and rules the dynamics of nature and 
humanity also fills and covers the whole system of 
existence with honey sweets of joy for life and for the 
lord’s own fulfilment too, the same honey which 
fertilises the earth and fills the clouds, the nectar that is 
filled in the cow’s udders and sweetens the sap in the 
herbs. 


अश्वादियायेति यद्वदन्त्योज॑सो जातमुत म॑न्य OT | 
मन्योरियाय हर्म्येषु तस्थौ ad: प्रजज्ञ इन्द्रो अस्य वेद ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Asvddiyayeti yadvadantyojaso jatamuta manya 
enam. Manyoriyaya marmyesu tasthau yatah 
prajajn indro asya veda. 


While some say this power and presence comes 
from the system itself, and I think it is born of divine 
lustre, arisen from passion and subsisting in forms and 
subsystems, the truth is that wherefrom it arises Indra 
alone knows the mystery. 


aa: सु पर्णा उप॑ सेदुरिन्द्रं प्रियमेधा ऋष॑यो नाध॑मानाः | 
अप॑ ध्वान्तमूर्णुहि पूर्धि चक्षुर्मुमुग्ध्य१ स्माच्निधयेव 
AEN ९९॥ 


780 RGVEDA 


11.  Vayah suparna upa sedurindram priyamedha 
rsayo nadhamanah. Apa dhvantamurnuhi purdhi 
caksurmumugdhyasman nidhayeva baddhan. 


Men of vibrant intelligence and flying 
imagination, seers and sages with love and reason, in a 
mood of supplication, prayer and faith sit and abide by 
Indra. O lord, unveil the truth from darkness, perfect 
our vision for the light of truth, release us for we are 
bound like birds in snares. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 74 
Indra Devata, Gauriviti Shaktya Rshi 


वसूनां वा ache इयंक्षन्धिया at यज्ञैर्वा रोद॑स्योः | अर्वन्तो 
वाये tard: सातौ ad ar a सुश्रुणं सुश्रुतो धुः ॥ ९॥ 


1 Vasunam va carkrsa tyaksan dhiya va yajnairva 
rodasyoh. Arvanto va ye rayimantah satau vanum 
va ye susrunam susruto dhuh. 


Wishing to honour the winners of the wealth 
and glories of heaven and earth by thought and action 
and by corporate yajnic performance, I celebrate the 
warriors of horse and commanders of wealth and honour 
of excellence who support the friends and destroy the 
assailants in the battles of life and who uphold and exalt 
the well received words and traditions of reputed sages 
and scholars. 


हव॑ एषामसुरो नक्षत द्यां श्रवस्यता मन॑सा निंसत क्षाम्‌। 
चक्षाणा यत्र॑ सुविताय देवा द्यौर्न वारे भिः कृणव॑न्त 
स्वैः।॥२॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 74 781 


2. Hava esamasuro naksata dyam Sravasyata 
manasa nimsata ksam. Caksana yatra suvitaya 
deva dyaurna varebhih krnavanta svaih. 


Their call to action, with the fragrance of their 
yajnic performance full of freshness and rejuvenation 
for life, rises to heaven and, with their ideas and fame, 
spreads over the whole earth where brilliant sages of 
vision and generous leaders, with their own essential 
choices and best actions, create a heaven on earth for 
the good and all round well being of life. 


इयमेषाममूतानां गीः सर्वताता ये कृपर्णन्त रत्न॑म्‌ । 
धियं च यज्ञं च साधन्तस्ते नो' धान्तु वसव्यमसामि ॥ ३॥ 


3. Iyamesamamrtanam ९/1 sarvatata ye krpananta 
ratnam. Dhiyam ca yajnam ca sadhantaste no 
dhantu vasavyamasami. 


This is the voice of song in adoration of these 
immortals who, in the general yajna of all humanity, 
create and bestow on us the jewel wealth of life, elevate 
ideas and actions and accomplish the corporate creative 
programmes of total humanity by yajna. May they, we 
pray, bear and bring unbounded wealth and honour for 
us all. 


आ तत्त इन्द्रायवः पनन्ताभि य ऊर्व गोम॑न्तं तितुत्सान्‌। 
सकृत्स्वं) ये पुरुपुत्रां महीं सहस्त्र॑धारां ब॒ हतीं दुदुक्षन्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. A tat ta indrayavah panantabhi ya urvam goma- 


ntam titrtsan. Sakrtsvamye puruputram mahim 
sahasradharam brahatim duduksan. 


Indra, ruler of the world, the people adore and 
exalt you when they reap the harvest of abundant food 


782 RGVEDA 


and milk, and when they till the land, and, like the 
mother cow, wish to milk the great wide earth of a 
thousand streams who, for her many many children, 
produces all things together. 


चीव इन्द्रमव॑से कृणुध्वमनानतं दमय॑न्तं पृतन्यून्‌ । 
ऋभुक्षणं मघर्वानं सुवृक्तिं भर्तां यो ag नर्य पुरुक्षुः ॥ ५॥ 


5. Saciva indramavase krnudhvamananatam dama- 
yantam prtanyun. Rbhuksanam maghava-nam 
suvrktim bharta yo vajram naryam puruksuh. 


O yajakas, for your protection and progress, 
adore and exalt Indra, lord of wondrous power and 
action, undaunted subduer of enemies, glorious, 
majestic, admirable and abundantly generous friend of 
humanity. And he wields the thunderbolt of power, 
justice and dispensation. 


agian पुरुतमं पुराषाव्ठा वुत्रहेन्द्रो नामान्यप्राः । अचेति 
प्रासहस्पतिस्तुविष्मान्यदींमुश्मसि कर्त॑वे कर त्तत्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yadvavana purutamam purasala vrtrahendro 
namanyaprah.Aceti prasahaspatistuvisman 
yadimusmasi kartave karat tat. 


While Indra, subduer of the strongest enemy, 
destroyer of the strongholds of darkness, breaker of the 
clouds, is known as the justifier of his name and fame, 
he, lord of patience and fortitude, most powerful, helps 
us achieve whatever we wish to accomplish. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 75 783 


Mandala 10/Sukta 75 
Nadyah Devata, Sindhukshit Praiyamedha Rshi 


wad आपो nea कारुर्वोचाति सद॑ने विवस्व॑तः। 
प्र unde त्रेधा हि च॑क्रमुः प्र सूत्व॑रीणामति सिन्धुरो- 
War ९॥ 


1. Pra su va apo mahimanamuttamam karurvocati 
sadane vivasvatah. Pra sapta-sapta tredha hi 
cakramuh pra srtvarinamati sindhurojasa. 


O fluent streams of water, energy and light, your 
best and highest grandeur and quality in every region 
of the master of earth, skies and light (Vivasvan), the 
scholar scientist devotee adores, describes and 
celebrates. Seven streams flow three ways in every one 
of the three regions, and in all the flowing streams the 
one common current flows on with its own innate energy 
and power. 


प्र तेऽ रदद्वरुणो यात॑वे पथः सिन्धो यद्वा्जौ। अभ्यद्र॑वस्त्वम्‌। 
wen अधिं प्रवततां यासि सानुना यदेषामग्रं जग॑तापिर- 
waa neu 


2. Pra te’radadvruno yatave pathah sindho yadva- 
jam abhyadravastvam. Bhumya adhi pravata yasi 
sanuna yadesamagram jagatamirajyasi. 


O flowing stream, as you flow for the energy 
and vitality of foods in plants, herbs and trees, or as 
you flow by the tops of mountains of the earth or as you 
elevate the first and best part of these living and moving 
forms of nature with pranic energy, the sun makes the 
path for your flow. 


784 RGVEDA 


दिवि स्वनो य॑तते भूम्योपर्यनन्तं शुष्पमुदियर्ति भानुनां। 
अभ्रादिव प्र स्त॑नयन्ति वृष्टयः सिन्धुर्यदेति वृषभो न 
रोरुवत्‌॥ ३ ॥ 


a Divi svano yatate bhumyoparyanantam susma- 
mudiyarti bhanuna. Abhradiva pra stanayanti 
vrstayah sindhuryadeti vrsabho na roruvat. 


When the force and flood of energy is set in 
motion by the sun, the rumble of infinite energy shakes 
the spaces in heaven and the atmosphere on earth. As 
thunder roars and reverberates from the sky, so do 
showers fall and the river flood flows resounding like 
the cloud. 


अभित्वा सिन्धो शिशुमिन्न मातरो वाश्रा अर्षन्ति पय॑सेव 
धेनव: । राजेव geal नयसि त्वमित्सिचौ यदासामग्रं 
प्रवतामिनक्षसि ॥ ४॥ 

4. Abhi tva sindho sisuminna mataro vasra arsanti 
payaseva dhenvah. Rajeva yudhva nayasi tvamit 
sicau yadasamagram pravataminaksasi. 

O Sindhu, flood of water, just as mothers move 
with love to the child, just as lowing cows with milk 
move to the calf to promote life, so do streams flow to 
you and you take them forward flowing to the sea like a 
warrior king leading his armies to the battlefield for 
victory. 


इमं मे गद्धे यमुने सरस्वति sid fe स्तोमं सचता परुष्ण्या । 
असिक्न्या म॑रुद्वृधे वितस्तयार्जीकीये sop सुषो- 
म॑या॥५॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 75 785 


>. Imam me gange yamune sarasvati Sutudri stomam 
sacata parusnya. Asidnya marudrdhe vitastayar- 
Jikiye Ssrnuhyd susomaya. 


O Ganga, ever flowing stream of water, life and 
life energy, Yamuna, stream that joins others and flows, 
Sarasvati, stream of abundant water and light of life, 
Shutudri, fast flowing stream of water and energy, 
Marudvrdha, stormy stream of water, prana and passion 
for life, Arjikiya, overflooding stream of life breaking 
over the banks, along with Parushni, sparkling stream 
flowing through stages, and Sushoma, stream of peace 
and vitality deep as the fathomless ocean, Asikni and 
Vistasta may all listen to this song of homage of mine 
and bless life. 


Note: It is said that the words from Ganga to 
Sushoma are names of ten particular streams. It is not 
so. According to Yaska and Swami Dayananda, Veda is 
universal knowledge, there is no history and no 
geography in this body of knowledge. If particular 
streams are called by these names, the names were 
derived from the Vedas in which those name-words 
already existed, and the name-word and the 
characteristics of the stream corresponded. For this very 
correspondence, certain nerves, arteries and veins in the 
body also were named after these Vedic words. Pandit 
Jaya Deva Sharma in his translation of Rgveda 
(published Arya Sahitya Mandala, Ajmer, 1936, vol. 7, 
p. 131) quotes from a Kerala manuscript on music the 
following: 


“Ida cha pingalakhya cha sushumna chasthi 
jihvika, Alambusa yatha pusha gandhari shankhini 


786 RGVEDA 


kuhuh, Dehamadhyagata etah mukhyah syurdasha 
nadyah”, and continues that Ganga is Ida, which leads 
us to spiritual enlightenment, Yamuna is Pingala which 
joins with and orders various organs of the body, 
Sarasvati is sushumna which leads us to the joy of 
knowledge, Parushni (parvavati, bhaswati, 
kutilagamini) which goes through the vertibrae of the 
spine is shining, Asikni is dark, Marudvrdha is 
augmented by all nadis, Shutudri is fast and full, Vitasta 
controls body temperature, Arjikiya originates from a 
centre called Rjuka in the brain, also called vipat which, 
if it breaks, then death occurs and the pranas and the 
soul forsake the body. For this reason it is also called 
urunjara. Sindhu is the soul into which retire all the 
pranas and the nadis. Thus ‘streams’ and names of 
streams are general terms of life’s dynamics in different 
physical, psychic and spiritual contexts. 


तृष्टाम॑या प्रथमं यात॑वे सजुः सुसत्वी र सयां श्वेत्या त्या । 
त्वं सिन्धो कुभ॑या गोमतीं ea मेहल्वा सरथं याथिरी- 
य॑से॥ u 


6. Trstamaya prathamam yatave sajuh susartva 
rasaya svetya tya. Tvam sindho kubhaya gomatim 
krumum mehatnva saratham yabhirtyase. 


O Sindhu, flood and ocean of the dynamics of 
life, the streams which you first join and go on by the 
body chariot of existence are: Trshtama, the nadi with 
which food is first digested in the stomach, Susartu by 
which the energy produced is distributed over parts of 
the body system, Rasa by which energy vibrates across 
the whole system, Shveti by which food energy joins 
the blood stream, Kubha by which the skin cover is 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 75 787 


formed and sustained, Gomati by which speech and 
other senses are controlled, Krumu which controls and 
coordinates body movements, and Mehatnu which 
controls the urinary function. 


ऋजीत्येनी रुरती महित्वा परि जयांसि भरते रजांसि। 
अदब्धा सिन्धुर पसामपस्तमाश्वा न चित्रा वपुषीव 
दर्ता ॥ ७॥ 


ve Ryityent rusatt mahitva pari jrayamsi bharate 
rajamsi. Adabdha sindhurapasamapastama- 
§va na citra vapusiva darsata. 


Rjiti which moves peacefully, Eni which 
controls the white corpuscles, and Rushati which is 
bright and creates the body lustre, move by the energy 
and grandeur of the spiritual centre and communicate 
particles of energy and vitality across the system. 
Sindhu, the central stream and spirit, undaunted, is the 
most dynamic of all dynamics, wonderful as a ray of 
light and beautiful as a youthful maiden. 


स्वश्वा सिन्धुः सुरथा qarat हिर्‌ ण्ययी Gare वाजिनीं 
वती । ऊर्णावती युवतिः सीलमावत्युताधि वस्ते सुभगां 
मधुवृधम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Svasva sindhuh suratha suvasa hiranyayi sukrta 
vajinivati. Urnavati yuvatih silamavatyutadhi 
vaste subhaga madhuvrdham. 


Sindhu, the central psychic and spiritual stream 
of the system commands beautiful senses and mind and 
the beautiful body chariot, it is fragrant, golden, nobly 
active, energetic achiever, handsomely covered 
youthful, provided with an efficient structural body 


788 RGVEDA 


system, beatific, honey sweet and rich, which abides in 
and rules over all streams of the system. 


सुखं रथं युयुजे सिन्धुर श्विनं तेन वाजं सनिषदस्मिन्नाजौ । 
महान्यस्य महिमा प॑नस्यतेऽ dara स्वय॑शसो विर - 
fer: ue 


9. Sukham ratham yuyuje sindhurasvinam tena 
vajam sanisdasminnajau. Mahan hyasya mahima 
panasyate’dabdhasya svayasaso varapsinah. 


Sindhu, spirit of the stream of existence, flows 
incessantly, riding the cosmic chariot of all joy and 
comfort, wonderfully dynamic, by which it wins 
victories of attainments for its devotees and tributaries 
in this cosmic play. Great is its glory praised and 
celebrated by poets, undaunted and inviolable, innately 
glorious, infinitely abundant and generous. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 76 
Gravana Devata, Sarpa Airavata Jaratkarna Rshi 


आ व॑ ऋञ्जस ऊर्जा व्युंष्टिष्विन्द्रं मरुतो रोद॑सी sree | 
उभे य्था नो अहनी सचाभुवा सदःसदो वरिवस्यातं 
उद्धिदा॥ ९॥ 


I; A va rijasa urjam vyustisvindram maruto rodasi 
anaktana. Ube yatha no ahani sacabhuva sadah 
sado varivasyat udbhida. 


O scholars and celebrants of yajna, creators of 
soma wealth, I honour and cooperate with you at the 
dawn of light and energy in the morning. Pray honour, 
celebrate and serve Indra, the sun, the winds, the earth 
and the environment and reveal their power and 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 76 789 


potential for us so that both day and night they may 
produce and give us wealth born of earth for every home. 


तदु HS सव॑नं सुनोतनात्यो न हस्त॑यतो अद्रिः GAR 
facial अभिभूति पौंस्यं महो राये चित्तरुते 
यदर्वतः ॥ २॥ 


2 Tadu srestham savanam sunotandatyo na 
hastayato adrih sotari. Vidaddhyaryo abhibhuti 
paumsyam maho raye cit tarute yadarvatah. 


Enact and accomplish that highest plan of yajnic 
action which like a goal-oriented programme of cloud 
showers in the hands of the creative maker of soma wins 
strength and power, progress and victory for the 
yajamana so that for the achievement of great wealth 
and progress he overcomes the worst hurdles and goes 
forward with quick mile stones of success. 


deca सव॑नं विवेरपो यथां पुरा मन॑वे ara 
गोअर्णसि care अश्व॑निर्णिलि प्रेम॑ध्वरेष्व॑ध्वरां अआंशि- 
श्रयुः ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Tadiddhyasya savanam viverapo yatha pura 
manave gatumasret. Go-arnasi tvastre asvanirniji 
premadhvar-esvadhavar-am asisrayuh. 


Let that creative soma yajna programme of this 
yajamana promote and extend his actions and 
achievements the way as ever before it has opened and 
extended the paths of progress for humanity and inspired 
pioneers of positive acts of love and service to go 
forward in the scientific development of land, cows, 
culture and enlightenment and in the technological 
development of efficient means of transport and 


790 RGVEDA 
civilisational attainments. 


अप॑ हत रक्षसो भङ्गुराव॑तः स्कभायत निऋतिं 
सेधताम॑तिम्‌। आ al रयिं सर्व॑वीरं सुनोतन देवाव्यं भरत 
VOHRA: US ॥ 


4. Apa hata raksaso bhanguravatah skabhayata 
nirrtim sedhatamatim. A no rayim sarvaviram 
sunotana devavyam bharata slokamadrayah. 


O yajakas and creators of soma, destroy the 
wicked and the evil tendencies, hold off the crooked 
and negative forces from the ways of development and 
progress, drive off want and poverty, create and bring 
us wealth and progeny worthy of the brave, and sing 
songs of thanks and praise in honour of the divinities. 


दिवश्चिदा वोऽमवत्तरेभ्यो विभ्वनां चिदाश्व॑पस्तरेभ्यः। 
aaa सोम॑रभस्तरेभ्योऽग्रेश्चिंदचच पितुकृत्त- 
रेभ्यः॥ ५॥ 


3: Divascida vo’mavattarebhyo vibhavana cidasva- 
pastarebhyah. Vayoscida somarabhas-tare- 
bhyo’gnescidarca pitukrttarebhyah. 


I sing in honour and appreciation of you all who 
create more and more energy and power from the light 
of the sun, more and more energy and speed from the 
electric energy of the middle regions, more and better 
energising tonics and sanatives from the fresh vitality 
of the winds, and more and better nourishing food from 
the heat and fertility of the earth. 


भुरन्तु नो यशसः सोत्वन्ध॑सो ग्रावाणो वाचा दिविता 
दिवित्म॑ता। नरो यत्र॑ दुहते काम्यं मर्ध्वाघोषय॑न्तो अभितो 
मिथस्तुर: ॥ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / ऽ <^ - 76 791 


6. Bharantu no yasasah sotvandhaso gravano vaca 
divita divitmata. Naro yatra duhate kamyam 
madhvaghosayanto abhito mithasturah. 


May the yajakas, creators of soma, bear and 
bring that nectar of honour and energy wherein, inspired 
by the heavenly voice of divinity rising to the skies, 
enlightened people together in unison distil the honey 
sweets of cherished love and fulfilment of life, their 
ecstasy resounding all round. 


सुन्वन्ति सोमं रथिरासो अद्र॑यो निर॑स्य रसं गविषो दुहन्ति 
ते। दुःहन्त्युध॑रुपसेचनाय कं नरो हव्या न म॑र्जयन्त 
आसभिः ॥ ७॥ 


7. Sunvanti somam rathiraso adrayo nirasya rasam 
gaviso duhanti te. Duhantyudhar-upasecanaya 
kam naro havya na marjayanta asabhih. 


Devotees of Soma, lovers of divinity, riding the 
body chariot in the state of dharma-megha samadhi 
extract the nectar juice of divine joy. Loving the vision 
and word of that joy they distil the taste and flavour of 
it. They milk the presence, the taste, the flavour of 
divinity from the udders of Mother Nature to sprinkle 
on and around the vedi of life and, as people taste the 
holy food with their tongue, they sanctify and experience 
the joy in the state of clairvoyance. 


एते At: स्वप॑सो अभूतन य इन्द्राय सुनुथ सोम॑मद्रयः। 
वामंवामं नो दिव्याय धाम्ने वसुवसु a: पार्थिवाय 
सुन्वते ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Ete narah svapaso abhutana ya indraya sunutha 
somamadrayah. Vamam vamam vo divyaya 
dhamne vasu vasu vah parthivaya sunvate. 


792 RGVEDA 


O enlightened sages, such you are, people of 
holy action, yajakas and creators of soma, to offer your 
homage of living joy to Indra, lord of glory. All the 
beauties and graces of life you create, all the wealth, 
honour and excellence of earthly life you achieve is for 
the service of Indra, your homage in totality to Divinity, 
Spirit of the earth. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 77 
Maruts Devata, Syumarashmi Bhargava Rshi 


अभ्रप्रुषो न वाचा प्रुषा ad ह विष्प॑न्तो न यज्ञा विंजानुष॑ः। 
सुमारुतं न genoa गणम॑स्तोष्येषां न शोभसे ॥ ९ ॥ 


| Abhrapruso na vaca prusa vasu havismanto na 
yajna vijanusah. Sumarutam na brahmanamar- 
hase ganamastosyesam na Sobhase. 


Like clouds of rain bringing showers of wealth 
and fertility to the earth, like yajakas bearing sacred 
offerings for the fire and replenishing the vitality of the 
environment, the vibrant currents of cosmic mind and 
holy sages of the divine Word bless humanity with the 
Vedic voice. Now, in order to do them the honour they 
deserve, sing and adore the assembly of the sages like 
the divine currents of Maruts, and do so in order that 
you too may deserve the honour and appreciation you 
would win. 


fara मयौसो अज्जीरंकृण्वत सुमारुतं न पूर्वीरति arc: । 
दिवस्पुत्रास एता न येतिर आदित्यासस्ते अक्रान 
वावृधुः ॥ २॥ 

2. Sriye marydso anjimrakrnavata sumarutam na 
purvirati ksapah. Divasputrasa eta na yetira 
adityasaste akra na vavrdhuh. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 77 793 


For their honour and glory, mortals adore and 
celebrate them, Even veteran powers of earliest fame 
cannot violate them. Children of light, they shoot 
forward like archers and do not deviate from the course. 
Children of Aditi, mother Eternity, they advance like 
rays of light and extend the bounds of knowledge. 


प्रये fea: पुधिव्या न बर्हणा wat रिरिच्रे अभ्रान्न सूर्यः: 1 
पाजस्वन्तो न वीराः पनस्यवो रिशादसो न मयौ अभि- 
द्य॑वः॥ ३॥ 


Pra ye divah prthivya na barhana tmana riricre 
abhranna suryah. Pajasvanto na virah panasyavo 
risadaso na marya abhidyavah. 


By virtue of their own strength and power (they 
are great) but not separate, not unrelated to heaven and 
earth just as the sun is great but not unrelated to the 
cloud and the sky. Commanding power and grandeur 
like heroes, they are adorable like mortals who destroy 
negativity, and they are refulgent in their own right. 


युष्माकं बुध्ने अपां न याम॑नि विथुर्यति न मही श्रथर्यति | 
विष्वप्सुर्यज्ञो अर्वागयं सु वः प्रय॑स्वन्तो न सत्राच आ 
Tet WU 


4. Yusmakam budhne apam na yamani vithuryati na 
mahi Sratharyati. Visvapsuryajno arvagayam su 
vah prayasvanto na straca व gata. 


In your area of operation you shine on together, 
as in the spaces of cosmic dynamics the earth does not 
shake, nor does it slacken, but goes on and on steadily 
on its course. Same way your yajnic operation in the 
cosmic law is universal, versatile and holy. Pray come 


794 RGVEDA 


to our sessions, bear and bring us the food, energy and 
the wealth we need and work for. 


यूयं धूर्षु प्रयुजो न र श्मिभिर्ज्योतिंष्मन्तो न भासा व्युष्टिषु | 
श्येनासो न स्वय॑शसो रिशादसः प्रवासो न प्रसिंतासः 
परिप्रुषः ॥ ५॥ 


5: Yuyam dhursu prayujo na rasmibhirjyotismanto 
na bhasa vyustisu. Syenaso na svayasaso risa- 
dasah pravaso na prasitasah pariprusah. 


In our programmes of progress, be like the 
motive powers of the plan with rays of light and reins 
of control. Be like light givers with sun-light on the 
rise of the dawns of initiative on a new day. Self- 
refulgent and glorious like harbingers of soma, be 
destroyers of violence and negativity. Like world- 
travellers, shining and sinless on meticulous missions, 
be harbingers of universal showers of rain and 
prosperity. 


प्र यद्वहध्वे मरुतः पराकाद्यूयं महः Cao वस्व॑ः 
विदानासो वसवो राध्य॑स्याराच्यिद्‌ ga: सनुतर्युयोत ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Pra yadvahadhve marutah parakad yuyam mahah 
samvaranasya vasvah. Vidanaso vasavo radhya- 
syaraccid dvesah sanutaryuyota. 


O Maruts, creators, achievers and givers of 
wealth and providers of peace and settlement, when you 
come from afar and bring great wealth of choice human 
value and order capable of further and capital 
development, then you eliminate all hate, jealousy and 
enmity polluting the heart within and society outside. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 77 795 


य Safa aa अध्वरेष्ठा मरुद्धयो न मानुषो दर्दात्‌। 
रेवत्स वयो दधते सुवीरं स देवानामपि गोपीथे अस्तु ॥ ७॥ 


di Ya udrci yajne adhvarestha marudbhyo na 
manuso dadaSat. Revat sa vayo dadhate suviram 
sa devanamapi gopithe astu. 


The man established in Vedic chant and yajnic 
programmes of creation and development who gives 
for yajna and also gives to the brilliant and versatile 
Maruts achieves good health and long age blest with 
plenty of wealth and noble children and he also enjoys 
the protection of divinities on the path of rectitude. 


ते हि यज्ञेषुं यज्ञियास aot आदित्येन aren शंभ॑विष्ठा 1 
ते नोऽ वन्तु रथतूर्मनीषां महश्च या्म॑न्नध्वरे चकानाः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Te hi yajnesu yajniyasa uma adityena namna 
sambhavisthah. Te no’vantu rathaturmanisam 
mahasca yamannadhvare cakanah. 


May the Maruts, adorable at yajna, protectors 
and promoters most benevolent and blissful by the gift 
of solar light and enlightenment and showers of 
substantial waters and energy, versatile movers of the 
dynamics of cosmic yajna circuit protect and promote 
our mind, intelligence and knowledge while they love, 
cherish and extend our grand paths of progress in our 
social programmes of creation and production in the 
spirit of universal love, friendship and peace and non- 
violence. 


796 RGVEDA 


Mandala 10/Sukta 78 
Maruts Devata, Syumarashmi Bhargava Rshi 


विप्रासो न मन्म॑भिः स्वाध्यो देवाव्यो न aa: स्वप्र॑सः। 
राजानो न चित्राः deat: क्षितीनां न मयी अरेपसः ॥ ९॥ 


ie Vipraso na manmabhih svadhyo devavyo na 
yajnai svapnasah. Rajano na citrah susamdrsah 
ksitinam na marya arepasah. 


Like sages holy and self-possessed by noble 
thoughts and meditation, like dreamers of dreams 
devoted to divinity by yajnic actions, like wondrous 
brilliant rulers noble in person and performance, the 
Maruts are pure and sinless like noble mortals among 
humanity. 


अथिर्न ये urstar रुक्मवक्षसो वातासो न स्वयुज॑ः 
सद्यऊतयः | प्रज्ञातारो न ज्येष्ठाः सुनीतयः सुशमीणो न 
सोमं ऋतं यते ॥ २॥ 


2 Agnirna ye bhrajasa rukmavaksaso vataso na 
svayujah sadhya-utayah. Prajnataro na jyesthah 
sunitayah susarmano na soma rtam yate. 


Shining with golden halo and lustre like fire, 
always devoted to protection and promotion of life like 
winds by free will and dedication of the self, highest 
and wholly committed to noble policies like wise and 
enlightened sages, they work for the peace and holy 
soma joy of the men of action and endeavour as divine 
harbingers of mental peace and spiritual bliss. 


वातासो न ये धुन॑यो जिगलवोंऽ मरीनां न जिह्वा विरोकिणः 1 
वर्मण्वन्तो न योधाः शिमीवन्तः पितृणां न शंसाः 
सुरातयः ॥ २ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 78 797 


a Vataso na ye dhunayo jigatnavo’ gninam na jihva 
virokinah. Varmanvanto na yodhah simivantah 
pitrnam na Samsah suratayah. 


Stormy shakers are they of the stagnant as well 
as of the vibrant like winds, blazing like flames of fire, 
mighty strong like warriors clad in armour for battle, 
and profusely generous like blessings of the parents. 


रथानां न ये4.5 राः सनाभयो जिगीवांसो न ort अभिद्यंवः। 
वरेयवो न मयी घृतप्रुषोऽ भिस्वतरि अर्क न सुष्टुभः ॥ ठ ॥ 

4. Rathanam na ye’rah sanabhayo jigivamso na Sura 
abhidyavah. Vareyavo na marya ghrtapruso- 
*bhisvartaro ar-kam na sustubhah. 


United in common with the centre as spokes of 
the wheel with the nave, lustrous like warriors thirsting 
for victory, liberal givers of the showers of prosperity, 
and soothing of speech like the holy chant of Rks, such 
are the Maruts for humanity. 


अश्वासो न ये ज्येष्ठास आशवो दिधिषवो न cea: 
सुदान॑वः। आपो न निम्नैरुदभिंर्जिंगल्रवो' विश्वरूपा 
अदधिरसो न साम॑भिः ॥ ५॥ 


a Asvaso na ye jyesthasa asavo didhisavo na rath- 
yah sudanavah. Apo na nimnairudabhir-jigatnavo 
visvarupa angiraso na samabhih. 


They are vibrant winners of the highest order 
like rays of light in focus, generous givers like 
commanders of the chariots of plenty and charity, 
progressive seekers like rivers flowing down to the sea, 
and versatile workers of theoretical knowledge into 
practice like the Angiras sages of Atharva Veda realising 


798 RGVEDA 
their hymns with the music of Samans. 


ग्रावाणो न सूरयः सिन्धुमातर आदर्दिरासो अद्रयो न 
विश्वहा | शिशूला न ्रीव्ठय॑ः सुमातरो महाग्रामो न यामंन्रुत 
त्विषा ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Gravano na surayah sindhumatara adardiraso 
adrayo na visvaha. Sisula na krilayah sumataro 
mahagramo na yamannuta tvisa. 


Like the clouds of rain they are makers of the 
floods and oceans of collective wealth and knowledge, 
always opening the flood gates of showers like thunder 
across the world, playing like innocent children of noble 
mothers and going forward with light and lustre like a 
mighty community united in action. 


उषसां न cada sear fara: शुभंयवो नाज्िभिर्व्यज्वितन्‌। 
सिन्ध॑वो न ययियो भ्राजदृष्टयः परावतो न योज॑नानि 
ममिरे ॥ ७॥ 


on Usasam na ketavo’dhvarasriyah subhamyavo 
nanjibhirvyasvitan. Sindhavo na yayiyo bhraja- 
drstayah paravato na yojanani mamire. 


Like lights of the dawn they illuminate the sky 
and beautify the yajna on earth, themselves shining with 
graces and wishing the world all well all round. Moving 
forward like rivers in flood they shine in arms, and like 
pioneer travellers over boundless woods and spaces they 
cover miles and miles of distance in progress and 
achievement. 


सुभागान्नो देवाः कृणुता सुरत्नानस्मान्त्स्तो तृन्म॑रुतो 
वावृधानाः | अधिं स्तोत्रस्य स॒ख्यस्य॑ गात सनाद्धि वों 
रत्नधेयानि सन्तिं ॥ ८ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 79 799 


8. Subhaganno devah krnuta suratnanas-mantstotrn 
maruto vavrdhanah. Adhi stotrasya sakhyasya 
gata sanaddhi vo ratnadheyani santi. 


O noble and divine Maruts, vibrant scholars and 
sages, blazing warriors, benevolent philanthropists and 
relentless seekers and creators, let us be sharers with 
you, blest with noble jewel wealth of existence. 
Yourselves exalted by our adorations, exalt us, the 
celebrants. Come and acknowledge our song of praise, 
appreciation and friendship. Liberal you are, and 
immense are the gifts of your generosity for all time 
past, present and future. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 79 


Agni Devata, Agni Sauchika or Vaishvanara, or Sapti 
Vajambhara Rshi 


अपंर्यमस्य महतो महित्वममर्त्यस्य cette fear 
नाना हनु fasta सं भ॑रेते असिन्वती बप्सती भूर्यत्तः ॥ ९ ॥ 


ie Apasyamasya mahato mahitvamamartasya 
martyasu viksu. Nana hanu vibhrte sam bharete 
asinvatt bapsati bhuryattah. 


I see and realise the sublime presence of this 
immortal Agni among mortals whose complementary 
catalytic powers open and close and open like the jaws 
of a living being, disjoining and joining together 
insatiably and relentlessly, creating, destroying and 
recreating new forms from old ones, and ultimately 
consume all things thereby consummating and 
completing the process of evolution back into involution 
and annilation. 


800 RGVEDA 


गुहा शिरो निहितमृधगक्षी असिन्वन्नत्ति जिह्यया वनानि । 
अत्राण्यस्मै पड्भिः सं भ॑रन्त्युत्तानह॑स्ता नमसाधि विश्च ॥ २॥ 


(1 Guha Siro nihitamrdhagaksi asinvannatti jihvaya 
vanani. Atranyasmai padbhih sam bharantyutta- 
nahasta namasadhi viksu. 


The highest presence of Agni is hidden in 
mystery, in the cave of the heart. Its eyes of universal 
vision are objectified separately in the sun and moon. 
With its tongue it consumes various things, even the 
best and most beautiful too, insatiably. In homage to it, 
yajakas all across humanity bear holy offerings with 
hands raised in reverence and adoration and bring them 
step by step for its consumption in the fire and in the 
crucibles of the discipline of meditation. 


प्रमातुः प्रतरं गुह्यमिच्छन्कुमारो न वीरुधः सर्पदुर्वीः । खसं 
न पक्वमंविदच्छुचन्तं रिरि हंसं रिप उपस्थे अन्तः ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. Pra matuh prataram guhyamicchan kumaro na 
virudhah sarpadurvih. Sasam na pakvamavi- 
dacchucantam ririhvamsam ripa upasthe antah. 


Loving and seeking the ultimate mystery of 
Agni, mother spirit of life and human evolution, the 
seeker comes like an innocent child moving up silently 
by and along the various folds of earthly existence, 
ultimately reaching the centre core of the mystery and 
attains the radiant presence deliciously ecstatic like the 
ripest fruit of life. 


तद्वामृतं रोदसी प्र tate जाय॑मानो मातरा गर्भो अत्ति। 
नाहं देवस्य मर्त्यश्चिकेताथिर ङ्क विचेताः स प्रचेताः ॥ ४ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 79 801 


4. Tadvomrtam rodasi pra bravimi jayamano 
matara garbho atti. Naham devasya martyasci- 
ketagniranga vicetah sa pracetah. 


O heaven and earth, father and mother of life in 
existence, truly do I speak to you of that law of life 
which you observe and sustain: the baby life in the 
womb and, thereafter, receives its sustenance from father 
and mother. I, the rising vital form, the mortal, know 
not of the lord divine. For sure, Agni the omniscient 
alone knows all, Agni alone illuminates the spirit in the 
human form. 


यो sien अन्नं gers दधात्याज्यैर्घुतेर्जुहोति getter । 
तस्मै सहस्रमक्षभिर्वि ads यें विशुवतः प्रत्यङ्ङसि 
त्वम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 

Yo asma annam trsvadadhdatyajyairghrtair-juhoti 
pusyati. Tasmai sahasramaksabhirvi cakse’gne 
visvatah pratyannsi tvam. 


Whoever the person that readily and 
enthusiastically brings and offers food to this Agni, feeds 
the fire and raises the flames with ghrta and intensive 
oblations of havi, Agni watches and enlightens him with 
a thousand eyes and visions. O lord of light and life, 
Agni, you are always with us, all time, all round, with 
and within at the closest. 


किं देवेषु त्यज एनंश्चक थग पृच्छमि नु त्वामविद्वान्‌ । 
अक्रीव्छन््रीव्छन्हरिरत्तवेऽ दन्वि पंर्वशश्च॑कर्तं गामिं- 
वासिः॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Kim devesu tyaja enascakarthagne prcchami nu 


tvamavidvan. Akrilan krilan harirattave’dan 
vi parsascakarta gamivasih. 


802 RGVEDA 


An ignorant man, I ask you, Agni, whether 
among the divinities, in sport or not in sport, you subject 
men to sin, anger and aversion, since the omnipotent 
power, creator and destroyer, to swallow what is to be 
swallowed at the end, cuts things into particles like a 
knife cutting leather into pieces. 


विषुंचो अशुवान्युयुजे वनेजा ऋजीतिभी रशानाभिव॑गृ भीतान्‌ । 
चक्चदे पित्रो वसुभिः सुजातः समानृधे पर्व॑भिर्वावु- 
धानः ॥ ७॥ 


४ Visuco asvan yuyuje vaneja rjitibhi rasanabhir- 
grbhitan. Caksade mitro vasubhih sujatah sama- 
nrdhe parvabhirvavrdhanah. 


Fortunately born in a beautiful body, the soul 
uses various and versatile senses controlled by simple 
and natural operations of the will and intelligence and, 
loving and enlightened by Agni, cosmic lord omniscient, 
grows stage by stage with pranic energies and prospers. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 80 


Agni Devata, Agni Sauchika or Vaishvanara, or Sapti 
Vajambhara Rshi 


sift: ahi वाजंभरं द॑दात्यथिर्वीरि श्रुत्यं ea 371 | अगी 
रोद॑सी fa ares cheep fat पुरन्धिम्‌॥ 2 


५ Agnih saptim vajambharam dadatyagnirviram 
Srutyam karmanistham. Agni rodasi vi carat 
samanjannagnirnarim virakuksim puramdhim. 


Agni gives us fast faculties of sense and mind 
which bring us food for life and experience with success 
in many fields. Agni gives valiant progeny, learned and 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 80 803 


cultured with dedication to noble action. Agni pervades 
heaven and earth, beautifying them, and blesses the 
family home of man and woman, beatifying it with light 
and passion for good action, and Agni blesses the 
woman with fertility, motherhood of the brave and 
wisdom to keep a happy home. 


अगेरप्र॑सः समिदस्तु भव्रायिर्मही रोद॑सी आ विवे । 
winch चोदयत्समत्स्वभिर्वुत्राणिं दयते पुरूणि ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Agnerapnasah samidastu bhadragnirmahi rodast 
a vivesa. Agnirekam codayat samatsvagnirvrtrani 
dayate puruni. 


May the full fire, heat and light of Agni, versatile 
power of action be good for universal well being, Agni 
which pervades both heaven and earth. Agni inspires 
and energises every one in the battles of life, and Agni 
dispels and destroys all evils of want and darkness. 


अगिर्ह त्यं जर॑तः कर्णीमावाथिर द्यो निरंदहजनरूथम्‌ | 
अभिरत्र" घर्म रुष्यदन्तर भिर्नृमेधं प्रजयांसृजत्सम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


2; Agnirha tyam jaratah karnamavagniradbhyo 
niradahajjarutham. Agniratrim gharma urusya- 
dantaragnirnrmedham prajayasrjat sam. 


Agni protects the devotee’s health of sense and 
mind and establishes him in piety and prayer. Agni burns 
away the debilitating impurities from waters and from 
the blood stream of the body system. Agni protects the 
enlightened man free from triple bonds of infatuation 
with family, fame and finance. Agni establishes the man 
dedicated to yajnic advancement of humanity in the right 
relationship with family, friends and community. 


804 RGVEDA 


sifrete द्रविणं वीरपेशा अयिच्छषिं a: सहस्रा सनोति । 
अथिर्दिवि हव्यमा त॑तानाग्धमिानि विभुता पुत्रा ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Agnirdad dravinam virapesa agnirrsim yah 
sahasra sanoti. Agnirdivi havyama tatanagner- 
dhamani vibhrta purutra. 


Agni, heroic in form and pride of the brave, 
gives wealth, honour and excellence and all that is 
valuable in the world. Agni rewards the sage, seer and 
visionary scholar a thousand ways. Agni raises and 
diffuses the fragrance of oblations to the heavens. Indeed 
the presence and pervasions of Agni are boundless, 
infinitely spread out. 


अभ्रिमुक्थेऋष॑यो वि ह्व यन्तेऽ भिं नरो याम॑नि arferara: | 
अगिं वयो! अन्तरिश्चे पत॑न्तोऽ fu: सहस्रा परि याति 
गोनाम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


2: Agnimukthairrsayo vi hvayante’gnim naro 
yamani badhitasah. Agnim vayo antrarikse 
patanto’gnih sahasra pari yati gonam. 


Seers invoke Agni with the chant of sacred 
hymns. People in crisis on the journey onward call on 
Agni for help and guidance. Like birds flying up in the 
sky, sages on the way higher up towards the heavens or 
deep in awareness in the mind adore Agni. Agni, indeed, 
pervades and transcends a thousand abodes of light and 
life and inspires and enlightens the souls that seek and 
find. 


sift fast gaa मानुंषीर्या aft मनुषो agar वि जाताः 1 
अभिर्गान्धर्वी पथ्यामृतस्यागर्गव्यं fasta आ निष॑त्ता ॥ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 81 805 


6. Agnim visva ilate manusirya agnim manuso 
nahuso vi jatah. Agnirgandharvim pathyamr- 
tasyagnergavyutirghrta a nisatta. 


Communities of humanity conscious of their 
humanity and social responsibility worship Agni for 
guidance. People who rise above their earthly bonds 
thank and adore Agni. Agni holds and proclaims the 
holy voice of eternal truth which guides humanity on 
the paths of rectitude. The path that leads to Agni exists 
in and radiates from the lustre of Agni itself. 


अग्रये ब्रह्मं ऋभवंस्ततक्षुर भिं महाम॑वोचामा सुवृक्तिम्‌ | 
अग्ने प्राव॑ जरितारं यविष्ठाग्ने महि द्रविणमा य॑जस्व ॥ ७॥ 


a Agnaye brahma rbhavastataksuragnim mahama- 
vocama suvrktim. Agne prava jaritaram yavistha 
*ene mahi dravinama yajasva. 


Rbhus, sages of divine vision and genius, 
compose and sing songs of adoration in honour of Agni. 
We too offer holy songs of reverence and worship in 
celebration of Agni. O Spirit of universal light and life, 
ever youthful Agni, pray protect and promote the 
celebrant and give us the highest wealth of yajnic life 
in communion with you. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 81 
Vishvakarma Devata, Bhauvana Vishvakarma Rshi 


य इमा विश्वा भुव॑नानि Weataeiar न्यसीदत्पिता 
4: । स आशिषा द्रविंणमिच्छर्मानः प्रथमच्छदव॑रोँ आ 
विंवेा ॥ ९॥ 


806 RGVEDA 


ly Ya ima visva bhuvanani juhvadrsihrhota nyasidat 
pita nah. Sa asisa dravinamicchamanah pra- 
thamacchadavaram ठ vivesa. 


The eternal Rshi, visionary creator and cosmic 
yajaka, our father generator, who calls up all these 
worlds of the universe into existence ever abides by 
himself. Moved with desire to give the wealth of life 
with his blessings to the souls, he first generates the 
original Prakrti vesting it with his divine will and then 
simultaneously enters and pervades the modes and forms 
of Prakrti as they evolve. 


किं स्विंदासीदधिष्ठान॑मारम्भ॑णं कतमस्स्विंत्कथासींत्‌। यतो 
भूमिं जनयच्विश्वक्मां वि दद्यामौर्णोन्महिना fava- 
चंश्चाः॥ २॥ 


2. Kim svidasidadhisthanamarambhanam katamat 
svit kathasit. Yato bhumim janayan visvakarma 
vi dyamaurnonmahima visvacaksah. 


What was the basis, what the beginning of the 
beginning, what sort and whence, from which 
Vishvakarma, omniscient all watching guardian of the 
universe, creating the heaven and earth shaped them 
and vested them with divine grandeur? 


विश्वतश्चक्षुरुत विश्वतोमुखो favadiarged favad- 
स्पात्‌। सं बाहुभ्यां धर्म॑ति सं पतंत्रैद्यवाभूमीं जनयन्देव 


एकः ॥ ३॥ 
3: Visvatascaksuruta visvatomukho visvatoba- 


huruta visvataspat. Sam bahubhyam dhamati sam 
patatrairdyavabhumi janayan deva ekah. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 81 807 


All watching with cosmic eyes, all speaking with 
cosmic voice, all protecting with cosmic arms and all 
sustaining on cosmic foundations, the sole self-refulgent 
maker creating heaven and earth shapes and controls 
the universe with his hands, 1.e., thought and will with 
strokes of the natural forces forging things into form. 


किं स्विद्वनं क उ स gat आंस यतो द्यावापृथिवी निं तक्षुः | 
मनीषिणो मन॑सा पृच्छतेदु तद्यदध्यतिं्द्धुव॑नानि धार- 
य॑न्‌॥ ४॥ 


4. Kim svidvanam ka u sa vrksa asa yato dyavapr- 
thivi nistataksuh. Manisino manasa prcchatedu 
tad yadadhyatisthadbhuvanani dharayan. 


Which is that forest and which is that tree from 
which the divine forces of nature carve out and shape 
the heaven and earth? O sages and scholars of divine 
vision, with your heart and intelligence ask that 
omniscient lord who abides and presides over the worlds 
of all existence, holding and controlling them in order. 


याते erat परमाणि यावमा या म॑ध्यमा विंश्वकर्म॑ननुतेमा | 
शिक्षा सखिभ्यो हविषि स्वधावः स्वयं य॑जस्व तन्वं 
वृधानः ॥ ५॥ 


Ya te dhamani paramani yavama ya madhyama 
visvakarmannutema. Siksa sakhibhyo havisi 
svadhavah svayam yajasva tanvam vrdhanah. 


O Vishvakarman, creator and maker of the 
universe, whatever the regions, their names and forms 
which are your creation, whether the highest and 
farthest, or the middle ones, or the lowest and closest, 
pray enlighten the friendly seekers and devotees about 


808 RGVEDA 


them. O lord of your own might of Prakrti and natural 
law, keep on the universal yajna by yourself, offering 
the fragrant havish and expanding the body form of the 
universe. 


विश्वकर्मन्हविषा वावृधानः स्वयं यजस्व पृथिवीमुत द्याम्‌ | 
मुह्यन्त्वन्ये अभितो जनास इहास्माकं मघवां सूरिरस्तु Ut & ॥ 


6. Visvakarman havisa vavrdhanah svayam yajasva 
prthivimuta dyam. Muhyantvanye abhito janasa 
thasmakam maghava surirastu. 


O Vishvakarman, you yourself guide and 
perform the yajna of heaven and earth with the holy 
materials from within nature itself, yourself exlating in 
the expansive universe. Here the other people, unaware 
of the mystery, feel awe-stricken but, we pray, may you, 
Lord Almighty and omnificent, be the ultimate giver of 
enlightenment for us. 


वाचस्पतिं विश्वकर्माणमूतये मनोजु वं वाज अद्या हुवेम | 
स नो विश्वानि हव॑नानि जोषद्धिरश्वश॑म्भूरव॑से साधु- 
कर्मा ॥ ७॥ 


7. Vacaspatim visvakarmanamiutaye manojuvam 
vaje adhya huvema. Sa no visvani havanani josad 
visvasambhuravase sadhukarma. 


For our enlightenment and victory in our battle 
of existence and action today, we invoke Vishvakarma, 
lord of universal speech and the expanding universe, 
creative cosmic awareness inspiring human mind and 
thought, and we pray that the lord of holy action and 
universal well being be pleased to listen and grant us 
the fruit of all our invocations, prayers and adorations. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 82 809 


Mandala 10/Sukta 82 
Vishvakarma Devata, Vishvakarma Bhauvana Rshi 


चश्चुषः पिता मन॑सा fe धीरों घृतमेने अजनन्नम्नमाने | 
यदेदन्ता अद दुहन्त पूर्वं आदिद्‌ द्यावापृथिवी अप्रथे- 
ताम्‌॥ ९॥ 


iP Caksusah pita manasa hi dhiro ghrtamene 
ajanannamnamane. Yadedanta adadrhanta purva 
adiddyavaprthivi aprathetam. 


The creator, protector and promoter of the light 
of the eye and sensitivity of mind, constant and 
inviolable, by his own will and resolution manifests the 
plasticity of nature’s potential, Ahankara, from Mahat, 
and then the double plastic potential of psychic and 
material forms, mind and senses on the one hand and 
tanmatras, subtle materials, on the other. And when these 
basic bounds are shaped and confirmed, then these 
tangible forms of intelligential and material existence, 
heavens and earths grow, extend and expand. 


विश्वकर्मां विम॑ना आद्विहाया धाता विधाता प॑र॒मोत संदूक्‌ । 
तेषापिष्टानि समिषा म॑दन्ति यत्रा सप्ततऋषीन्पर एकं - 
माहः ॥ २॥ 

2. Visvakarma vimana advihaya dhata vidhata 
paramota samdrk. Tesamistani samisa madanti 
yatra saptarsin para ekamahuh. 


Vishvakarma is infinitely intelligent, infinitely 
pervasive, all sustaining, all controlling, supreme, all 
percipient, and all watchful. By virtue of his immanence 
and inspiration, living beings enjoy the cherished objects 
of their love and desire. It is that one Supreme Spirit 


810 RGVEDA 


which all sages celebrate and adore as One and Absolute. 
It is from him that all seven mantra chants arise and 
unto him return. 


यो न॑: पिता strat यो विधाता धामानि ae भुव॑नानि 
विर्वा । यो देवानां नामधा एकं एव तं संप्रश्नं भुव॑ना 
यन्त्यन्या ॥ ३॥ 


ai Yo nah pita janita yo vidhata dhamani veda 
bhuvanani visva. Yo devanam namadha eka eva 
tam samprasnam bhuvana yantyanya. 


Vishvakarma is our father and mother, he who 
is the sustainer, ruler and controller of existence, who 
knows all abodes and regions of the universe, who is 
the sole ordainer of the nature, functions and names of 
all divinities and the sole unity of all these in one, the 
one comprehensive question of all questions and the 
one complete answer to all questions, the one ultimate 
reality into whom all regions and worlds converge and 
merge. 


त आय॑जन्त द्रविणं aden ऋष॑यः पूर्वे जरितारो न भूना । 
असूर्ते सूर्ते रज॑सि निषत्ते ये भूतानि समकुण्वच्निमानिं ॥। ४ ॥ 


4. Ta ayajanta dravinam samasma rsayah purve 
jaritaro na bhuna. Asurte surte rajasi nisatte ye 
bhutani samakrnvannimani. 


The earliest Rshis, i.e., the vital energies of 
nature in the process of creative evolution in their own 
right with their power of Being, did yajnic service to 
the creator and offered their best input in the formative 
process like celebrants. Placed and abiding in the tumult 
of the moving and unmoving elements and forms, they 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 82 811 


fashioned forth the later forms of Being in homage to 
the divine will. 


परो दिवा पर एना पुंथिव्या परो देवेभिरसुरेर्यदस्तिं। कं 
स्विद्धर्भ प्रथमं der आपो यत्र॑ देवाः स॒मप॑श्यन्त विश्वे ॥ ५ ॥ 


9 Paro diva para ena prthivya paro devebhira- 
surairyadasti. Kam svidgarbham prathamam 
dadhra apo yatra devah samapasyanta viSsve. 


What is that generative as well as emergent spirit 
and reality which is beyond the heavens, beyond this 
earth and this entire universe, beyond the divinities and 
the energies, beyond and above all that is in existence? 
What is that presence, that Hiranyagarbha, that golden 
seed model of the universe which the primeval Prakrti 
particles contain and which contains and generates those 
particles themselves, wherein all the divine existences 
find and realise themselves? 


dest प्रथमं der आपो यत्र॑ देवाः समगच्छन्त fava । 
अजस्य नाभावध्येकमर्पि"तं यस्मिन्विश्वानि भुव॑नानि 
तस्थुः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tamidgarbham prathamam dadhra apo yatra 
devah samagacchanta visve. Ajasya nabhava- 
dhyekamarpitam yasmin visvani bhuvanani 
tasthuh. 


That Vishvakarma is the first power and 
presence which the particles of Prakrti contain as the 
immanent generator and which also generates, contains 
and rules the particles as the transcendent presiding 
power wherein all the divinities converge, abide and 
realise themselves. All that is, is self-contained in the 


812 RGVEDA 


central generative core of the eternal unborn and 
undying spirit, and therein abide all the regions of the 
universe. 


ad विंदाथयडइमा जजानान्यद्युष्माकमन्तंरं aya | 
नीहारेण प्रावुता जल्प्या ards उक्थशासश्चरन्ति ॥ 9 


भ Na tam vidatha ya ima jajananyadyusmakama- 
ntaram babhuva. Ntharena pravrta jalpya casu- 
trpa ukthasasascaranti. 


You do not comprehend that spirit which creates 
all these worlds of existence. That is something else, 
deeper than the deepest that you feel you are and know 
yourself. Covered by the fog of extrovert thought, 
playing with mere words, happy and satisfied with a 
breathing existence, singing songs of self-gratification, 
people roam around and miss the centre pole of the 
whirling worlds. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 83 
Manyu Devata, Manyu Tapasa Rshi 


aed मन्योऽ flags सायक सह ste: पुष्यति 
विश्वमानुषक्‌ | साह्याम दासमार्यं carat युजा सर्ह॑स्कृतेन 
सह॑सा सह॑स्वता ॥ ९ ॥ 


1 Yaste manyo’vidhadvajra sayaka saha ojah 
pusyati visvamanusak. Sahyama dasamaryam 
tvaya yuja sahaskrtena sahasa sahasvata. 


O Manyu, spirit of passion and ardour of mind 
for righteous action, awful as thunder and accurate as 
an arrow to hit the target, whoever bears, honours and 
commands you with strength and enthusiasm, rises in 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 83 813 


universal honour and splendour. We pray that with your 
friendly and unfailing spirit of courage, patience and 
vigour, we may be able to support the noble and defeat 
the violent and the destroyers. (Righteous passion is 
the gift and spirit of all the divinities.) 


मन्युरिन्द्रो ward देवो मन्युर्होता वरुणो जातवेदाः 1 
मन्युं fast daa मानुषीर्याः पाहि नो मन्यो तप॑सा 
सजोषाः ॥ २॥ 


2. Manyurindro manyurevasa devo manyurhota 
varuno jatavedah. Manyum visa ilate manusiryah 
pahi no manyo tapasa sajosah. 


Manyu, righteous passion of the spirit and 
courage of mind, is Indra, glory and power. Manyu is 
brilliance, manyu is yajaka and performer of yajna, 
manyu is Varuna, deep as ocean, blazing as sun and self 
confidence of choice, manyu is Jataveda, spirit of 
intelligence and existential awareness. Communities 
which live all over the human world honour and adore 
manyu. O spirit of passion and universal intelligence 
of divine mind, dearest friend and inner inspiration, pray 
protect and promote us with the strength and discipline 
of body, mind and soul. 


अभीहि मन्यो तवसरस्तवीं यान्तप॑सा युजा वि ज॑हि शत्रून्‌ । 
अमि त्रहा वृत्रहा द॑स्युहा च विश्वा वसून्या भ॑रा त्वं न॑: ॥ ३॥ 
a Abhthi manyo tavasastaviyan tapasa yuja vi jahi 


Satrun. Amitraha vrtraha dasyuha ca visva vasu- 
nya bhara tvam nah. 


Come manyu, stronger than strength itself, one 
with valour and austerity of discipline, destroy the 


814 RGVEDA 


enemies. Come, saviour of friends and destroyer of 
adversaries, dispeller of darkness, eliminator of evil and 
negativity, bear and bring us all wealth, honour and 
excellence of the world. 


त्वं हि म॑न्यो अभिभूत्योजाः स्वयं भूभमिो अभिमातिषाहः 1 
विश्वचर्षणिः सदह रि: सहावानस्मास्वोजः पृत॑नासु 
धेहि॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Tvam hi manyo abhibhityojah svayambhurbhamo 
abhimatisahah. Visvacarsanih sahurih sahava- 
nasmasvojah prtanasu dhehi. 


O noble wrath and passionate spirit of rectitude, 
you are illustrious subduer of adversaries, self-existent 
and self justified, awesome, challenger and destroyer 
of hostilities, universally present among men, patient 
and forbearing. Pray inspire us with strength and high 
morale in our battles of life. 


अभागः सन्नप परेतो अस्मि तव Heat तविषस्य wera: | 
तं त्वां मन्यो अक्रतुर्जिदहीव्ठाहं स्वा तनूर्बलदेयाय मेहि ॥ ५ ॥ 


> Abhagah sannapa pareto asmi tava kratva 
tavisasya pracetah. Tam tva manyo akraturjihila- 
ham sva tanurbaladeyaya mehi. 


Being void of righteous passion, O spiritual 
rectitude, giver of self confidence and assertive identity, 
Iam gone far from my own self and, by action, deprived 
of your spirit of lustre and inspiration. O manyu, O Indra, 
O Varuna, O Jataveda, I am guilty of remiss toward you, 
and I pray bless me with the strength of body, mind and 
soul. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 84 815 


अयं ते अस्म्युप Agate प्र॑तीचीनः स॑हुरे विश्वधायः | 
मन्यो वचिन्नभि मामा व॑वृत्स्व हनाव दस्यू रुत बोध्यापेः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ayam te asmyupa mehyarvan praticinah sahure 
visvadhayah. Manyo vajrinnabhi mama vavrtsva 
hanava dasyumruta bodhyapeh. 


Here I am all for you, O spirit of courage and 
self assertion, challenging sustainer of all the world, 
come turn to me universal spirit. O spirit of awesome 
passion and undaunted self-identity, wielder of the 
thunderbolt, come constantly, let us together dispel 
darkness and destroy evil. Pray inspire and awaken me, 
your own self. 


अभि प्रेहि दश्चिणतो भ॑वा मेऽर्धां garfot जङ्कनाव भूरिं। 

जुहोमि ते धरुणं मध्वो अग्रमुभा ॐपांशु प्र॑थमा पिबाव ॥ ७॥ 

a. Abhi prehi daksinato bhava me’ dha vrtrani jan- 

ghava bhuri. Juhomi te dharunam madhvo agra- 
mubha upamsu prathama pibava. 

Pray come forward and be on my right side in 

your own place, and together we shall eliminate all 

darkness and adversities. I offer you the best, foremost 


and sweetest honeyed homage of the self, and we shall 
together drink of the joy of victory in closest intimacy. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 84 
Manyu Devata, Manyu Tapasa Rshi 


त्वरयां मन्यो सरथ॑मारुजन्तो हर्षमाणासो धुषिता म॑रुत्वः | 
तिग्मेष॑व आयुधा संशिशाना अभि प्र य॑न्तु नरों अथि- 
रूपाः ॥ ९॥ 


816 RGVEDA 


॥; Tvaya manyo sarathamarujanto harsamanaso 
dhRsihta marutvah. Tigmesava ayudha samsisana 
abhi pra yantu naro agnirupah. 


O Manyu, spirit of vaulting passion without 
compromise with negativities, may our leading lights, 
warriors of universal rectitude, riding the chariot with 
you, breaking through paths of advancement, joyous, 
bold, undaunted, stormy like wind shears, their arrows 
like lazer beams, weapons sharp and blazing, move 
forward like flames of fire. 


अभिरिंव मन्यो त्विषितः स॑हस्व सेनानीर्न : सहुरे हूत एधि । 
हत्वाय शत्रून्वि भ॑जस्व वेद्‌ ओजो मिमानो वि geil 
नुदस्व ॥ २॥ 


2. Agniriva manyo tvisitah sahava senanIrnah 
sahure huta edhi. Hatvaya Ssatrun vi bhajasva 
veda ojo minano vi mrdho nudasva. 


O Manyu, blazing like fire, commanding our 
forces, spirit of forbearance and challenge, invoked and 
called upon, come to lead our battles of life, face the 
enemies to destroy the adversaries and share the wealth, 
beauty and goodness of life with all. O spirit 
comprehending lustrous light of life, move forward, 
push the adversities back and throw out the adversaries. 


सह॑स्व मन्यो अभिमातिमस्मे सुजन्मृणन्प्र मृणन्प्रेहि ss | 
उग्रं ते पाजो नन्वा SSN वशी वशं नयस एकज त्वम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


3: Sahasva manyo abhimatimasme rujan mrnan 
pramrnan prehi satrun. Ugram te pajo nanva 
rurudhre vasi vasam nayasa ekaja tvam. 


O wrath of justice, rectitude and dispensation, 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 84 817 


arise, challenge our adversaries, breaking, smashing, 
eliminating the forces of negation. Blazing is your face 
and courage, none to obstruct and stay your advance. 
You are the master, all in control, leader of the forces of 
predominance, sole born of divinity without an equal. 


एको aerate मन्यवीच्ठितो विशंविशं युधये सं शिशाधि । 
अकृत्तरुक्त्वया युजा वयं द्युमन्तं घोषं विजयाय कृण्महे ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Eko bahunamasi manyavilito visamvisam 


yudhaye sam sisadhi. Akrttaruk tvaya yuja vayam 
dyumantam ghosam vijayaya krnmahe. 


Manyu, you are the one unique among many, 
invoked and universally adored. Pray instruct, inspire, 
prepare and perfect every community to fight and win 
against negativity and adversity. Your lustre unimpaired 
and unchallengeable, with you as leader and inspirer, 
let us raise the blazing battle cry and raise the flag of 
victory flying sky high. 


विजेषकृदिन्द्र इवानवनब्रवो ३ ऽस्माकं मन्यो अधिपा भ॑वेह। 
प्रियं ते नाम॑ सहुरे गृणीमसि विद्या तमुत्सं ad आब- 
at GU 


5, Vijesakrdindra ivanavabrvo ’smakam manyo 
adhipa bhaveha. Priyam te nama sahure grnimasi 
vidma tamutsam yata ababhiutha. 


Uncontradicted, irreproachable victorious like 
Indra, O Manyu, be our protector and promoter here 
throughout life. For sure, O spirit of courage, 
forbearance and victory, we adore you, dear and 
adorable of all. We know where you arise from, fountain 
head of the lust for life, inspiration and victory: Dharma 


818 RGVEDA 
and the universal love of life. 


sien सहजा व॑ज्र सायकः सहो बिभर्ष्यभिभूत Sa | 
क्र्त्वा नो मन्यो स॒ह मेद्यधि महाधनस्य पुरुहूत संसृजि ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Abhitya sahaja vajra sayaka saho vibharsya- 
bhibhuta uttaram. Kratva no manyo saha madye- 
dhi mahadhanasya puruhita samsrji. 


Twin brother of the ardour and glory of life, 
thunderbolt of divine humanity, unfailing pointed arrow, 
you bear the higher ardour of human love and passion 
for life. O Manyu, sweetest companion of living 
splendour universally invoked and adored, come to us 
with the force of unfailing yajnic action in the heat of 
the grand battle scene of life. 


CS धनमुभयं समाकृतमस्मभ्यं दत्तां वरुणश्च मन्युः । 
भियं दधाना हृदयेषु शत्र॑वः परांलितासो अप नि 
तयन्ताम्‌।॥ ७॥ 


Des Samsrstam dhanamubhayam samakrtamasma- 
bhyam dattam varunasca manyuh. Bhiyam 
dadhana hrdayesu Ssatravah parajitaso apa ni 
layantam. 


May Varuna, highest lord of life loved and 
worshipped with rational choice, and Manyu, highest 
ardour of life, give us integrated material and spiritual 
wealth of both this world of humanity and the light of 
divinity, and may the enemies, negativities and 
adversities, fear stricken at heart and defeated, run off 
and dissolve into the darkness of their origin. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 85 819 


Mandala 10/Sukta 85 
Soma (1-5), Surya vivaha (6-16), Devah (17), Somarkau 
(18), Chandrama (19), Marriage (20-28), Vadhuvasa 


samsparsha ninda (29-30), Yakshma nashanam dampatyoh 
(31) Surya Savitri (32-47) Devatah; Savitri Surya Rshi 


सत्येनोत्तभिता yfa: सूर्येणोत्तभिता at: 1 
ऋतेनादित्यास्तिं्न्ति दिवि सोमो अधिं fata: 2 


1. Satyenottabhita bhumih suryenottabhita dyauh. 
Rtenadityastisthanti divi somo adhi Sritah. 


The earth is sustained by the force of its own 
identity within the truth of divine law, the heaven is 
sustained by the sun within the same truth of divine 
law, the Adityas are sustained by Rtam, the natural law 
of Divinity, and Soma is sustained in the highest heaven 
of the same law. 


सोमेनादित्या afea: सोमेन पृथिवी मही । 

अथो नक्च॑त्राणामेषासुपस्थे सोम आरितः ॥ २॥ 
2 Somenaditya balinah somena prthivi mahi. 

Atho naksatranamesamupasthe soma ahitah. 


The Adityas are mighty by Soma, divine energy 
and law of existence. By Soma, the earth is great and 
adorable. And in the closest environment of these stars 
Soma is abiding in concentrations as sustaining energy. 


सोमं मन्यते पपिवान्यत्संपिंषन्त्योषधिम्‌। 
सोमं यं ब्रह्माणो विदुर्न तस्याश्नाति कश्चन ॥ ३ ॥ 


Somam manyate papivan yat sampimsantyo- 
sadhim. Somam yam brahmano vidurna tasya- 
§nani kascana. 


820 RGVEDA 


The person who drinks the soma juice feels that 
the herb which they crush and squeeze for the juice is 
soma. But the Soma which the divine sages know and 
realise no one can drink like that. 


srestgarnttadt बार्हतैः सोम रक्षितः । 
ग्राव्णामिच्छरण्वन्तिं्ठसि न ते अश्नाति पार्थिवः ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Acchadvidhanairgupito varhataih soma raksitah. 
Gravnamicchrnvan tisthasi na te asnati parthi- 
vah. 


Preserved by divine ordinances, protected by the 
measures of Brhat Samans, Soma is guarded safely by 
somapalas. O Soma, you abide somewhere in divinity 
hearing the roar of thunder and clouds, no one earthly 
can drink or experience the ecstasy of your celestial 
nature and identity. 


यत्वा देव प्रपिब॑न्ति aa आ प्यायसे oA: 1 
वायुः सोम॑स्य रक्षिता समानां are आकुतिः॥५॥ 


Yat tva deva prapibanti tata a pyayase punah. 
Vayuh somasya raksita samanam masa akrtih. 


O divine Soma, when the sun rays drink you as 
the moon in the first, dark half of the month, then you 
come up to full growth as the moon in the second, bright 
half of the month. The wind, cosmic energy, is the 
protector of soma in its place. Thus the month is the 
constituent of years and presents the full form of the 
two equal fortnights of the moon. 


Note: Mantras from 6 to 16 are a metaphor 
which can be interpreted as wedding of the dawn in the 
context of nature and the Veda, and as wedding of a 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 85 821 


maiden and relevance of the Veda in the human context. 
The maiden and the dawn are synonymous. 


रेभ्यासीदनुदेयी' नाराशंसी न्योच॑नी । 
सूर्यायां भद्रमिद्वासो गाथ॑येति परिष्कृतम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Raibhyasidanudeyi narasamsi nyocani. 
Suryaya bhadramidvaso gathayaiti pariskrtam. 


Raibhi verses of the Veda are the bride’s 
wedding gifts, Narashansi verses, the bride’s ornaments, 
grace and good fortune, her bridal robes sanctified by 
exemplary verses relating to the good life. 


चित्तिरा saad ut चक्षुरा अभ्यञ्ज॑नम्‌। 
द्यौर्भूमिः कोशं आसीद्यदयात्सूर्यां पतिम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


a Cittira upabarhanam caksura abhyanjanam. 
Dyaurbhumih koSsa asid yadayat surya patim. 


When Surya, the dawn, the new bride, goes to 
the house of her groom, then her noble mind and thought 
is her resting couch, her gracious eye, the collyrium, 
and the earth and heaven, her treasure. 


wire आसन्प्रतिधय॑ः कुरीरं छन्दं ओपशः | 
सूर्यायां अश्विना वराभिरांसीत्पुरोगवः॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Stoma asan pratidhayah kuviram chanda opasah. 
Suryaya asvana varagnirasit purogavah. 


Hymns of adoration are the axle of her chariot 
wheels, music of the hymns, her head scarf and cushion, 
the Ashvins, prana and udana energies, are friends of 
the groom, and Agni is the first call of maturity. 


822 RGVEDA 


सोमो' वधूयुर॑ भवदश्विनास्तामुभा वरा। 
सूर्या यत्पत्ये शं स॑न्तीं मन॑सा सवितादंदात्‌॥ ९ ॥ 


9. 90110 vadhuyurabhavadasvinastamubha vara. 
Suryam yat patye Samsantim manasa savitadadat. 


Soma is the proposer and Ashvins, pranic 
energies, the first attraction and attention, when Savita, 
giver of life and light, gives away the bride, love-lorn 
at heart, to the groom. 


मनो! अस्या अन॑ आसीद्‌ दयौरासीदुत wate: | 
शुक्रावनद्वाहाीवास्तां यदयात्सूर्या गृहम्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 


10. | Mano asya ana asid daurasiduta cchadih. 
Sukravanadvahavastam yadayat surya grham. 


The mind is her bridal chariot, bright sky its 
canopy, the sun and moon the motive powers when the 
bride, like the glorious dawn, goes to her own home 
with the groom. 


ऋक्सामारभ्यामभिहिंतौ गावौ ते सामनावितः 1 
श्रोत्रं ते चक्रे आस्तां दिवि पन्थांश्चराचरः॥ ९९॥ 


11. Rksamabhyamabhihitau gavau te samanavitah. 
Srotram te cakre astam divi panthascaracrah. 


Sun and moon, both equal and glorious, yoked 
and celebrated by Rks and Samans, move the chariot 
on the new procession. Let revelation of the Word and 
infinite Space be the movement towards advancement, 
and let the path be both tumultuous and restful over the 
moving and the unmoving world unto the light of 
heaven. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 85 823 


शुची ते चक्रे यात्या व्यानो अक्ष आह॑तः | 
अनों मनस्मयं सूर्यारो'हत्प्रयती पतिम्‌ eeu 


12. Suci te cakre yatya vyano aksa Ghatah. 
Ano manasmayam suryarohat prayati patim. 


Surya, the new bride, rides the chariot of the 
mind when she moves to the house of the groom (with 
her dreams of the future). When she moves, her pure 
ears are the wheels (on which the chariot moves because 
the mind moves in response to the stimulants of the 
senses) and the wind, psychic energy of thought, is the 
axis of the wheels. 


सूर्याया वहतुः प्रागात्सविता यमवासूंजत्‌। 
अघासु हन्यन्ते गावोऽ जन्योः पर्युह्यते ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Suryaya vahatuh pragat savita yamavasrjat. 
Aghasu hanyante gavo’rjunyoh paryuhyate. 


The bridal procession of Surya proceeds which 
Savita, her father, starts. The bullocks are made to move 
the chariot in Magha constellations and the bride is 
inducted into the groom’s home in Phalguni 
constellations. 


यद॑श्विना पृच्छमानावर्यातं त्रिचक्रेणं वहतुं सूर्यायाः fave 
देवा अनु तद्वामजानन्पुत्रः पितराववृणीत पूषा ॥ ९२४ ॥ 


14. Yadasvina prcchamanavayatam tricakrena 
vahatum suryayah. Visve deva anu tadvamajanan 
putrah pitaravavrnita pusd. 


O Ashvins, married couple, when you come 
together by the three wheeled mental chariot of Sattva, 
Rajas and Tamas constituents of personality in balance, 


824 RGVEDA 


asking for fulfilment of the wedding of Surya, let all 
the Vishvedevas, nobilities around and the mind and 
senses within, know and approve your intent and 
purpose, and then let Pusha, future progeny for 
sustenance, select the life giving parents for the arrival. 


यदयातं शुभस्पती वरे यं सूर्यामुप | 
क्वैकं चक्रं वामासीत्क्व Sera तस्थथुः ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Yadayatam subhaspati vareyam suryamupa. 
Kvaikam cakram vamasit kva destraya tastha- 
thuh. 


O Ashvins, protectors and promoters of life’s 
good, noble men and women of reason and passion, 
when you come to the bride, darling choice of the groom, 
where is one of the wheels of your chariot and where 
abide the two for the purpose of benediction? 


दे त चक्रे सूरये ब्रह्माणं ऋतुथा विदुः | 
अथेकं चक्र यद्‌ गुहा तदद्धातय इद्धिंदुः ॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. 121८ te cakre surye brahmana rtutha viduh. 
Athaikam cakram yadguha tadaddhdataya idviduh. 


O Surya, bride of the new home, the sages of 
knowledge know the two wheels of your life’s chariot 
according to the seasons, 1.e., your words and actions 
according to your moods and circumstances. The third, 
thought, reflection and intentions, is hidden in the depths 
of the mind which only exceptional master minds know. 
And that one is a mystery. 


सूयय देवेभ्यो! मित्राय वरुणाय च। 
ये भूतस्य प्रचेतस इदं तेभ्योऽ करं AA: ॥ ९७॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 85 825 


17. Surydayai devebhyo mitraya varunaya ca. Ye 
bhitasya pracetasa idam tebhyo’karam namah. 


This homage I do and offer to Surya, the dawn, 
the divinities, the loving friend and the wise for the sake 
of intelligent progeny and to all those who know and 
enlighten all living beings. 


पूर्वा परं च॑रतो माययैतौ शिशु क्रीव्न्तौ GR यातो अध्वरम्‌ | 
विश्वान्यन्यो भुवनाभिचष्ट ऋतूंरन्यो विदधज्जायते 
पुन॑ः ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Purvaparam carato mayayaitau sisu krilantau 
pari yato adhvaram. Visvanyanyo bhuvanabhi- 
casta rtumranyo vidadhajjayate punah. 


These two, sun and moon, move on in sequential 
order by their own power and virtue, playing happily 
like innocent children and go on participating and 
contributing to the divine yajna of the cosmos. Of these, 
one watches and enlightens all regions of the world and 
the other rises again and again according to the season 
and thereby setting the seasons in order. 


नवोनवो भवति जाय॑मानोऽ et केतुरुषसामेत्यग्र॑म्‌। भागं 
देवेभ्यो वि द॑धात्यायन्प्र चन्द्रमास्तिरते दीर्घमायुः ॥ १९ ॥ 


19. = Navonavo bhavati jayamano’hnam keturusa- 
sametyagram. Bhagam devebhyo vi dadhatyayan 
pra candramasitirate dirghamayuh. 


The moon rising again and again ever anew, 
proclaiming days and lunar dates, comes ahead of the 
dawn in the dark fortnight. While coming it brings its 
share of the havi for divinities and gives long life to 
biological and human life. 


826 RGVEDA 


सुकिंशुकं शल्मलिं विश्वरूपं हिर॑ण्यवर्णं सुवृतं सुचक्रम्‌ । 
आ रोह सूर्ये अमृतस्य ल्लोकं स्योनं पत्ये वहतुं कुणुष्व tl २०॥ 


20. Sukimsukam Salmalim visvarupam hirnyavar- 
nam suvrtam sucakram. A roha surye amrtasya 
lokam syonam patye vahatum krnusva. 


Welcome, O bride, bright dawn of a new 
morning, ride and rule the golden, well structured, well 
geared chariot of ahomely world, beautiful and glowing 
like a shalmali garden in bloom and turn it into paradisal 
bliss of immortal joy for the husband and the family. 


उदीर्ष्वातः पतिवती हये रेषा विषश्वाव॑सुं नम॑सा HAAS । 
अन्यामिच्छ पितृषदं व्यक्तां ad भागो जनुषा तस्य॑ 
fas eeu 


21. Udirsvatah pativati hyisa visvavasum namasa 
girbhirile. Anyamiccha pitrsadam vyaktam 
sa te bhago janusa tasya viddhi. 


Rise from here. This girl is now married as wife 
to a husband. Thanks and salutations I offer to the master 
of the world’s wealth with homage and words of 
reverence and adoration. Love this girl, your other self, 
born, bred and raised to fullness in the parental home. 
She is now a part of your life. Know her, accept and 
take her as a complement of your self from the very 
birth by nature, culture and future growth of your life. 


उदीर्ष्वातो! विश्वावसो नप॑सेव्ठामहे त्वा । 
अन्यामिच्छ प्रफर्व्यव सं जायां पत्या सृज ॥ २२॥ 


22. Udirsvato visvavaso namaselamahe tva. 
Ajyamiccha prapharvyamsam jayam patya srja. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 85 827 


Rise from here and now, O master of the wealth 
of anew world, we honour and adore you with reverence 
and homage. Love this bride, this other self of yours, 
fully mature and cultured, accept, take and join her in 
the role of husband. 


अनृक्षरा vested: सन्तु पन्था येथिः सखायो यन्तिं नो 
वरेयम्‌। समर्यमा सं भगो नो निनीयात्सं जास्पत्यं सुयममस्तु 
देवाः ॥ २३॥ 


23. Anrksara rjavah santu pantha yebhih sakhayo 
yanti no vareyam. Samaryama sam bhago no 
nintyat sam jaspatyam suyamamastu devah. 


Let our paths be simple, natural and comfortable, 
free from obstacles, by which our friends may win the 
goal of their choice. May Aryama, lord of vision, justice 
and rectitude, and Bhaga, lord of power, prosperity and 
glory, lead us on to fulfilment. O divinities of nature 
and humanity, may our married life be happy, noble and 
fruitful. 


प्र wal मुञ्चामि वरुणस्य पाशाद्येन wareeareafear 
सुशोव॑ः । ऋतस्य योनौ सुकृतस्य॑ लोकेऽरिष्टां त्वा स॒ह पत्या 
दधामि॥ २४॥ 


24. Pra tva muncami varunasya pasad yena tvaba- 
dhnat savita susevah. Rtasya yonau sukrtasya 
loke’ristam tva saha patya dadhami. 


I free you from the bonds of Varuna, discipline 
of virginity observed in the spirit of justice, freedom 
and responsibility in the parental home, into which 
Savita, lord giver of life and natural growth unto 
maturity, had bound you in full dedication without 


828 RGVEDA 


inhibition, and I settle and establish you with your 
husband into a new life of natural conjugal order in the 
world of noble action free from sin, violence and 
violation of the law. 


प्रेतो मुञ्चामि नामुत॑ सुबन्दाममुत॑स्करम्‌। 
यथेयमिन्द्र मीद्ट्वः सुपुत्रा सुभगासति ॥ २५॥ 


25. Preto muncami namutah subaddhamamuta- 
skaram. Yatheyamindra midhvah suputra subha- 
gasati. 

I release you from here, the parental home and 
its discipline, but not from there, the husband’s home, 
where I establish you duly bound in the new conjugal 
law and discipline so that, O Indra, O noble husband, 
she may be the proud and fortunate mother of noble 


progeny. 
पूषा त्वेतो न॑यतु हस्तगृह्याश्विना त्वा प्र deat रथेन । 
गृहान्ग॑च्छ Tete यथासो' वशिनी त्वं विदथमा 
वंदासि॥ २६॥ 


26. Pusa tveto nayatu hastagrhyasvina tva pra 
vahatam rathena. Grhan gaccha grhapatni 
yathaso vasini tvam vadhathama vadasi. 


May Pusha, the husband who would maintain 
you, having accepted your hand, lead you to the new 
home. May the Ashvins, other leading personalities, 
escort you by chariot to the husband’s home. O bride, 
go to the new home and new families as mistress of the 
new home and new family so that you become the 
darling ruler of the new hearth and home. You are come 
to anew yajnic order, and you speak a new language of 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 85 829 
yajnic dedication. 


इह प्रियं प्रजया ते समरुध्यतापस्मिन्गृहे गार्ह॑पत्याय 
जागृहि। एना पत्या तन्वं सं संजस्वाधा जिव्री विदथमा 
वदाथः ॥ २७॥ 

27. Ilha priyam prajaya te samrdhyatamasmin ९1/1८ 
garhapatyaya jagrhi. Ena patya tanvam sam 
srjasvadha jivri vidathama vadathah. 

Here in the new home may your new love and 
happiness increase to new heights with family and 
children. In this new home keep awake for the good of 
the children and the family. Here with this husband of 
yours join in body and mind, and both of you enjoy 
good fellowship, company and converse till full age and 
fulfilment in yajnic life. 


Heated भ॑वति कृत्यासक्तिर्व्य'ज्यते | 
एध॑न्ते अस्या ज्ञातयः पतिर्बन्धेषु बध्यते ॥ २८ ॥ 


28.  Nilalohitam bhavati krtyasaktirvyajyate. 
Edhante asya jnatayah patirbandhesu badhyate. 


Then the blood grows dark and red, love and 
desire vibrates for fulfilment, the near kinsmen of this 
bride swell with hope and expectation, and the husband 
is bound in new responsibilities. 
परा देहि शामुल्यं ब्रह्मभ्यो वि भ॑जा ad 
कृत्यैषा पद्वती भूत्व्या जाया विशते पतिम्‌ Vz 

29. Para dehi samulyam brahmabhyo vi bhaja vasu. 
Krtyaisa padvati bhutvya jaya visate patim. 


Cast away the sense of sin and impurity, share 


830 RGVEDA 


wealth and knowledge with and from the holy and wise, 
and when the bride has taken the seven steps to conjugal 
duty, she joins the husband heart and soul. 


अश्रीरा तनूर्भवति रुश॑ती पापयामुया । 
पतिर्यट्ध्वो ३ वासंसा स्वमद्धमथिधित्संते ॥ 30 ॥ 


30. = 4.5-77/त tanurbhavati rusati papayamuya. Patirya- 
dvadhavo vasasa svamangamabhidhitsate. 


The body becomes polluted, injured and 
injurious by that impious act if the husband touches or 
wants to touch his body with the clothes of the wife in 
her period. 


ये वध्वश्चन्द्रं dad यक्ष्मा यस्ति sare | 
पुनस्तान्यन्ञिया देवा नय॑न्तु यत आग॑ताः ॥ ३९ ॥ 
31. Ye vadhvascandram vahatum yaksma yanti 


jJanadanu. Punastan yajniya deva nayantu yata 
agatah. 

Those consumptive ailments which afflict the 
health and handsomeness of the husband or the beauty 
and fertility of the wife from birth, let the sages and 
brilliant specialists of yajna treat and cure upto the 
source whence, otherwise, they may come and afflict 
again. 

मा विदन्परिपन्थिनो य आसीदन्ति दम्प॑ती | 
सुगेभि्दुर्गमतीतामपं द्रान्त्वरातयः ॥ २२॥ 


32. Ma vidan paripanthino ya asidanti dampati. 
Sugebhirdurgamatitamapa drantvaratayah. 


And those which overtake and afflict the wedded 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 85 831 


couple on their course of life must not come, and may 
all adversities, wants and malignities disappear and go 
down to far off depths beyond recurrence. 


qaqeika वधूरिमां समेत पश्य॑त । 
सौभाग्यमस्यै दत्वायाथास्तं वि परेतन ॥ ३३ ॥ 
33. Sumangaliriyam vadhurimam sameta pasyata. 
Saubhagyamasyai dattvaya’ thastam vi paretana. 
Auspicious is this bride, gracious, please come, 
see her to wish her all good fortune in life, and having 
thus blessed her, you may please retire homeward. 
तृष्टमेतत्‌ कटुकमेतद॑पाष्ठ वद्विषवन्नैतदत्त॑वे । 
सूर्या यो ब्रह्मा विद्यात्स इद्वाधूयमर्हति ॥ ३२४ ॥ 
34. Trstametat katukametadapasthavadvisav- 


annaitadattave. Suryam yo brahma vidydat sa 
idvadhuya-marhati. 


Matrimony? It is roughshod, it is thorny bitter, 
all barbs, all poison, it is dangerous to flirt with it. Only 
the wise youth of divine vision who knows and realises 
the light and sanctity of Surya, he deserves the prize he 
may carry away. 


siete विशसनमथो अधिविकर्तनम्‌। 

सूर्यायाः पश्य रूपाणि तानि ब्रह्मा तु शुन्धति ॥ ३५ ॥ 
35. ASsasanam visasanamatho adhivikartanam. 

Suryayah pasya rupani tani brahma tu sandhati. 


Hope, fear and debasement, frustration, anger 
and cruelty, and the irony that cuts too deep to the very 
core, these are various moods and manners of women. 


832 RGVEDA 


These the wise vision knows and corrects, purifies or 
excuses with superior understanding. 


oT ते सौभगत्वाय हस्तं मया पत्या जरदष्टिर्यथासः | 
भगो अर्यमा सविता पुरन्धिर्मह्यं त्वादुर्गर्हिपत्याय देवाः ॥ ३६ ॥ 


36. Grbhnami te saubhagatvaya hastam maya patya 
jaradastiryathasah. Bhago aryama savita 
purandhirmahyam tvadurgarhapatyaya devah. 


I take your hand for the sake of good fortune so 
that you may live a long full life till old age with me, 
your husband. Bhaga, lord of glory, Aryama, lord of 
cosmic order, Savita lord giver of life and light, and 
Purandhi, divine beneficence, have given you to me for 
the creation of a happy home and family. 


तां पूंषञ्छिवत॑मामेर॑यस्व यस्यां बीजं मनुष्या ३ वप॑न्ति । 
या न॑ ऊरू उश॒ती विश्रयाते यस्यामुशन्तः प्रहराम 
BAT २७॥ ति 

37. Tam pusanchivatamamerayasva yasyam bijam 
manusya vapanti. Ya na uru usati visrayate yasya- 
musantah praharama Sepam. 


Pushan, O lord of creativity and growth, inspire 
her, the most auspicious wife, in whom men sow the 
seed of life, who, moved with love and desire for 
progeny, surrenders herself with body and mind and men 
too with love and passion enter into the conjugal rite of 
consummation. 


तुभ्यमग्रे पर्य॑वहन्त्सूर्या व॑हतुना सह। 
पुनः पतिभ्यो जायां दा अगन प्रजयां ae २८ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 85 833 


38. Tubhyamagre paryavahantsuryam vahatuna 
saha. Punah patibhyo jayam da agne prajaya 
saha. 


O lord of divine fire, Agni, parents bring Surya, 
the bright bride to you with her gifts and ornaments. O 
yajna fire, pray give back the bride to the husband 
alongwith her potential to bear children for the husband. 


पुनः पल्नीमयिरंदादायुषा सह afar 
दीर्घायुरस्या यः पतिर्जीवाति शरद॑: श॒तम्‌ ३९॥ 


39. Punah patnimagniradadayusa saha varcasa. 
Dirghayurasya yah patirjivati Saradah satam. 


Agni then gives Surya, now a wife, when the 
wedding ceremony is complete, to the husband along 
with her health and age, honour and lustre of life with 
the blessing: Long live the man who is her husband for 
a full hundred years. 


सोम॑ः प्रथमो विविदे गन्धर्वो fafae उत्त॑रः | 
तृतीयो! अगिष्टे पतिस्तुरीयस्ते मनुष्यजाः ॥ ० ॥ 


40. Somah prathamo vivide gandharvo vivida uttarah. 
Trtiyo agniste patisturiyaste manusyajah. 


O Surya, bright girl, your first protective and 
promotive guardian is Soma, nature’s energy which 
leads you to puberty. The next is Gandharva which 
energises you with fertility. The third is Agni which 
inspires you with love and passion. And your fourth 
guardian is your husband, son of man, for the extension 
of humanity. 


सोमो ददद्न्धर्वाय॑ं गन्धर्वो द॑ददग्रयें। 
रयिं चं पुत्रांश्चादादगिर्मह्यमथो इमाम्‌ ॥ ४९ ॥ 


834 RGVEDA 


41. Somo dadadgandharvaya gandharvo dadada- 
gnaye. Rayim ca putramscadadagnirmahyam- 
atho imam. 


Soma gives you to Gandharva, Gandharva gives 
you to Agni, and O dear bride, Agni then gives this wife 
to me, the husband, and with her gives me progeny and 
wealth, honour and excellence of family life. 


इहैव स्तं मा वि als विश्वमायुर्व्य श्नुतम्‌। 
क्रीव्छन्तौ gata भिर्मोदमानौ स्वे गृहे॥ ४२॥ 


42.  Thaiva stam ma vi yaustam visvamayurvyasnutam. 
Krilantau putairnaptrbhirmodam-anau sve grhe. 


O man and wife, live here itself in the family 
joined together, never separate, live and enjoy a full 
life in your own home playing and celebrating life with 
children and grand children. 


आ न॑ः: प्रजां ज॑नयतु प्रजापतिराजरसाय समनक्त्वर्यमा । 
अदुर्मङ्कत्ीः पतिलोकमा fast शं नो भव द्विपदे शं 
चतुष्पदे ॥ ४३ ॥ 


43. A nah prajam janayatu prajapatirajarasaya 
samanaktvaryama. Adurmangalih patilokama 
visa Sam no bhava dvipade sam catuspade. 


May Prajapati bless us with children, may 
Aryama bring us honour and glory upto the completion 
of a long full age, may the blessed wife abide with grace 
in the husband’s home of paradisal bliss, and may there 
be all round peace and well being for humans and 
animals all. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 85 835 


अधोरचक्षुरप॑तिघ््येधि शिवा पशुभ्य: सुमनाः सुवचीः | 
वीरसूर्देवकामा स्योना शं नो भव द्विपदे शं चतुष्पदे ।॥ SY ॥ 


44. Aghoracaksurapatighnyedhi Siva pasubhyah 
sumanah suvarcah. Virasurdevrkama syona 
sam no bhava dvipade sam catuspade. 


Be lady of the gracious eye for the husband. Be 
kind and good to the animals, noble at heart and brilliant 
in mind and sense of honour and propriety. Be the 
mother of brave and noble children. Love your 
husband’s brothers. Be cheerful and blissful. Let there 
be all round peace and total well being for us all, peace 
and well being for humans and animals all. 


इमां त्वमिन्द्र tiga: सुपुत्रां सुभगां कृणु। 
दशास्यां पुत्राना धेहि पतिमेकादशं कधि ॥ ४५॥ 
45. Imam tvamindra midhavah suputram subhagam 


krnu. Dasasyam putrana dhehi patimekadasam 
krdhi. 

Lord of glory and fertility, Indra, bountiful ruler 

of the world and the home, bless this bride for noble 


progeny, honour and glory. Give her ten children, and 
let the husband be the eleventh, as guardian over all. 


सम्राज्ञी श्वशुरे भव aural श्वश्रवां va 
ननान्दरि सम्राज्ञी भव सम्राज्ञी अधिं देवृषु ॥ we ॥ 

46. Samrajni 5174511८ bhava samrajni $vasrvam 
bhava. Nanandari samrajni bhava samrajni adhi 
devrsu. 


Be a darling queen for the father-in-law, be a 
favourite queen for the mother-in-law, be a loving queen 


836 RGVEDA 


for the sister-in-law, and a kind queen for the brothers- 
in-law. 


समञ्जन्तु विश्वे देवाः समापो हृद॑यानि नौ । 
सं मातरिश्वा सं धाता समु eet दधातु नौ ॥ ४७॥ 


47. Samanjantu visve devah samapo hrdayani nau. 
Sam matarisva sam dhata samu destri dadhatu 
nau. 


Listen and know all ye Vishvedevas, divinities 
of nature and nobilities of humanity, like the waters of 
two streams our hearts and mind are one. May the Vayu 
join us as one personality. May the lord controller of 
the world make us one personality. May mother 
Sarasvati of the divine voice join and proclaim us as 
one. May the Vishvedevas join and integrate our hearts 
and minds into one inseparable personality. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 86 
Indra Devata, Indra (1, 8, 11-12, 14, 19-22), Vrshakapi 
Aindra (7, 13, 23), and Indrani (2-6, 9, 10, 15-18) Rshis 


वि हि सोतोरस्रश्चत नेन्द्रं canted । यत्राम॑दद्‌ वृषाकपिरर्यः 
पुष्टेषु मत्स॑सरा विश्वस्मादिन्द्र उत्तरः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Vi hi sotorasrksata nendram devamamsata. 
Yatramadadvrsakapiraryah pustesu matsakha 
visvasmadindra uttarah. 


The creatures having been created flowed forth, 
streamed too far and strayed from acknowledgement of 
the creator Indra, where Vrshapkapi, the human soul, 
jivatma, top master among the created, rejoiced among 
them. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 86 837 


My friend and favourite Indra, great and 
generous, is supreme over the whole creation, says 
Prakrti, the mother consort. 


परा हीन्द्र धाव॑सि वृषाकपेरति व्यथिंः। नो अह प्र 
विन्दस्यन्यत्र सोम॑पीतये विश्वस्मादिन्द्र उत्त॑रः ॥ २॥ 


2. Para hindra dhavasi vrsakaperati vyathih. No aha 
pra vindasyanyatra somapitaye visvasmadindra 
uttarah. 


Indra, far too far you move from Vrshakapi who 
feels too sorrow stricken. O jivatma you would not find 
anywhere else other than Indra’s presence to enjoy the 
soma joy of life... Indra is supreme over all. 


किमयं त्वां वृषाकपिश्चकार हरितो मृगः । यस्मा इर स्यसीदु 
न्वर्यो at पुष्टिमद्वसु विश्वस्मादिन्द्र उत्त॑रः ॥ ३॥ 
६१ Kimayam tvam vrsakapiscakara harito mrgah. 


Yasma irasyasidu nvaryo va pustimadvasu visva- 
smadindra uttarah. 


What has this Vrshakapi done to you, this golden 
green natural, who needs initiation but who is the top 
master spirit of the created, toward whom you show so 
much resentment? 


Indra is supreme over the whole creation. 


यमिमं त्वं वृषाकपिं प्रियमिन्द्राथिरक्चसि। yar न्व॑स्य 
जम्भिषदपि कर्णे वराहयुर्विश्व॑स्मादिन्द्र उत्त॑रः ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Yamimam tvam vrsakapim priyamindrabhira- 
ksasi. Sva nyasya jambhisadapi karne varahayur- 
visvasmadindra uttarah. 


838 RGVEDA 


Indra, your darling Vrshakapi whom you protect 
and favour so much falls a victim to greed which crushes 
him in its jaws as a hound seizes a boar by the ear. 


Indra is supreme over the whole creation. 


arash मे कपिर्व्यक्ता व्य॑दूदुषत्‌ | शिरो न्व॑स्य राविषं 
न सुगं दुष्कृते भु वं विश्वस्मादिन्द्र उत्त॑रः ॥ ५॥ 

5. Priya tastani me kapirvyakta vyadadisat. Siro 
nvasya ravisam na sugam duskrte bhuvam visva- 
smadindra uttarah. 


And all my dear forms of existence wrought into 
beauteous being, he pollutes. I would rather push his 
head down, I would not be good and never allow him 
anything too easily for this sinner. 


Indra is supreme over all the world. 


न मत्स्त्री सुभसत्तरा न AAT धुवत्‌। न मत्प्रतिंच्यवी- 
यसी न सक्थ्युद्यमीयसी विश्व॑स्मादिन्द्र्‌ उत्त॑रः ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Na mat stri subhasattara na suyasutara bhuvat. 
Na mat praticyaviyasi na sakthyudyamiyasi 
visvasmadindra uttarah. 


There is no other creative consort of Indra other 
than Prakrti, no female more charming, more agreeable, 
more pliant, more responsive, more attractive and more 
elevating, none other than me. 


Indra is supreme over all the world. 


उवे अम्ब सुलाभिके adarg भविष्यति । भसन्मे अम्ब 
सक्थि मे शिरोमे वीव हष्यति विश्व॑स्मादिन्द्र उत्त॑रः ॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 86 839 


7. Uve amba sulabhike yathevanga bhavisyati. 
Bhasanme amba sakthi me Siro me viva hrsyati 
visvasmadindra uttarah. 


Mother Nature, Prakrti, blessed and blissful 
fertility and giver of virility, whatever is to be shall be. 
My breast, my loins, my head all vibrate with energy, 
your gift. Indra is supreme over all. 


fe सुबाहो स्वङ्करे पृथुष्टो पृथुंजाघने। किं शूरपत्ति 
नस्त्वमभ्यमीषि वृषाकपिं विश्वस्मादिन्द्र उत्तरः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Kim subaho svangure prthusto prthujaghane. Kim 
Surapatni nastvamabhyamisi vrsakapim visva- 
smadindra uttarah. 

O lady of lovely arms and nimble fingers, wavy 


hair and ample zone, divine consort of omnipotence, 
why do you arraign Vrshakapi, why blame jivatma? 


Indra is supreme over all. 


अवीरामिव मामयं शरारुरभि म॑न्यते। उताहमस्मि वीरि- 
'णीन्द्र॑पली मरुत्सखा विश्वस्मादिन्द्र उत्तरः॥ ९॥ 


Aviramiva mamayam Ssararurabhi manyate. 
Utahamasmi virinindrapatni marutsakha visva- 
smadindra uttarah. 


This naughty thinks of me as naught, bereft of 
the brave, while I am blest with heroes, and I am the 
creative consort of Indra and friend of the Maruts, 
stormy troops of the winds of nature. 


Indra is supreme over all. 


840 


संहोत्रं स्म॑ पुरा नारी सम॑नं वाव॑ गच्छति । वेधा ऋतस्य 
वीरिणीन्द्र॑पली महीयते विश्व॑स्मादिन्द्र्‌ SAT: ९०॥ 


10. Samhaotram sma pura nari samanam vava 
gacchati. Vedha rtasya virinindrapanti mahiyate 
visvasmadindra uttarah. 


The creative force in original time receives the 
cosmic seed and stirs into action for the dynamics of 
creative evolution. For this very reason, Prakrti, 
impregnated with the cosmic seed, is exalted as the 
consort of Indra, mother of the universal brave, 
controller of the laws of existence. 


Indra is supreme over all. 


इन्द्राणीमासु TRG सुभगामहमश्रवम्‌ | नह्यस्या अपरं चन 
जरसा मर॑ते पतिर्विश्व॑स्मादिन्द्र उत्तरः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Indranimasu narisu subhagamahamasrvam. 
Na hyasya aparam cana jarasa marate patirvi- 
svasmadindra uttarah. 


So have I heard of Indrani among the creative 
dames as the mother of glory. Never shall her lord, Indra, 
ever die of old age like others, men of mortal nature. 
Indra is supreme over all. 


नाहमिन्द्राणि रारणा सख्युर्बृषाकपेऋते | यस्येदमप्यं हविः 
प्रियं देवेषु गच्छ॑ति विश्वस्मादिन्द्र उत्तरः ॥ ९२॥ 
12. Nahamindrani rarana sakhyurvrsakaperrte. 


Yasyedamapyam havih priyam devesu gacchati 
visvasmadindra uttarah. 


O divine consort, Indrani, I never enjoy the play 
of existence without my friend and companion, 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 86 841 


Vrshakapi, generous playful humanity, since the havi 
given by him and given for nature and humanity goes 
up and reaches the divinities which I share. 


Indra is supreme over all. 


वृषाकपायि रेव॑ति सुपु॑त्र आदु GAS । TAT इन्द्रं उक्चण॑ः 
प्रियं काचित्करं हविर्विश्व॑स्मादिन्द्र उत्त॑रः ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Vrsakapayi revati suputra adu susnuse. Ghasat 
ta indra usanah priyam kacitkaram havirvisva- 
smadindra uttarah. 


O Vrshakapayi, mother Prakrti, provider of 
living beings, opulent and abundant power, mother of 
noble children and giver of joy and bliss, mother fertility, 
Indra would ultimately take over and consume whatever 
dear, creative and inspiring havi you would offer here 
in the created world. 


Indra is supreme over all the world. 


उक्ष्णो हि मे पञ्च॑दश साकं पच॑न्ति ferorfer | उताहम॑दि 
पीव इदुभा Halt dura मे विश्वस्मादिन्द्र उत्त॑रः ॥ ९४॥ 


14. Vrsakapayi revati suputra ddu susnuse. 
Utahamadmi piva idubha kuksi prnanti me visva- 
smadindra uttarah. 


Natural powers of creative mother Prakrti ripen, 
mature and give up fifteen evolutionary forms of matter, 
energy and mind with twenty parts of the biological 
systems which I swallow at the completion of the 
existential cycle and I feel satisfied with the 
involutionary consumption of the Rtam and Satyam 
modes of existence. Indra is supreme over all. 


842 RGVEDA 


वृषभो न तिग्मशंङ्खोऽ न्तर्युथेषु रोरुवत्‌। मन्थस्त इन्द्र शं 
हृदे यं तै सुनोति भावयुर्विंश्व॑स्मादिन्द्र्‌ SAT: ॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Vrsabho na tigmasrngo’ntaryuthesu roruvat. 
Manthasta indra sam hrde yam te sunoti bhava- 
yurvisvasmadindra uttarah. 


Indra, just as a sharp horned bull bellows and 
lords over the herds of cattle with pride, so may the 
joyous process of the creative cycle which the dedicated 
celebrant and loving Prakrti enacts for you give you 
satisfaction and joy at heart as lord and master of the 
world. 


Indra is supreme over all. 


न ast यस्य रम्ब॑ तेऽ न्तरा सक्थ्या ३ HI Sets यस्य॑ 
रोमशं निषेदुषो fasta विश्व॑स्मादिन्द्र्‌ उत्तरः ॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. Na sese yasya rambate’ntara sakthaya kaprt. 
Sedise yasya romasam niseduso vijrmbhate visva- 
smadindra uttarah. 


That person does not rule over the self whose 
hedonic mind roams and rambles around among objects 
of sensual pleasure. That person rules as master of the 
self whose radiant mind in a state of peace and freedom 
blossoms and expands in spiritual wakefulness. Indra 
is Supreme over all. 


न ast यस्य॑ रोमशं निषेदुषो fasmsta सेदीशे यस्य 
रम्ब तेऽ न्तरा सक्थ्या ३ कपृद्धिश्व॑स्मादिन्द्र उत्त॑रः ॥ ९७॥ 
17. Na sese yasya romasam niseduso vijrmbhate. 


Sedise yasya rambate’ntara sakthaya kaprd 
visvasmadindra uttarah. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 86 843 


That person whose radiant mind in a state of 
peace and freedom blossoms and expands in spiritual 
wakefulness does not rule the world of Prakrti. The 
master that rules the world of Prakrti is the power whose 
ecstatic presence in peace and sovereignty pervades in 
and over space and time. Indra is supreme over all. 


अयमिन्द्र वृषाकपिः पर॑स्वन्तं हतं faad| असिं सूनां नवं 
चरुमादेधस्यान आचितं विश्व॑स्मादिन्द्र्‌ उत्तरः॥ ९८. ॥ 


18. Ayamindra vrsakapih parasvantam hatam vidat. 
Asim sunam navam carumddedhasyan acitam 
visvasmadindra uttarah. 


Indra, lord omnipresent and omnipotent, let this 
Vrshakapi, lover of joyous showers and shaker of 
thoughts of evil, know and realise that the duality 
between the self and the super self is ended. Then he 
will attain the soul inspiring pranic energy, creative 
intelligence, new spirit of yajnic performance and full 
achievement of the saving light of divinity. 


Indra is supreme over all the world. 


अयमेमि विचाकशद्विचिन्वन्दासमार्यम्‌। पिबामि पाक- 
सुत्व॑नोऽ भि धीरमचाकशं विश्वस्मादिन्द्र उत्तरः॥ ९९॥ 


19. Ayamemi vicakasad vicinvan dasamaryam. 
Pibami pakasutvano’bhi dhiramacakasam 
visvasmadindra uttarah. 


Perceiving the light of knowledge, building up 
my score of yajnic action, I come to the omnificent 
vibrant presence of divinity, and I drink of the nectar of 
the light and life of purity, eternity and direct realisation 
of divine communion. Indra is greater than the world 


844 RGVEDA 
of existence. 


धन्व॑ च यत्कृन्तत्रं च कति स्वित्ता वि योजना । नेदीयसो 
वृषाकपेऽ tae गृहं उप विश्व॑स्मादिन्द्र उत्त॑रः ॥ Ro ॥ 


20. Dhanvaca yat krntatram ca kati svit ta vi yojana. 
Nedtyaso vrsakape ’stamehi grham upa visvasma- 
dindra uttarah. 


The desert land, the dead-wood or the dark 
abyss, whatever, wherever, howsoever many they be, 
they must be given up. Come closer to your own homes, 
shelter of the closest divinity. Indra is supreme over all 
the world. 


पुनरेहि वृषाकपे सुविता कल्पयावहे। य एष स्व॑प्रनंशनोऽ- 
स्तमेषिं पथा पुनर्विश्व॑स्मादिन्द्र्‌ SAT: 12211 


21. Punarehi vrsakape suvita kalpayavahai. Ya esam 
svapnanamsano’stamesi patha punavisvasma- 
dindra uttarah. 


O Vrshakapi, come again and both of us would 
create good things for your peace and comfort in well 
being. Thus destroying the state of dream and sleep, 
this lover of showers and breeze, Vrshakapi comes home 
by the paths of existence and piety again and again. 
Indra is supreme over all the world. 


यदुद॑ञ्चो वृषाकपे गृहमिन््राजं गन्तन | Fa} स्य पुल्वघो 
मृगः कम॑गजञ्जनयोप॑नो विश्वस्मादिन्द्र उत्तरः ॥ २२॥ 


22. Yadudanco vrsakape grhamindrdjagantana. 
Kva sya pulvagho mrgah kamaganjanayopano 
visvasmadindra uttarah. 


O Vrshakapi, O Indra, when the higher souls 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 87 845 


come rising to the state of peace in the divine home, 
then where does the sinner, the vexatious and the seeker 
roaming around go, to what state of life? 


Great is Indra, supreme over all the world. 


usté नाम॑ मानवी साकं स॑सूव विंशतिम्‌। भद्रं ts eet 
अभूद्यस्यां उदर माम॑यद्धिश्व॑स्मादिन्द्र उत्तरः ॥ २३ ॥ 


23. Parsurha nama manavi sakam sasuva vimSatim. 
Bhadram bhala tyasya abhiud yasya udarama- 
mayad visvasmadindra uttarah. 


The creative and catalytic power of omniscient 
Indra, universal mother, together creates twenty varying 
modes of matter, energy and thought for physical, 
biological and intelligent forms of existence. O noble 
soul, blessed be the mother who suffers the travail to 
bear the transmigrant soul on way to earthly pleasure 
and pain and then the bliss divine. Great is Indra, greater 
than all, supreme over all the world. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 87 
Agni Rakshoha Devata, Payu Bharadvaja Rshi 
रक्षोहणं वाजिनमा Rett fast ufetsad यापि शर्म । 
शिर््णानो अभिः क्रतुभिः afte: सनो fear स रिषः 
पातु नक्तम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 

0 Raksohanam vajinama jigharmi mitram prathi- 
sthamupa yami Sarma. Sisano agnih kratubhih 
samiddhah sa no diva sa risah patu naktam. 

I sprinkle the holy fire with ghrta and dedicate 


myself to Agni, light and fire of life, destroyer of evil 
and giver of victory, friend and saviour most boundless, 


846 RGVEDA 


and there I find peace and freedom for life eternal. May 
Agni, sharp and blazing with yajnic actions of creativity, 
protect and promote us against hate and enmity, violence 
and obstruction day and night. 


HSS अर्चिषां यातुधानानुपं स्पृश जातवेदः UE: | 
आ feat मूर॑देवात्रभस्व क्रव्यादो! वुक्तव्यपि धत्स्वा- 
PLN २॥ 


2: Ayodamstro arcisa yatudhananupa sprsa jata- 
vedah samiddhah. A jihvaya muradevan rabhasva 
kravyado vrktvyapi dhatsvasan. 


Omnipresent spirit of life and protection of 
existence, blazing with flames of fire and fierce with 
jaws of steel, destroy the anti-life elements with the 
touch of your lazer beams, seize the agents of death 
with flames, catch the blood suckers and flesh eaters 
with the jaws and crush them to naught. 


उभोभ॑याविन्नुपं धरहि dst fee: शिशानोऽ at परं च। 
उतान्तरिंश्चे परिं याहि राजजञ्जम्भेः सं धेह्यभि यातुधा- 
APL ३॥ 


Ubhobhayavinnapa dhehi damstra himsrah 
sisano’varam param ca. Utantarikse pariyahi 
rajanjambaih sam dhehyabhi yatudhanan. 


Destroyer of the negative, refining the positive, 
commanding both creative and corrective powers for 
protective and punitive purposes, promote life both here 
and hereafter. O refulgent ruler of the world, fly over 
the skies and, with the force of both power and 
persuasion, overwhelm the violent and destructive, and 
either correct and integrate them or throw them out. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 87 847 


यज्ञैरिषुंः संनम॑मानो अगे वाचा great अशनिंभिर्विहानः। 
ताभिर्विध्य ada यातुधानान्प्रतीचो बाहून्प्रति भङ्ध्ये- 
षाम्‌ ॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Yajnairisuh samnamamano agne vaca salyam 
asanibhirdihanah. Tabhirvidhya hrdaye yatu- 
dhanan pratico bahin prati bhandhyesam. 


Organising the armed forces into order, alliance 
and submission by discussion, cooperation and 
submission, shining and updating the forces by the 
addition of lightning weapons and thereby paralysing 
the heart core of the terrorist forces, break their violent 
arms all round. 


अग्ने त्वचं यातुधानस्य भिन्धि िस््राशनिर्हर॑सा हन्त्वेनम्‌ | 
प्र पवीणि जातवेदः श्वणीहि wear विष्णुर्वि चिनोतु 
वृक्णम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


a, Agne tvacam yatudhanasya bhindhi himsrasanir- 
harasa hantvenam. Pra parvani jatavedah srnthi 
kravyat kravisnurvi cinotu vrknam. 


Agni, Jataveda, present everywhere, break 
through the cover, camouflage, secret shelters and 
hideouts of the elements of evil, violence and sabotage 
with fatal light and penetrative power, split up every 
section and every unit of it to bits, disperse and destroy 
them all, and let the fire which consumes the dead collect 
and consume the remains and reduce them to ash. 


यत्रेदानीं पश्य॑सि जातवेदस्तिरटन्तमग्र उत वा चर॑न्तम्‌ । 
यद्ान्तरिश्चे पथिभिः पत॑न्तं तमस्ता विध्य शर्वा 
शिशानः ॥ ६ ॥ 


848 RGVEDA 


6. Yatredanim pasyasi jatavedastisthantamagna uta 
va carantam. Yadvantarikse pathibhih patantam 


awa 


tamasta vidhya Sarva sisanah. 


And now, whenever you see, O ruler all 
knowing, Agni, the enemies of life, elements of darkness 
and destruction, covered in clusters or roaming around 
or even flying in the sky by paths of air, then sharp, 
shining and instantly shooting, destroy the enemy with 
a fatal shot of thunderous missile. 


उतालब्धं स्पृणुहि जातवेद आकेभानादृष्टिभिंर्यातुधानात्‌ | 
अग्र yal नि ज॑हि शोशुचान आमादः क्िविद्धास्तमं- 
दन्त्वेनीः ॥। ७ ॥ 


4; Utalabdham sprnuhi jataveda alebhanadrsti- 
bhiryatudhanat. Agne purvo ni jahi Sosucana 
amadah ksvinkastamadantvenih. 


Agni, first and foremost power, bright and 
blazing, knowing and commanding over everything 
born, with the strike of your force, power and 
punishment, release the innocents caught up in the 
clutches of the forces of violence and terror, destroy 
the carnivorous, blood suckers and eaters into the flesh, 
and let them be thrown to the vociferous vultures. 


इद प्र ब्रूहि यतमः सो अग्रे यो यातुधानो य इदं quite | 
तमा रभस्व समिधां यवि नृचश्च॑सश्चक्षुषे रन्धयैनम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tha pra bruhu yatamah so agne yo yatudhano ya 
idam krnoti. Tama rabhasva samidha yavistha 
nrcaksasascaksuse randhayainam. 


Agni, expose and proclaim right here whoever 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 87 849 


be the violent force that does this damage. O youthful 
power ever watchful of humanity, subject it to the fuel 
fire and destroy it that all may see. 


तीक्ष्णेन चक्षुषा tet ast प्राञ्चं वसुभ्यः प्रणय 
प्रचेतः feet रश्चास्यभि शोशुचानं मा त्वा दभन्यातुधाना 
न॒चक्षः॥ ९॥ 


0. Tiksnenagne caksusa raksa yajnam prancam 
vasubhyah pra naya pracetah. Himsram raksam- 
syabhi sosucanam ma tva dabhan yatudhana 
nrcaksah. 


O Agni, blazing ruling power of nature and the 
world, ever alert, ever watchful of humanity, with 
penetrative and comprehensive eye, guard, protect and 
promote the yajnic order of society enacted and 
proceeding so clearly and transparently, and let it 
progress for the achievement of wealth, honour and 
excellence for all the people. Unsparing destroyer of 
the negatives, shining, and burning the destructive, let 
no violent force terrorize or depress you ever. 


नृचक्षा tat: UR use विक्षु तस्य त्रीणि प्रतिं श्वणीह्यग्रा । 
तस्याग्रे पृष्टीर्हरसा श्यृणीहि त्रेधा मूलं यातु धान॑स्य 
AVIAN ९०॥ ति 

10. Nrcaksa raksah pari paSsya viksu tasya trini prati 
srnihyagra. Tasyagne prstirharasa srnthi 
tredha mulam yatudhanasya vrsca. 


Agni, all watchful power, watch for the wicked 
enemy hidden among the people, crush his three prime 
forces of intelligence, arms and follow up. With your 
blazing fire and passion, break his back three ways, 


850 RGVEDA 


financial, manpower and allies. Throw up and throw 
out the forces of violence and destruction root and 
branch wherever they be. 


त्रि्यीतुधानः प्रसितिं त एत्वृतं यो अग्रे अनुंतेन हन्ति । 
तमर्चिष। स्फू र्जयञ्जातवेदः समक्षमेनं गृणते नि 
तुंङ्धि।॥ ९९॥ 


11. = Triryatudhanah prasitim ta etvrtam yo agne anr- 
tena hanti. Tamarcisa sphurjayanjatavedah 
samaksamenam grnate ni vrndhi. 


Agni, all knowing Jataveda, brilliant ruler, 
whoever violates the law of truth with the force of 
untruth, must suffer threefold shackles of your law and 
power, justice, punishment and deterrence. Crashing on 
him with the light and power of truth, crushing him 
down openly before the law abiding and socially 
dedicated people, root out the evil and the violent. 


aan चक्षुः प्रतिं ders शफारुजं येन पश्य॑सि यातुधान॑म्‌। 
अथर्ववज्न्योतिषा दैव्येन सत्यं धूर्व न्तमचितं न्योष 0 ९२॥ 


12. Tadagne caksuh prati dhehi rebhe sapharujam 
yena pasyasi yatudhanam. Atharvavajjyotisa 
daivyena satyam dhurvantamacitam nyosa. 


O Agni, cast the same eye of light on the law 
abiding celebrant of the social order by which you watch 
the violent and antisocial elements treading on the peace 
and order of society. As an enlightened power 
undisturbed at heart, with your divine light and power, 
light up or burn out the callous and violent destroyer of 
truth and law. 


13. 


MANDAL - 10/ SUKTA - 87 851 
aan अद्य fost शपातो यद्वाचस्तृष्टं जनय॑न्त रे भाः। 
मन्योर्मन॑सः शर व्या जाय॑ते या तया विध्य हृद॑ये यातु- 
धानान्‌ ॥ ९३ u 


Yadagne adya mithuna sapato yadvacastrstam 
janayanta rebhah. Manyormanasah saravya 
jayate ya taya vidhya hrdaye yatudhanan. 


Agni, the sharp and shooting words with which 


fighting rivals revile and execrate, the rough and raging 
words which the poet creates for irony, the piercing pain 
that issues forth in words from the mind in a state of 
passion, with that language chastise and strike the 
demonic violent deep to the heart core (yourself 
undisturbed). 


14. 


परा श्वणीहि तप॑सा यातुधानान्परभे रक्षो हर॑सा श्वणीहि। 
परार्चिषा मूरंदेवाञ्छणीहि परासुतृपो' अभि शोश- 
ATT: U VS IU त 

Para 5117017 tapasa yatudhanan paragne rakso 
harasa srnthi. Pararcisa muradevanchrnihi para- 
sutrpo abhi sosucanah. 


Agni, shatter the violent with heat, destroy the 


demonic with passion, destroy the destroyers with blaze, 
and destroy the devitalizers with light. 


| 


पराद्य देवा वृजिनं शुणन्तु प्रत्यगेनं शापा यन्तु तृष्टाः | 
वाचास्तेनं शर॑व ऋच्छन्तु मर्मच्विूव॑स्यैतु प्रसितिं यातु- 
धानं: ॥ ९५५ ॥ ति ति ति 
Pardadya deva vrjinam 51147111 pratyagenam 
sapatha yantu trstah. Vacastenam Ssarava rccha- 
ntu marman visvasyaitu prasitim yatudhanah. 


852 RGVEDA 


Let the divinities break off the crooked, let the 
cruel curses visit back upon the crooked curser, let the 
arrows reach the heart core of the thief with the right 
message, and let the saboteur suffer universal bondage 
with loss of freedom under the rule of Agni. 


यः पौरुषेयेण विषां समद्धे यो अश्व्येन पशुना AAA: | 
यो अघ्न्याया भरति क्षीरमग्ने तेषां शीर्षाणि हरसापि 
तुश्च ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Yah pauruseyena kravisa samankte yo aSvyena 
pasuna yatudhanah. Yo aghnyaya bharati 
kstramagne tesam Sirsani harasapi vrsca. 


Whoever feeds himself upon the flesh of 
humanity, whoever prospers by animal wealth at the 
cost of animal wealth by destroying it, whoever carries 
off the milk of the inviolable cow and destroys the 
fertility of the earth, O Agni, strike off their heads with 
light and passion for truth. 


संवत्सरीणं पय॑ उस्रियायास्तस्य माशीद्यातुधानो नृचक्षः | 
पीयूषमग्ने यतमस्तितुप्सात्तं प्रत्यञ्च॑मर्चिषा विध्य 
TPT ९७॥ 


17. Samvatsarinam paya usriyayastasya masidyatu- 
dhano nrcaksah. Pityusamagne yatamastitrpsat 
tam pratyancamarcisa vidhya marman. 


Agni, watchful guardian of humanity, let the 
oppressor not drink milk of the cow for a year, and if 
the oppressor drinks of the milk and excessively too, 
punish him with your flame unto the heart core. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 87 853 


विषं गवां यातुधानाः पिबन्त्वा वुंश्च्यन्तामादिंतये 
दुरेवाः । परैनान्देवः संविता द॑दातु परा भागमोषंधीनां 
जयन्ताम्‌ ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Visam gavam yatudhanah pibantva vrscyantama- 
ditaye durevah. Parainan devah savita dadatu 
para bhagamosadhinam jayantam. 


Let the oppressors of the cows, earth and the 
environment drink poison instead of milk. Let the 
oppressors of Aditi, mother, sister and nature suffer in 
isolation. O Savita, saviour soul of renewal and 
replenishment, throw them off to ruin and let them be 
denied their share of herbs and trees. (Those who 
oppress the creative and productive powers of natural 
sustenance of life and pollute the sources of energy 
themselves deny the sustenance because that is the law 
of Agni in nature and life). 


Parada मृणसि यातुधानान्न त्वा रक्षांसि पृत॑नासु जिग्युः | 
अनु दह सहमुरान्क्रव्यादो मा ते हेत्या मुक्षत Serta: ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Sanadagne mrnasi yatudhanan na tva raksamsi 
prtanasu jigyuh. Anu daha sahamuran kravyado 
ma te hetya muksata daivyayah. 


Agni, you destroy the oppressors since time 
immorial. Never can the evil dominate over you in their 
battles against the good. Let the flesh eaters alongwith 
the cruel and wicked be destroyed, and may they never 
escape the strike of your divine punishment and natural 
retribution. 


त्वं Al अरे अधरादुद॑क्तात्त्वं पश्चादुत La पुरस्तात्‌ | 
प्रति ते ते अजरासस्तपिष्ठा अघशंसं शोचतो दहन्तु ॥ २०॥ 


854 RGVEDA 


20. Tvam no agne adharadudaktat tvam pascaduta 
raksa purastat. Prati te te ajarasastapistha agha- 
Samsam Sosucato dahantu. 


Agni, pray protect us from below, from above, 
from behind and in front against the oppressors facing 
us. May those unaging flames shining and blazing burn 
down the malignant and sinful enemies of life to ashes. 


पश्चात्पुरस्तादधरादुद॑क्तात्कविः काव्येन परिं पाहि राजन्‌। 
सखे सर्रायमजरो जरिम्णेऽग्ने मर्ता अम्त्यस्त्वं न॑: ॥ २९॥ 


21. Pascat purastadadharadudaktat kavih kavyena 
pari pahi rajan. Sakhe makhayamajaro jarimne 
*gne martam amartyastvam nah. 


O refulgent ruler, divine visionary, protect us 
all round, from the back and front, from above and 
below, as now and hereafter, by the light of your vision 
and wisdom. O Agni, unaging friend, immortal divinity, 
save the mortals, save your friend, bless us all mortals 
to live a happy life till a full age of fulfilment. 


परि त्वाग्ने पुरं वयं विप्रं सहस्य धीमदहि। 
धृषद्वर्ण दिवेदिवे हन्तारं भङ्नगुराव॑ताम्‌॥ २२ ॥ 


22. Pari tvagne puram vayam vipram sahasya dhi- 
mahi. Dhrsadvarnam divedive hantaram bhangu- 
ravatam. 


Agni, day in and day out all time, we celebrate 
and adore you, eternal giver of fulfilment, wise, resolute 
and brave, redoubtable vanquisher of the mischievous 
and destroyer of the destroyers of life and nature. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 87 855 


विषेणं भङ्गुरावतः प्रतिं ष्म Carel दह । 
अग तिग्मेन॑ शोचिषा तपुरग्राभिच्ऋष्टिभिः ॥ २३ ॥ 


23. Visena bhanguravatah prati sma raksaso daha. 
Agne tigmena socisa tapuragrabhirrstibhih. 


Agni, with pervasive and expansive light, heat 
and penetrative flames and with beams of constant 
action against the negativities of life and society, pray 
burn up the crooked and destructive elements of life in 
every field of their activity. 


wan मिथुना de यातुधाना किमीदिना | 
सं त्वा शिशामि जागृह्यद॑ब्धं विप्र मन्म॑भिः ॥ Be ॥ 


24. Pratyagne mithuna daha yatudhana kimidina. 


Sam tva sisami jagrhyadabdham vipra manma- 
bhih. 


Agni, burn up the oppressive and destructive 
alliances and combinations of the negativities of life 
and nature on the prowl looking for where to strike. O 
power all intelligent and wise, with holy thoughts and 
prayers, I invoke and exhort you. Arise, O power 
indomitable, and strike against the killers. 


waa हर॑सा at: श्वणीदहि विश्वतः प्रति । 
यातुधान॑स्य र॒क्षसो ae वि रुज वीर्यम्‌ ॥ २५॥ 


25. Pratyagne harasa harah 51117007 visvatah prati. 
Yatudhanasya raksaso balam vi ruja viryam. 


Agni, universal spirit of light and fire, creator, 
protector and destroyer, refulgent ruler of nature, life 
and society, with your love and passion for life and 
goodness and with your wrath against evil, sabotage 


856 RGVEDA 


and negativity, seize, cripple and all round destroy the 
strength, vigour, valour and resistance of the negative 
and destructive forces of evil and wickedness, lurking, 
working and persisting in nature, life and society. Save 
the good and destroy the demons. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 88 


Surya, Vaishvanaragni Devata, Murdhanvan Angirasa 
or Vamadevya Rshi 


हविष्पान्त॑मजरं स्वर्विदि दिविस्पुश्याहु तं Seat । 
तस्य भर्म॑णो भुव॑नाय देवा धर्मणे कं स्वधया पप्रथन्त ॥ ९॥ 


ls Havispantamajaram svarvidi divisprsyahutam 
justamagnau. Tasya bharmane bhuvanaya deva 
dharmane kam svadhaya paprathanta. 


Devas, the divines of humanity and divinities 
of nature, with food and reverence, offer delicious, 
expansive, loved and solemnly dedicated havi into the 
holy fire which rises to the skies and reaches the sun. 
Thus do they exalt Agni so that they may well be, rise 
and exalt in the gracious order of Agni under the divine 
shelter and support of the order. 


गीर्ण भुव॑नं तमसाप॑गृढ््हपाविः स्व॑रभवज्नाते अग्रौ । तस्य॑ 
देवाः पुंथिवी द्यौरुतापोऽ र॑णयन्नोष॑धीः सख्ये अस्य ॥ २॥ 


2: Girnam bhuvanam tamasapagulhmavih svara- 
bhavajjate agnau. Tasya deva prthivi dyauru- 
tapo’ranapannosadhih sakhye asya. 

The world of existence lay deeply engulfed and 


covered in the darkness of the night of Pralaya, 
annihilation, and then on the rise of Agni, Lord Supreme 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 88 857 


of light and life, it rose and manifested: Akasha, time- 
space continuum manifested, and then others followed, 
earth, light and heat, waters, herbs and trees all arose, 
and all the devas, divine spirits of nature, rejoiced in 
the love and friendship of this Lord Supreme, Agni. 


देवेभिर्न्विषितो aaah भं स्तोषाण्यजरं बृहन्त॑म्‌। यो 
भानुना पृथिवीं द्यामुतेमामाततान रोद॑सी अन्तरिंश्चम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


Di Devebhirnvisito yajniyebhiragnim stosanyajaram 
brhantam. Yo bhanuna prthivim dyamutema- 
matatana rodasi antariksam. 


Inspired by Devas and lighting the fire of yajnas, 
I adore and exalt Agni, lord unaging and eternal, infinite, 
who, by his self-refulgence, pervades this earth and 
heaven and expands both heaven and earth and the 
middle regions of the skies. 


यो होतासीत्प्रथमो देवजुष्टो यं समाञ्जन्नाज्येना SUT: 1 
स प॑तत्रीत्वरं स्था जगद्यच्छरात्रमथिरंकृणोज्नातवेदाः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Yo hotasit prathamo devajusto yam samanja- 
nnajyena vrnanah. Sa patatritvaram stha jaga- 
dyacchvatramagnirakrnojjatavedah. 


I adore and exalt Agni who is the first, original 
and efficient cause of the cosmic yajna, loved and 
celebrated by the devas, whom the best of men with 
cherished love and choice sprinkle and serve with sacred 
ghrta, who creates, shapes and rules the world of flying, 
moving, non-moving and revolving objects and living 
beings. That is Agni, Jataveda, self-refulgent and 
omniscient. 


858 RGVEDA 


यञ्नातवेदो भुव॑नस्य मूर्धन्नतिंछो अग्ने सह Tere । तं cate 
मतिभिर्गीर्भिरुक्थेः स यज्ञियो अभवो रोदसिप्राः ॥ ५॥ 


a: Yajjatavedo bhuvanasya murdhannatistho agne 
saha rocanena. Tam tvahema matibhirgirbhiru- 
kthaih sa yajniyo abhavo rodasiprah. 


O Jataveda, Agni, who abide and shine on top 
of the world with the sun, with our thoughts, words and 
holy songs we adore and worship you. You are adorable, 
worthy of worship, pervasive all over heaven and earth. 


मूर्धा भुवो भ॑वति ahaha: सूर्यो जायते प्रातरुद्यन्‌ | 
मायामू तु यज्ञियानामेतामपो यत्तू्पिश्चर॑ति प्रजानन्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Murdha bhuvo bhavati naktamagnistatah suryo 
jayate pratarudyan. Mayamiu tu yajniyanameta- 
mapo yat turniscarati prajanan. 


Agni as Vaishvanara is awake and vibrates as 
the prime reality and spirit of existence at night when 
the whole world sleeps. Then in the morning, rising with 
the dawn, it shines as the sun. It is but the wondrous 
work of the highest of adorables, cosmic Maya, that it 
thus moves and vibrates at the fastest, knowing and 
watching all actions and movements of the world of 
moving and non-moving objects. 


Wea यो महिना समिन्धोऽ रोचत दिवियोनिर्विभावां | 
तस्मित्र्नो सूक्तवाकेन देवा हविर्विश्च आलजुंहवुस्तनूपाः ॥ ७ ॥ 


Ve Drsenyo yo mahina samiddho’rocata divi 
yonirvibhava. Tasminnagnau suktavakena deva 
havirvisca ajuhavustanupah. 


Wondrous in form, Agni, who, refulgent with 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 88 859 


its own grandeur, shines in heaven as the light most 
gracious is the divinity into whom, in sacred fire form, 
all devas, divinities of nature and humanity, guardians 
of our health and body, offer yajnic oblations of havi 
with the chant of Vedic mantras. 


सूक्तवाकं प्र॑थममादिदभिमादिन्द॒विर॑जनयन्त देवाः | 
स एषां यज्ञो अंभवत्तनूपास्तं aes तं पंथिवी तमापः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Suktavakam prathamamddidagnimdiddhavira- 
jJanayanta devah. Sa esam yajno abhavat tanupa- 
stam dyaurveda tam prthivi tamapah. 


The devas, noble yajakas, first chant the divine 
Word, then they light the fire and then they prepare and 
offer the havi. That Agni is the adorable lord of them 
all, guardian and promoter of health and age. That the 
heaven receives, that the earth receives, and that the 
waters receive, and that all of them realise, the pervasive 
power and energiser. 


यं देवासोऽ Waa यस्मिन्नाजुं हवुर्भव॑नानि विश्वां । 
सो अर्चिषां पृथिवीं द्यामुतेमामूंजूयमांनो अतपन्महित्वा ॥ ९ ॥ 


रः Yam devaso’janayantagnim yasminnajuhavur- 
bhuvanani visva. So arcisa prthivim dyamutema- 
mrjuyamano atapanmahitva. 


Agni which all the divine powers of the universe 
create and serve, into which all worlds of the universe 
offer their oblations at the cosmic yajna of evolution 
and devolution, that Agni, radiant and natural ordainer, 
lights and energises this earth and heaven with its glory 
and self refulgence. 


860 RGVEDA 


स्तोमेन हि दिवि देवासो अथिमजींजनञ्छक्तिंभी रोदसिप्राम्‌। 
तमू अकृण्वन्त्रेधा भुवे कं स ओष॑धीः पचति fava- 
रूपाः ॥ ९०॥ 


10.  Stomena hi divi devaso agnimajijananchaktibhi 
rodasipram. Tamu akrnvan tredha bhuve kam 
sa osadhih pacati visvarupah. 


By mantric power and their own potential the 
divine powers in heaven create and raise Agni which 
pervades earth and sky too, thus creating it in three ways: 
Agni or fire on earth, Vayu or electricity in the sky, and 
Aditya or light in heaven. This same Agni of all universal 
forms well matures and ripens herbs and all vegetation 
on earth. 


यदेदेनमद॑धुर्यज्ियांसो दिवि देवाः सूर्य॑मादितेयम्‌। यदा 
चरिष्णु मिंथुनावभूंतामादित्प्रापंश्यन्भुव॑नानि विश्वां ॥ ९९ ॥ 


11. Yadedenamadadhuryajniyaso divi devah surya- 
maditeyam. Yada carisnu mithunavabhutamadit 
prapasyan bhuvanani visva. 


When the divine powers, performers of cosmic 
yajna, place this sun, child of the refulgence of Aditi, 
mother Infinity, in the heavenly region, then it becomes 
two, moving together as twofold power, Agni and 
Vaishvanara, sun and dawn, and as they pervade all 
regions of the world, so do all regions of the world see 
them. 


विश्व॑स्मा sift भुव॑नाय देवा वैश्वानरं केतुमह्मकृण्वन्‌। 
आ यस्ततानोषसो विभातीरपो ऊर्णोति तमो अर्चिषा 
यन्‌॥ ९२॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 88 861 


12. Visvasma agnim bhuvanaya deva vaisvanaram 
ketumahnamakrnvan. A yastatanosaso vibhdati- 
rapo urnoti tamo arcisa yan. 


Devas, divine powers, create and make the solar 
form of Vaishvanara Agni, and make it the flag sign of 
the day for the sake of the whole world, and the sun, 
radiating, lights up the bright dawns and dispels the 
darkness of the night with its light, unveiling the day. 


वैश्वा नरं कवयो यज्ञियासरोऽ भिं देवा अंजनयन्नलुर्यम्‌ Aalst 
प्रलममिंनच्यरिष्णु यक्षस्याध्य्॑चं तविषं बृहन्त॑म्‌ ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Vaisvanaram kavayo yajniyaso’ gnim deva ajana- 
yannajuryam. Naksatram pratnamaminaccarisnu 
yaksasyadhyaksam tavisam brhantam. 


Wise and visionary Devas, adorable divine 
powers, create the unaging Vaishvanara Agni, the 
ancient star unalterable and inviolable, moving as the 
ruling star of space, blazing and expansive. 


वैश्वानरं विश्वहा दीदिवांसं मन्त्रैर गिं कविमच्छं aa: | 
यो महिम्ना परिबभूवोर्वी उतावस्तांदुत देवः परस्तात्‌ ॥ ९४ ॥। 

14. = Vaisvanaram visvaha divivamsam mantrairagnim 
kavimaccha vadamah. Yo mahimna_ paribabhu- 
vorvi utavastaduta devah parastat. 


With Vedic mantras we invoke and adore Agni, 
Vaishvanara, light divine ever shining bright, the very 
eye of omniscience which, with its might and grandeur, 
enlightens and overwhelms both heaven and earth, the 
ultimate light and bliss above and below, the end and 
the foundation both. 


862 RGVEDA 


द्वे स्तुती अ॑श्रुणवं पितृणामहं दे वानौमुत मत्यौनाम्‌। 
ताभ्यापिदं विश्वमेजत्समेति यद॑न्तरा पितरं मातरं च ॥ १५॥ 


15. Dve sruti asrnavam pitrnamaham devanamuta 
martyanam. Tabhyamidam visvamejat sameti 
yadantara pitaram mataram ca. 


I hear there are two paths of life in existence: 
Pitryana, the path of average mortals to earthly bliss, 
and Devayana, the path of divine souls to divine bliss. 
By these does the world of vibrant life travel 
transmigrating from birth by father and mother to death 
and attains whatever is between earth and heaven. 


दे स॑मीची बिभृतश्चर॑न्तं शीर्षतो जातं मन॑सा fader स 
प्रत्यङ्किश्वा भुव॑नानि तस्थावप्रयुच्छन्तरणिर्जंमानः ॥ ९६ ॥ 
16. Dve samict bibhratascarantam Sirsato jatam 
manasa vimrstam. Sa pratyan visva bhuvanani 
tasthavaprayucchan taranirbhrajamanah. 


Two, earth and heaven, together bear Agni born 
on top, vibrant and radiating from the highest heaven, 
and that abides immanent and pervasive all over the 
worlds of existence, unremissive, radiant and divinely 
self-refulgent. 


यत्रा वदेते stat: पर॑श्च यज्ञन्योः कतरो नौ fa aa 
आ शेकुरित्स॑धमादं सखायो नश्च॑न्त यज्ञं क इदं वि 
वोचत्‌ ॥ ९७॥ 


10. Yatra vadete avarah parasca yajnanyoh kataro 
nau vi veda. A sSekurit sadhamadam sakhayo 
naksanta yajnam ka idam vi vocat. 


Where both terrestrial agni and supraterrestrial 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 88 863 


22111, both high priests of yajna, communicate and 
commingle then, for us, which one of these excels and 
proclaims the distinction? When yajakas do perform the 
yajna and serve and celebrate Agni together on the vedi, 
who would speak to us of the distinction? 


waa: कति सूयौसः कत्युषासः कत्यु, स्विदापंः। 
नोपस्पिजं वः पितरो वदामि gent a: कवयो विदाने 
PAN ९८ ॥ 


18. Katyagnayah kati suryasah katyusasah katyu 
svidapah. Nopaspijam vah pitaro vadami prccha- 
mi vah kavayo vidmane kam. 


How many are the fires? How many the suns? 
How many the dawns? How many the waters? O 
enlightened sages, I say this not out of curiosity, I ask 
you this in all seriousness for the sake of knowledge. 


यावन्मात्रमुषसो न प्रतीकं सुपर्ण्यो वस॑ते मातरिश्वः। 
AACN TA यज्ञमायन्त्राह्यणो होतुरव॑रो निषीदन्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


19. = {ता/वा77का7वा11115व50 na pratikam suparnyo vasate 
matarisvah. Tavaddadhatyupa yajnamayan 
brahmano hoturavaro nisidan. 


As long as the all moving glorious Vayu, the 
electric form of Agni, with radiant sun rays bears and 
wears the face of dawn as its banner of the day, so long 
would the holy yajaka, the Brahmana, go to the yajna 
vedi and sit and offer the fragrant havi in honour of the 
terrestrial fire, the high priest of yajna. 


Note: The answer to these questions is given in 
Rgveda 8, 58, 2: The same one Agni shines and blazes 
in many forms, The same one sun shines in all lights of 


864 RGVEDA 


the universe, the same one dawn rises over all this world, 
and the same one lord of existence manifests in all forms 
of the world, 


Mandala 10/Sukta 89 
Indra-Varunau Devate, Renu Vaishvamitra Rshi 


इन्द्रं स्तवा नृत॑मं यस्य॑ wer विबबाधे रोचना fa ज्मो 
अन्तान्‌। आ यः पप्रौ चंर्षणीधृद्धरोभिः प्र सिन्धुभ्यो 
रिरिचानो महित्वा i ९॥ 


i, Indram stava nrtamam yasya mahna vibabadhe 
rocana vi jmo antan. A yah papraucarsani- 
dhrdvarobhih pra sindhubhyo riricano mahitva. 


Adore and celebrate Indra, highest over 
humanity, who overwhelms the lights of the world with 
his grandeur and rules over the ends of the earth, who, 
watchful sustainer of humanity, pervades and fills the 
worlds of the universe by his excellences and, all 
overpowering, exceeds the oceans of earth and space 
by his glory and grandeur. 


स सूर्यः पर्युरू वरांस्येन्द्रो ववृत्याद्रथ्यैव चक्रा | अतिं्ठन्तम- 
Tey न सर्ग कृष्णा तमांसि त्विष्या जघान ॥ २॥ 


a. Sa suryah paryuru varamsyendro vavrtyadra- 
thyeva cakra. Atisthantamapasyam na sargam 
krsna tamamsi tvisya jaghana. 


Indra, self-refulgent cosmic Sun, greater than 
the greatest, he moves the worlds of existence like 
chariot wheels and, destroying the deepest darknesses 
of the world with his refulgence, keeps the dynamic 
universe in ceaseless flow like a particle in a wave of 


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 89 865 


energy. 


समानम॑स्मा अन॑पावृदर्च क्ष्मया दिवो अस॑मं ब्रहम नव्य॑म्‌। 
वि यः पृष्ठेव जनिमान्यर्य इन्द्रश्चिकाय न सखाय- 
मीषे॥ ३॥ 


3. Samanamasma anapavrdarca ksmaya divo 
asamam brahma navyam. Vi yah prstheva janima- 
nyarya indrascikaya na sakhayamise. 


Worship Indra, constant, evident and immanent, 
greater than heaven and earth, infinite, adorable ever 
new, who, as primary foundation and ultimate master, 
knows all that are born in existence and neither deserts 
friends nor hurts the devotees. 


इन्द्राय गिरो अनिशितसर्गा अपः प्रेर॑यं सग॑रस्य बुध्नात्‌। 
यो अक्षेणेव चक्रिया शचींभिर्विष्व॑क्तस्तम्भं पृथिवीमुत 
द्याम्‌॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Indraya giro atisitasarga apah prerayam saga- 
rasya budhnat. Yo akseneva cakriya sacibhirvi- 
svak tastambha prthivimuta dyam. 


I sing songs of praise and make incessant 
streams of water flow from the oceans of space and sky 
in honour of Indra who, with his cosmic power and 
actions, sustains the heaven and earth in motion like 
wheels of a chariot held in balance by the axle. 


आपान्तमन्युस्तृपलप्रभमां धुनिः शिमीवाजञ्छरुमां ऋजीषी । 
सोमो विश्वान्यतसा वनानि नार्वागिन्द्रं प्रतिमानानि 
देभुः UGH 


866 RGVEDA 


2: Apantamanyustrpalaprabharma dhunih simiva- 
ncharumam rjist. Somo visvanyatasa vanani 
narvagindram pratimanani debhuh. 


Boundless in passion and potential, impetuous 
in action, mighty mover and shaker, awfully powerful, 
strongly armed, simple and natural, creative and 
inspiring like Soma, is Indra. Not all the winds and 
weapons of the world, not all the lights and blazes, no 
measures and comparisons of the finite world, can face, 
equal, much less exceed and overcome Indra. 


न यस्य द्यावापृथिवी न धन्व नान्तरिक्षं नाद्रयः GAT अक्षाः 1 
यद॑स्य मन्युर धिनीयमानः श्रृणाति die रुजति स्थि- 
राणि ।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Na yasya dyavaprthivi na dhanva nantariksam 
nadrayah somo aksah. Yadasya manyuradhini- 
yamanah §$rnati vilu rujati sthirani. 


Neither heaven and earth, nor sky, nor space, 
nor clouds and mountains, equal his might, creative and 
inspiring Soma as he is, especially when his power and 
passion, overwhelming all, shatters the strongest and 
shakes the firmest fixed. 


जघानं वृत्रं स्वधिंतिर्वनैव रुरोज पुरो अर॑दन्न सिन्धून्‌ fart 
गिरिं नवमिन्न कुम्भमा गा इन्द्रो अकृणुत स्वयुग्भिः ॥ ७॥ 
ne Jaghana vrtram svadhitirvaneva ruroja puro 


aradanna sindhun. Bibheda girim navaminna 
kumbhama ga indro akrnuta svayugbhih. 


Destroying the demon of darkness like lightning 
striking the woods, Indra shatters the strongholds of 
evil. He breaks the clouds and mountains like a little 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 89 867 


new earthen jar, and as he sets floods of rivers aflow, so 
with his own waves of divine energy, he lets the streams 
of psychic energy and spiritual enlightenment flow for 
the devotee. 


त्वं ह त्यदंणया इन्द्र धीरोऽ सिर्न od’ वृजिना शणासि। प्र 
ये मित्रस्य वरुणस्य धाम युजं न जना पिनन्ति पित्रम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tvam ha tyadrnaya indra dhiro ’sirna parva 
vrjind srnasi. Pra ye mitrasya varunasya dhama 
yujam na jana minanti mitram. 


You alone are the constant and magnificent giver 
of bliss, and you alone, like the sword severing every 
knot and joint of negativity, destroy the evil and 
crookedness of life for those good people who do not 
violate the light and law of Mitra and Varuna, universal 
spirit of love, friendship and judgement and for those 
who do not ever deceive a real sincere friend of all time. 


प्रयेमित्रप्रार्यमणं दुरेवाः Wah: प्र वरुणं मिनन्ति । 
न्य मित्रेषु वधमिन्द्र तुम्रं वृषन्वृर्षाणमरूषं शिंशीदहि।॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Pra ye mitram pratyamanam durevah pra sam- 
girah pra varunam minanti. Nyamitresu vadha- 
mindra tumram vrsan vrsanamarusam Sisthi. 


And against those crooked men of unholy ways 
who deceive the friend, violate the progressive man of 
justice and rectitude, hurt dedicated men of positive 
social support and oppose the man of judgement and 
enlightenment, O lord of power and progress, Indra, 
prepare the thunderbolt, instant, overwhelming and 
blazing but just and unquestionable, and strike such 
unfriendly and negative forces without delay. 


868 RGVEDA 


इन्द्रो दिव इन्द्रं ईशो पृथिव्या इन्द्रो अपामिन्द्र इत्पर्व arr । 
इन्द्रो वृधामिन्द्र इन्मेधिंराणामिन्द्रः क्षेमे योगे हव्य 
इन्द्रः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. 14 diva indra 75८ prthivya indro apamindra it 
parvatanam. Indro vrdhamindra inmedhir- 
anamindrah kseme yoge havya indrah. 


Indra rules over the heavens, Indra rules over 
the earth, Indra rules over the waters of earth and space, 
Indra rules over mountains and the clouds, and Indra 
rules over all our actions and ambitions. And Indra is 
the spirit and power for the rising wise on way to 
progress in times of peace and prosperity to be invoked 
and worshipped for protection and preservation of what 
has been gained and for the achievement of that what 
has yet to be gained further. (Yoga is achievement, and 
Kshema is preservation and protection of what has been 
achieved, and both these are two aspects of progress.) 


प्राक्तुभ्य इन्द्रः प्र वृधो अर्ह॑भ्यः प्रान्तरिंश्चात्मर संमु्रस्य॑ धासेः | 
प्र वात॑स्य प्रथ॑सः प्र ज्मो अन्तात्प्र सिन्धुभ्यो रिरिचे प्र 
धितिभ्यः ।॥ ९९॥ 


11. Praktubhya indrah pra vrdho ahabyah prantari- 
ksat pra samudrasya dhaseh. Pra vatasya pratha- 
mah pra jmo antat pra sindhubhyo ririce pra 
ksitibhyah. 


Indra is far greater than the nights of existence, 
greater than days, space, and the bounds of space. He 
transcends the expansive currents of energy, the bounds 
of the universe, the flowing flux of existence, and all 
definitions of the flux in form. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 89 869 


प्र शोशुचत्या उषसो न केतुरसिन्वा a वर्ततामिन्द्र हेतिः। 
अश्मेव विध्य दिव आ सुंजानस्तपिंेन हेष॑सा टद्रोघ॑- 
Part ९२॥ 


12. Pra Sosucatya usaso na keturasinva te vartata- 
mindra hetih. ASmeva vidhya diva 4 srjanastapi- 
sthena hesasa droghamitran. 


Like the blazing flames of dawn dispelling the 
dark, let your boundless thunderbolt strike. With that 
blazing thunder, like a shot from heaven pierce the forces 
of hate and enmity. 


अन्वह मासा अन्विदनान्यन्वोष॑धीरनु पर्वतासः । अन्विन्द्रं 
रोद॑सी वावशाने अन्वापो अजिहत जाय॑मानम्‌ ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Anvaha masa anvidvananyanvosadhiranu parva- 
tasah. Anvindram rodasi vavasane anvapo ajihata 
jJayamanam. 

Indeed, days and months, herbs and forests, 
clouds and mountains, shining skies and earth and the 


oceans and vapours of space, all move and proceed in 
accordance with Indra as it emerges into manifestation. 


कर्हि स्वित्सा त॑ इन्द्र चेत्यास॑दघस्य यद्धिनदो tar एष॑त्‌। 
मित्रक्रुवो यच्छसने न गाव॑ः पृथिव्या आपृग॑मुया 
शयन्ते ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Karhi svit sa ta indra cetyasadaghasya yadbhi- 
nado raksa esat. Mitrakruvo yacchasane na gavah 
prthivya aprgamuya Sayante. 


Where is that punitive power of yours, Indra, 
and when does it strike, the power that picks up and 
shatters the sinner, the criminal, and the perpetrator of 


870 RGVEDA 


evil, and struck by which the betrayers of friends, felled 
and dead, lie on the ground like cattle carcasses. 


Baad अभि ये न॑स्ततस्त्रे महि व्राध॑न्त ओगणास इन्द्र | 
अन्धेनापित्रास्तप॑सा सचन्तां सुज्योतिषो अक्तवस्तो अभि 


ष्युः ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Satriyanto abhi ye nastatasre mahi vradhanta 
oganasa indra. Andhenamitrastamasa sacantam 
sujyotiso aktavastam abhi syuh. 


Enemies of humanity, obstructionist forces, 
highly organised gangs which afflict us, may all 
unfriendly forces suffer deep darkness on their way, and 
may the powers of enlightenment and progressive 
culture face them and overcome them. 


पुरूणि हि त्वा सव॑ना जनानां ब्रह्माणि मन्द॑न्गणता- 
मृषीणाम्‌। इमामाघोषन्नव॑सा adhe तिरो विश्वां अर्चतो 
STATE ९६ ॥ 

16. (2 hi tva savana jananam brahmani mandan 
grnatamrsinam. Imamaghosannavasa sahutim 
tiro visvam arcato yahyarvan. 


May all felicitative yajnas of the people and holy 
songs of celebrant seers adore and exalt you. O lord, 
listening to this prayer and invocation, proclaiming your 
acceptance and pleasure, come to all the devotees in 
direct experience and bless them with peace and 
protection. 


एवा ते वयमिन्द्र भुञ्जतीनां feared सुमतीनां नवानाम्‌। 
विद्याम वस्तोरव॑सा गृणन्तो विश्वामित्रा उत तं इन्द्र 
नूनम्‌ ॥ ९७॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 90 871 


17. Evate vayamindra bhunjinam vidyana sumatinam 
navanam. Vidyama vastoravasa grnanto visva- 
mitra uta ta indra nunam. 


Thus may we, O lord omnipotent, Indra, know 
of, experience and enjoy your protective, enlightening 
and ever new gifts of kindness and grace. And may we, 
being friends of the world, singing and celebrating your 
divine gifts, know you and be happy by your favour 
and protection day and night. 


शुनं gan मघवानमिन्द्र मस्मिन्भरे नृत॑मं वाज॑सातौ । 
श्रण्वन्त॑मुग्रमूतयें समत्सु wd वृत्राणि संजितं धना- 
नाम्‌॥ ९८ ॥ 

18. Sunari huvema maghavanamindramasmin bhare 


nrtamam vajasatau. Srnvantamugramutaye 
samatsu ghnantam vrtrani samjitam dhananam. 


We invoke and adore Indra, lord of bliss, 
omnipotent, highest leader and guide of humanity in 
this our battle of life for protection, victory and further 
advancement. Indra is listening, blazing in battles, 
destroying demons of darkness, negativity and 
obstructions, and winning the honours, wealth and 
excellences of the world for humanity. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 90 
Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi 
सहस्त्र॑शीर्षां पुरुषः सहस्त्राक्षः सहस्त्र॑पात्‌ । 
स भूमिं विश्वतो वृत्वात्य॑तिष्ठदशाङ्गुतम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


I. Sahasrasirsa purusah sahasraksah sahasrapdt. 
Sa bhumim visvato vrtvatyatisthaddasangulam. 


872 RGVEDA 


Purusha, the cosmic soul of existence, is 
Divinity personified, of a thousand heads, a thousand 
eyes and a thousand feet. It pervades the universe wholly 
and entirely and, having pervaded and comprehended 
the universe of ten Prakrtic constituents, It transcends 
the world of existence. 


पुरुष एवेदं सर्वं aed यच्च॒ yea 
उतामुं तत्वस्येशानो यदन्नेनातिरोहति ui २॥ 


0.0 Purusa evedam sarvam yadbhutam yacca bha- 
vam. Utamrtatvasyesano yadannenatirohati. 


All this that is and was and shall be is Purusha 
ultimately, sovereign over immortality and ruler of what 
expands by living food. 
एतार्वानस्य महिमातो ज्यार्यौश्च पूरुषः । 
पादोऽ स्य विश्वां भूतानि त्रिपाद॑स्यामृतं दिवि ॥ ३। 

3 Etavanasya mahimato jyayamsca purusah. 
Pado’sya visva bhutani tripadasyamrtam divi. 
So great is the grandeur and glory of It, and still 
the Purusha is greater. The entire worlds of existence 
are but one fourth of It. Three parts of Its mystery are in 
the transcendental heaven of immortality beyond the 
universe. 
त्रिपादूर्ध्व उदैत्पुरुषः पादोऽ स्येहाभंवत्पुन॑ः | 
ततो विष्वङ्‌ व्य॑क्रामत्साशनानशाने अभि॥४॥ 

4. Tripadurdhva udait purusah pado’syehabhavat 
punah. Tato visvan vyakramt sasananasane abhi. 


Three parts higher rises the Purusha above the 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 90 873 


universe in which only one measure of Its glory 
manifests again and again, pervading all the material 
and biological world and thence remains transcendent 
over the universe. 


तस्पाद्धिराव्जायत विराजो अधि पूरुषः। 
स जातो अत्य॑रिच्यत पश्चाद्भूमिमथो पुरः ॥ ५॥ 


5. Tasmadvirdalajayata virajo adhi purusah. 
Sa jato atyaricyata pascadbhumimatho purah. 


From Purusha arose Virat, the cosmic idea, the 
blue-print in terms of Prakrti. The Purusha manifests in 
the Virat and remains sovereign over it. Though 
manifested, it exceeds, transcends and then creates the 
universe and the world regions for forms of existence. 


यत्पुरुषेण gest देवा य॒ज्ञमत॑न्वत | 
वसन्तो अस्यासीदाज्यं ग्रीष्म इध्मः शारद्छविः॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yat purusena havisa deva yajnamatanvata. 
Vasanto asyasidajyam grisma idhmah §Sara- 
ddhavih. 


When the sages visualise the universal yajna of 
creation and enact it in communion with the Purusha in 
meditation, then the spring season is the ghrta, summer 
is the fuel, and winter is the havi. (This meditative 
enactment is in terms of nature. In fact, the creation of 
the universe is an evolutionary process beginning with 
Prakrti evolving into material, biological and psychic 
forms as follows in this very hymn.) 


तं यज्ञं बर्हिषि verges जातमंग्रतः। 
तेन॑ car अयजन्त साध्या ऋषयश्च ये ॥ ७॥ 


874 RGVEDA 


fin Tam yajnam barhisi prauksan purusam jatama- 
gratah. Tena deva ayajanta sadhya rsyasca ye. 


The Rshis of universal vision, sages of universal 
accomplishment and scholars of the Veda, invoke and 
worship the eternal Purusha, self-manifested in advance 
of every thing else of the cosmic yajna. They spread 
and consecrate the grass over the vedi in mind and offer 
the oblations in the cosmic fire with Veda mantras. 


तस्ाद्याजात्संर्वहुतः संभूतं rer | 
पशून्तांश्चक्रे वायव्यानारण्यान्ग्राम्याश्च ये ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Tasmadyajnat sarvahutah sambhratam prsada- 
jJyam. Pasun tamscakre vayavyanaranyan gram- 
yasca ye. 

From that cosmic yajna with total input of 
Prakrti, by the universal Purusha was prepared and 
received the sacred ghrta, living plasma, the universal 
material of creation. He created the animals, all those 
birds of the air, rangers of the forest and inmates of the 
village. 

तस्माद्यज्ात्सर्वहत ऋचः सामानि afar 
छन्दांसि जज्ञिरे तस्माद्यजुस्तस्मादजायत ॥ ९ ॥ 

0. Tasmadyajnat sarvahuta rcah samani jajnire. 
Chandamsi jajnire tasmadyajustasmadajayata. 

From that Lord of universal yajna were born 
the Rks and the Samans. From him were born the 
Chhandas and from him were born the Yajus. 

तस्मादश्वा अजायन्त ये के चोभयाद॑तः। 
गावो ह जज्ञिरे तस्मात्तस्माज्जाता अंजावय॑ः ॥ ९०॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 90 875 


10. Tasmadasva ajayanta ye ke cobhayadatah. 


From that yajna were born the horses and those 
which have two rows of teeth up and down. From that 
were born the cows and from that were born the goat 
and sheep. 


यत्पुरुषं व्यद॑धुः कतिधा व्य॑कल्पयन्‌ | 
tre किम॑स्य कौ बाहू का ऊरू पाद। उच्येते ULV 


11. {वा purusam vyadadhuh katidha vyakalpayan. 
Mukham kimasya kau bahu ka uru pada ucyete. 


How do the Rshis visualise the manifestive 
modes of the Purusha? What was his mouth? What the 
arms? What the thighs? What are the feet as they are 
said to be? 


ब्राह्यणोऽ स्य मुख॑मासीद्वाहू Usa: Ga: | 
ऊरू तद॑स्य यद्विश्य॑ पद्भयां शूद्रो अजायत ॥ ९२॥ 


12. = Brahmano’sya mukhamastdbahu rajanyah kytah. 
Uru tadasya yadvaisyah padbhyam sudro ajayata. 


The Brahmana, man of divine vision and the 
Vedic Word, is the mouth of the Samrat Purusha, the 
human community. Kshatriya, man of justice and polity, 
is created as the arms of defence. The Vaishya, who 
produces food and wealth for the society, is the thighs. 
And the man of sustenance and ancillary support with 
labour is the Shudra who bears the burden of the human 
family as the legs bear the burden of the body. 


चन्द्रमा मन॑सो जातश्चक्षोः सूर्यो stra 
मुखादिन्द्र॑श्चायिश्चं प्राणाद्धायुर॑जायत ॥ ९३॥ 


876 RGVEDA 


13. Candrama manaso jatascaksoh suryo ajayata. 
Mukhadindrascagnisca pranddvayurajayata. 


The moon is born of the cosmic mind, the sun 
is born of the eye, the fire and energy is born from the 
mouth and the wind is born from the breath. 


नाभ्यां आसीदन्तरिक्षं शीर्ष्णो द्यौः सम॑वर्तत । 
पद्यां भूमिर्दिशः श्रोत्रात्तथा ल्लोको अकल्पयन्‌ ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Nabhya asidantariksam sirsno dyauh sama- 
vartata. Padbhyam bhumirdiSsah srotrat tatha 
lokam akalpayan. 


The sky was born of the navel of the cosmic 
Purusha, that is, the sky is the navel part of the universe, 
the heaven of light arose from the head, the earth 
solidified from the dust of the feet, the space quarters 
emanated from the ear, and the other regions of the 
universe similarly arose from the Purusha. 


समपतास्यासन्परिधयस्तिः सप समिधं: Sa: | 
देवा यद्यज्ञं तन्वाना अबध्नन्पुरुषं पशुम्‌ ॥ १५ ॥ 


15. Saptasyasan paridhayastrih sapta samidhah 
krtah. Deva yadyajnam tanvana abadhnan puru- 
sam pasum. 


Seven are the bounds of the vedi of cosmic yajna 
in meditation, thrice seven, twenty one, are the 
samidhas, fuel sticks, ordained and offered into the yajna 
fire. When the sages enact the yajna within, they 
concentrate on the Purusha, the universal observer, 
whose presence they crystallise and fix upon in the soul 
for direct realisation. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 90 877 


Note: In this mantra the word “‘pashu’ does not 
mean ‘animal’ as has been interpreted by certain 
translators. The word ‘pashw’ is derived from the root 
‘pash’ which means ‘to see, to observe’. ‘Pashu’ then 
means ‘one who sees’, and here it means the ‘Purusha, 
cosmic observer’ whose presence is the object of 
concentration in meditation. 


Seven bounds and twenty one samidhas is the 
mystique of meditative yajna of creation which has been 
explained in different ways. Swami Dayanand explains 
it thus in his commentary on Yajurveda, 31, 15: 


Seven bounds are the seven chhandas, metrical 
compositions of Veda mantras such as Gayatri. Twenty 
one samidhas are: Prakrti, potential material cause of 
the universe, Mahat, material cause actualised, 
Ahankara, individualised identity of the universe which 
may also be called the blue print of the universe, five 
subtle elements or tanmatras, five gross elements, five 
senses, and three qualitative orders of the creative 
materials, i.e., Sattva (thought), Rajas (energy) and 
Tamas (matter), and that makes up twenty one. 


In the Introduction to his Commentary on the 
Vedas Swami Dayanand explains the same thing in a 
different and detailed manner in the chapter on creation. 


For an average reader, a simpler way to 
understand is to refer to the seven stages of creative 
evolution: Prakrti, Mahat, Ahankara, Tanmatra, 
perceptive faculties, volition faculties, and gross 
elements. These stages of evolution are the seven bounds 
of creative yajnas performed by Purusha. They are also 
samidhas because each successive evolute arises from 


878 RGVEDA 


yajnic consumption of the preceding one. And each of 
these seven is of three orders of quality, Sattva, Rajas 
and Tamas. That makes it thrice seven. 


Another way to realise the seven boundaries is 
to refer to the seven Vyahrtis: Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svah, 
Mahah, Janah, Tapah and Satyam which are the 
boundaries of each loka or region of existence. 


wart यज्ञम॑यजन्त देवास्तानि धमीणि प्रथमान्यासन्‌ a 
ह नाकं महिमानः सचन्त॒ यत्र पूर्वे साध्याः सन्तिं 
देवाः ॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. Yajnena yajnamayajanta devastani dharmani 
prathamanyasan. Te ha nakam mahimanah 
sacanta yatra purve sadhyah santi devah. 


By that yajna of the mind, and in meditative 
realisation of the cosmic process of evolution, the sages 
worship the master of cosmic yajna and realise the 
eternal and original Dharmas of existence. Blest with 
the light of the divine, they experience that heaven of 
freedom which the primeval sages of the world enjoyed 
at the dawn of creation. 


In objective terms: Divine powers and potentials 
by integration and interaction conduct and accomplish 
the yajna of creation. They are the primary modes of 
the laws and causes of creative evolution which, while 
they wield and realise their potential in evolution, they 
also embody and realise the heavenly purpose, the 
original and efficient cause, the Purusha, and they are 
also the same original and eternal potentials of divinity 
which carry on the eternal cycle of existence. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 91 879 


Mandala 10/Sukta 91 
Agni Devata, Aruna Vaitahavya Rshi 


सं जागृवद्धिर्जर॑माण इध्यते दमे दमूना इषयच्चिव्छस्पदे | 
विश्व॑स्य होता हविषो वरेण्यो विभुर्विभावा सुषख। 
सखीयते ॥ ९ ॥ 


10 Sam jagrvadbhirjaramana idhyate dame damuna 
isayannilaspade. Visvasya hota haviso varenyo 
vibhurvibhava susakha sakhtyate. 


Agni, celebrated by enlightened devotees, is 
kindled and lighted in yajnic halls on the holy ground 
on earth. Generous it is, loving and inspiring, universal 
giver and receiver of yajnic materials and fragrances of 
yajna, loving choice of all, all pervasive, refulgent, and 
an unfailing friend who loves the devotees as friends 
and is honoured by them as a friend. 


स द॑र्शतश्रीरतिंधिर्गृहेगुं हे वनेवने शिश्रिये तक्ववीरिंव | 
जनंजनं जन्यो नाति मन्यते fast आ क्षेति विश्यो 
fasifasr 2 u 


2. Sa darsatasriratithirgrhegrhe vanevane Sisriye 
takvaviriva. Janamjanam janyo nati manyate 
visa a kseti 11510 visamvisam. 

Commanding excellent grace and grandeur, 
honoured like a holy guest, it abides in every home and 
every forest like a flying bird. Lover of humanity, it 
blesses every community, ignores none, scorns none, 
loves every class of people and lives with all classes 
and communities with equal love and favour. 


880 RGVEDA 


सुदक्षो ea: ्रतुंनासि सुक्रतुरये कविः काव्येनासि 
विश्ववित्‌। वसुर्वसूनां क्षयसि त्वमेक इद्‌ द्यावां च यानिं 
प॒थिवी च पुष्य॑तः ॥ २॥ 


3s Sudakso daksaih kratunasi sukraturagne kavih 
kavyenasi visvavit. Vasurvasunam ksayasi 
tvameka id dyava ca yani prthivi ca pusyatah. 


Refulgent Agni, generous with immense gifts, 
noblest performer by holy works, you are the omniscient 
poetic creator evidently by your cosmic poetry of 
existence. You alone dwell in the world as the highest 
Vasu of life shelters and living forms, and you are the 
master of all that the heaven and earth create and sustain. 


प्रजानन्नग्ने तव योनिमृत्वियमिव्ठायास्पदे घृतव॑न्तमासंदः। 
आ ते चिकित्र उषसापिवेत॑योऽ tua: सूर्य॑स्येव 
र॒श्मय॑ः ॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Prajanannagne tava _yonimrtviyamilayaspade 
ghrtavantamasadah. A te cikitra usasamivetayo- 
’repasah suryasyeva rasmayah. 


Agni, lighted and refulgent, come and take your 
holy seat in the vedi prepared and sprinkled with ghrta 
according to the season on the floor of the yajnic earth. 
The light and flames of your arrival shine and appear 
like rise of the dawns, like rays of the sun, pure, 
immaculate, beatific. 


तव fart! वर्ष्यस्येव विद्युतंश्चित्राण्चिंकित्र उषसां न 
edd: | यदोष॑धीर्‌ भिसो वनानि च परिं स्वयं चिनुषे 
अन्नमास्ये i ५॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 91 881 


=) Tava Sriyo varsyasyeva vidyutascitraSscikitra 
usasam na ketavah. Yadosadhirabhisrsto vanani 
ca pari svayam cinuse annamasye. 


Your wonderful lustre and beauties shine like 
lightning flashes of the clouds of rain, like lights of the 
rising dawns, specially when, radiating warm and free, 
you reach and shine upon the herbs and trees and fields 
of grain and receive them into the shining warmth of 
your maturing and ripening radiations. 


तमोषधीर्दधिरे गर्भ॑मृत्वियं carat sth जनयन्त मातरः । 
तमित्समानं वनिनश्च वीरुधो न्तर्व'तीश्च सुव॑ते च 
विश्वहा ।॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Tamosadhirdadhire garbhamrtviyam tamapo 


agnim janayanta matarah. Tamit samanam 
vaninasca virudho’ntarvatisca suvate ca visvaha. 


That Agni, energy, the herbs and waters receive 
into them and they bear it as mothers, producing it on 
maturity as nourishment and energy for life forms. The 
same Agni, the herbs and trees of the forest receive 
equally, hold it in the womb and always produce it as 
the embodiment of energy. 


वातोपधूत इषितो वशां अनुं तृषु यदन्ना afaafgiasea | 
आ ते यतन्ते teats यथा पृथक्छाधींस्यये अजराणि 
धक्च॑तः॥ ७॥ 

a Vatopadhiuta isito vasam anu trsu yadanna vevi- 


sadvitisthase. A te yatante rathyo yatha prthak 
sardhamsyagne ajarani dhaksatah. 


When urged and impelled by wind, Agni, you 


882 RGVEDA 


rush fast to objects of your choice love and consumption, 
then your youthful unaging flames, burning and blazing, 
rush on like the horses of a monarch’s chariot. 


मेधाकारं विदथस्य प्रसाध॑नमिं होतारं ued मतिम्‌। 
तपिदर्भे हविष्या स॑मानपित्तमिन्महे वणते नान्यं त्वत्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Medhakaram vidathasya prasadhanamagnim 
hotaram paribhitamam matim. Tamidarbhe 
havisya samanamit taminmahe vrnate nanyam 
tvat. 


Devotees choose to worship Agni alone, none 
other than Agni, giver of intelligence, accomplisher of 
yajna and education for knowledge, high priest of yajnic 
existence, supreme over all, omniscient wise, and 
equally loving for all, whether the havi offered is small 
or great, whether the purpose is high or low. O lord of 
light, they choose none other than you. 


त्वामिदत्र॑ वृणते त्वायवो होतारमगे विदथेषु aera: | 
यदैवयन्तो दध॑ति प्रयांसि ते हविष्मन्तो मन॑वो वृक्त- 
बर्हिषः ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Tvamidatra vrnate tvayavo hotaramagne vida- 
thesu vedhasah. Yaddevayanto dadhati prayamsi 
te havismanto manavo vrktabarhisah. 


Agni, here in the world, your loving devotees, 
wise sages, thoughtful people, choose to worship you, 
high priest of yajna, when dedicated to divinity and the 
divine potentials of nature, having spread the holy grass 
on the vedi and bearing sacred havi, they offer their 
dearest fragrant oblations to you. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 91 883 


Tale होत्रं तव॑ पोत्रमृत्वियं तवं नेष्टं त्वमथिदतायतः। तवं 
प्रशास्त्रं त्वम॑ध्वरीयसि ब्रह्मा चासिं गृहप॑तिश्च नो दमे ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Tavagne hotram tava potramrtviyam tava 
nestram tvamagnidrtayatah. Tava prasasram 
tvamadhvariyasi brahma casi grhapatisca no 
dame. 


Agni, you are the over all master and lord of 
yajna, yours are all the functions: you are the yajaka, 
you are the purifier, you are the leader, you are the 
kindler, you are the director, you are the manager, you 
are the Brahma, presiding priest, and you are the chief 
of our yajnic home. 


यस्तुभ्य॑मग्ने अमृताय मर्त्य॑: समिधा दाशदुत at हविष्करति। 
तस्य होता भवसि यासि दूत्य मुप॑ ब्रूषे यजंस्यधरी- 
यसि neu 


11. Yastubhyamagne amrtaya martyah samidha 
dasaduta va haviskrti. Tasya hota bhavasi yasi 
dutyamupa bruse yajasyadhvariyasi. 


Agni, whoever the mortal that gives unto you, 
Spirit imperishable, Lord immortal, and surrenders 
himself by way of fuel fire, dedicates his total life as 
yajnic performance, you yourself become the yajaka for 
him, move as his messenger, speak to him in the soul, 
and take over his life itself as manager of the yajna. 
(Surrender, O man, to the Immortal for the sake of 
immortality.) 


इमा अस्मै मतयो वाचों अस्मदा ऋचो गिर॑ः सुष्टुतयः 
सम॑ग्मत । वसूयवो वसंवे जातवेदसे वृन्धासु चिदधर्धनो यासु 
चाकनंत्‌॥ ९२॥ 


884 RGVEDA 


12. Ima asmai matayo vaco asmadam rco girah 
sustutayah samagmata. Vasuyavo vasave jdata- 
vedase vrddhasu cidvardhano yasu cakanat. 


May all these thoughts, words, Rks, holy voices 
and songs of adoration, prayers for peace, prosperity 
and fulfilment reach this Agni, omniscient, omnipresent 
and ultimate haven of all that exists, the lord that waxes 
with love and exaltation when these rise and reach him. 


इमां vera सुष्टुतिं नवीयसीं areca उशते श्रुणोतु 
नः। भूया अन्त॑रा हृदय॑स्य निस्पृशे जायेव पत्य॑ उशती 
सुवासाः ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Imam pratnaya sustutim naviyasim voceyamasma 
usate srntotu nah. Bhuya antara hrdyasya nisprse 
jayeva patya usati suvasah. 


Let me raise this new holy song of praise to the 
loving and gracious eternal Agni. May the Lord listen. 
And let it be like an inspiring creative poem full of love 
and passion in a beautiful form for the master, able to 
touch and move his heart within to bless me. 


यस्मिन्नश्वास ऋषभास उक्षणो वशा मेषा अवसृष्टास 
आहताः | कीलालपे सोम॑पृष्ठाय aera हृदा मतिं ज॑नये 
चारुमग्नये ।॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Yasminnasvasa rsabhasa uksano vasa mesa 
avasrstasa ahutah. Kilalape somaprsthaya 
vedhase hrda matim janaye carumagnaye. 


With love and devotion at heart I create this song 
of thoughtful praise for the kind and gracious Agni under 
whose order and dispensation horses, virile bulls, cows, 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 92 885 


sheep and goats are created and range around freely 
and then are called back to the stalls. 


अहाव्यग्ने हविरास्ये ते स्रुचीव घृतं चम्वीव सोमं: । वाजसनिं! 
रयिमस्मे सुवीरं प्रशस्तं धेहि यशसं Gert ९५ ॥ 


15. Ahavyagne havirasye te sruciva ghrtam camviva 
somah. Vajasanim rayimasme suviram prasastam 
dhehi yasasam brhantam. 


Agni, fragrant havi is offered into the sacred 
fire as ghrta in the ladle and soma in the cup. Pray bear 
and bring us rising prosperity with food, sustenance and 
victory, wealth, noble progeny, and honour and glory 
of the noblest order. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 92 
Vishvedevah Devatah, Sharyata Manava Rshi 


यज्ञस्य॑ वो रथ्यं विरुपतिं'विशां होर्तारमक्तोरतिंधिं विभा- 
व॑सुम्‌। शोचज्चछुष्कांसु हरिणीषु जर्भुर द्‌ वृषां केतुर्यजतो 
द्याम॑शायत ॥ ९॥ 


॥. Yajnasya vo rathyam vispatim visam hotarama- 
ktoratithim vibhavasum. Socanchuskasu harinisu 
jarbhurad vrsa keturyajato dyamasayat. 


Honour and adore Agni, leader of your life’s 
yajna, ruler and sustainer of communities of the people, 
pioneer and chief priest of the universe, useful giver of 
the peace of night, and spectrum light of the world. 
Generous and virile, brilliant illuminator, worthy of 
honour and adoration, burning the dry woods and 
vibrating in the greens it pervades every thing on earth 
and reposes in the regions of light. 


886 RGVEDA 


इममञ्जस्पामुभये अकृण्वत धर्माण॑मभिं विदथस्य arel- 
नम्‌। अक्तु न यह्वमुषसः पुरोहितं तनूनपातमरुषस्य 
निंसते ॥ २॥ 


2. Imamanjaspamubhaye akrnvata dharmanama- 
gnim vidathasya sadhanam. Aktum na yahvamu- 
sasah purohitam tanunapatamarusasya nimsate. 


Both humans and divines honour and adore this 
Agni, by nature energising life constantly, sustainer of 
the world and its dharma, accomplisher of yajna. They 
love and adore it like the mighty sun, harbinger of the 
dawn and child inviolable of the blazing cosmic energy. 


wees नीथा वि पणेश्च मन्महे वया ster wear 
आसुरत्त॑वे । यदा घोरासो अमूतत्वमाशतादिज्जनस्य दैव्य॑स्य 
चर्किरन्‌ ॥ ३॥ 


Balasya nitha vi panesca manmahe vaya asya 
prahuta asurattave. Yada ghoraso amrtatvamasa- 
tadijjanasya daivyasya carkiran. 


Truly do we love and adore the various gifts of 
this Agni. May the food, energy and sustenance, all with 
light divine, blessed gifts, be good for consumption and 
advancement. Indeed, when relentless devotees come 
to realise the imperishable joy and freedom of 
immortality, then are the gifts of this divine Agni truly 
realised in actuality. 


ऋतस्य हि प्रसिंतिर्द्यौरूरु व्यचो नमो मह्य श्रम॑तिः पनीयसी । 
इन्द्रो मित्रो वरुणः सं चिंक्ित्रिरेऽथो भग॑ः सविता 
पूतद॑श्चसः ॥ ४ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 92 887 


4. Rtasya hi prasitirdyaururu vyaco namo mahyara- 
matih paniyast. Indro mitro varunah sam 
cikitrire’tho bhagah savita putadaksasah. 


All this existence is an extension, a web, of 
nature and her law under the ordinance of Agni: the 
heavens of light, the vast skies, adorable earth, 
expansive space, all are but fragrant manifestations of 
Agni, the cosmic high priest. Mitra, the sun, Varuna, 
the night, Bhaga, cosmic power, Savita, cosmic 
creativity, all reveal the omnipotence of the generous 
lord of light and purity that gives everything in plenty. 
They all do homage to Agni. 


प्र रुद्रेण ययिना यन्ति सिन्ध॑वस्तिरो महीमरमतिं दधम्िरे। 
येभिः परिज्मा परियन्नुरु wat वि रोरुवज्जठरे विश्व॑ - 
Ward uy ul 


क Pra rudrena yayina yanti sindhavastiro mahima- 
ramatim dadhanvire. Yebhih parijma pariya- 
nnuru jrayo vi roruvajjathare visvamuksate. 


Showers of rain and floods of rivers which cover 
the earth move by the tempestuous currents of cosmic 
energy of the Maruts, and by the same currents the vast 
ocean of vapours far traversing across the middle 
regions roars in the womb of skies and showers and 
fertilises the world of life. 


क्राणा रुद्रा Heal विश्वकुष्टयो fea: श्येनासो असुरस्य 
ated: | तेभिश्चष्टे वरूणो मित्रो अयमिन्द्रो देवेभिरर्व- 
शोभिरर्व॑शाः।॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Krana rudra maruto visvakrstayo divah syenaso 


asurasya nilayah. Tebhiscaste varuno mitro 
aryamendro devebhirarvaSsebhirarvasah. 


888 RGVEDA 


Active currents of the cosmic energy of the 
Maruts, dwelling all over the universe, move from the 
regions of the sun as directed companions of the ocean 
of vapours, and along with those dynamic currents are 
seen the dynamic Varuna, Mitra, Aryama and Indra, 
forces of nature’s catalysis, integration, direction and 
motive energy. 


इन्द्रे भुजं शणरमानासं आत सूरो Bile वृष॑णश्च पौस्यें। 
प्र ये denen ada युजं ast नुषद॑नेषु कारवः ।॥ ७॥ 


a, Indre bhujam Sasamanasa asata suro drsike vrsa- 
nasca paumsye. Pra ye nyasyarhana tataksire 
yujam vajram nrsadanesu karavah. 


Indra, cosmic energy, is self-potent, creative and 
immensely fertile. In Indra, in its splendid self- 
manifestive power to be observed and pursued with the 
mind, they find possibilities of human profit, and they, 
creative and competent craftsmen in elite human 
institutions, invent usable instruments of power, 
prosperity and protection. 


wae हरितो अस्य रीरमदिन्द्रादा कण्चिंद्धयते 
तवीयसः । भीमस्य वृष्णो जठरादभिश्वसो दिवेदिवे सहुरिः 
स्तन्नबाधितः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Surascida harito asya riramadindrada kascidbha- 
yate taviyasah. Bhimasya vrsno jatharadabhi- 
svaso divedive suhurih stannabadhitah. 


Even the sun radiates its rays of light under the 
power and law of Indra, supreme omnipotent. Every 
powerful force obeys the law and power of Indra. Under 
the power of fertile and potent Indra, the whistling winds 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 92 889 


blow from its vault and the mighty cloud roars without 
obstruction day by day. 


स्तोमं at अद्य रुद्राय शिक्व॑से ्चयद्वीराय नम॑सा दिदिष्टन । 
येभिः शिवः स्ववां एवयाव॑भिर्द्वः सिष॑क्ति स्वय॑शा 
निकामभिः॥ ९॥ 


9. Stomam vo adya rudraya 576145८ ksayadviraya 
namasa didistana. Yebhih sivah svavam evayava- 
bhihrdivah sisakti svayasa nikamabhih. 


Offer now a song of praise and adoration with 
homage to Rudra, mighty lord of justice and 
dispensation, leader, protector and ruler of the brave, 
self-existent, self-glorious, lover of peace and well 
being, commanding bright power and forces moving 
on their ordered course by which he blesses loving 
devotees with the fulfilment of their cherished desires. 


ते हि प्रजाया अभरन्त वि श्रवो बृहस्पतिर्वृषभः सोम॑- 
जामयः | यज्ञैरथर्वा प्रथमो वि धारयदहेवा दक्चैर्भग॑वः सं 
चिकित्रिरे ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Te hi prajaya abharanta vi 57८10 brhaspatirvr- 
sabhah somajamayah. Yajnairatharva prathamo 
vi dharayaddeva daksairbhrgavah sam cikitrire. 


They for sure hold and know the evolution of 
life, birth of divinity’s children: Brhaspati, lord of Prakrti 
and the Word of knowledge, Vrshabha, generator of the 
seed of life in the form of Hiranyagarbha, and the Soma 
currents of vitality which bear the seeds in life form. 
These, first Atharvan holds in knowledge and 
disseminates in form and word by processes of yajna, 
and later, the divine Bhrgus, sages of knowledge and 


890 RGVEDA 


austere discipline, acquire the knowledge by tradition 
and their own expertise. 


ते हि द्यावापृथिवी भूरिरेतसा नराशंसणश्चतुरद्खो यमोऽ- 
दितिः । देवस्त्वष्टा द्रविणोदा ऋभुक्षणः प्र रोदसी मरुतो 
विष्णरर्हिरे॥ ९९॥ 


11. Te hi dyavaprthivi bhuriretasa narasamsascatu- 
rango yamo’ditih. Devastvasta dravinoda rbhu- 
ksanah pra rodasi maruto visnurarhire. 


These for sure are the divinities which contribute 
to the evolution and flow of life : the solar region and 
the earth both replete with life and fertility, the middle 
region which overflows with electric energy, air, vapour, 
and elements of nourishment, evolutionary law in its 
course, imperishable mother nature, divine Tvashta 
which is the formative power immensely generous and 
keen to structure the forms, pranic energy, wind energy, 
and Vishnu, divine power of sustenance. These are 
powers worthy of our gratitude, reverence and worship. 


उत स्य न॑ उशिजामुर्विया कविरहिः श्रुणोतु बुध्न्यो डे 
हवीमनि । सूर्यामासा विचरन्ता दिविद्धितां धिया shires 
अस्य बोधतम्‌॥ ९२॥ 


12. Uta कव व usijamurviya kavirahih srnotu budh- 
nyo havimani. Suryamasa vicaranta diviksita 
dhiya saminahusi asya bodhatam. 


And may that Ahirbudhnya, omnipresent, 
omniscient and all watching lord of expansive Prakrti, 
listen to our profuse prayer and adoration offered in 
our yajna with unbounded love and faith. And may the 
sun and moon, both stationed in heaven and moving in 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 92 891 


space, acknowledge our homage with their sensitive 
natural perception, and may the heaven and earth too 
acknowledge our homage. 


प्र न॑ः get चरथं fasadetsat नर्पादवतु araksa 
आत्मानं वस्यो अभि वात॑मर्चत॒ तद॑श्विना सुहवा याम॑नि 
श्रुतम्‌ ॥ ९३ ॥ 

13. Pra nah pusa caratham visvadevyo’pam napa- 
davatu vayuristaye. Atmanam vasyo abhi vata- 
marcata tadasvina suhava yamani Srutam. 


And may Pusha, divine spirit of nature’s 
nourishment, protect and promote our living and moving 
wealth. May the life-giving Vayu energy, sustainer of 
life’s vitality, and all natural divinities protect and 
promote us to achieve our cherished desires for well 
being. O dedicated celebrants of divinity, honour and 
adore the glorious spiritual energy within the soul, and 
may the Ashvins, complementary currents of natural life 
energy in yajnic touch with us, perceive our earnestness 
on way and bring us blessings of divinity. 


विशामासामभ॑यानामधिक्षितं गीर्भिरु स्वय॑शसं गृणीमसि । 
य्राभिर्विंश्वांभिरदिंतिमनर्वणीमक्तोर्युवानं नृमणा अधा 
पतिम्‌ ९४॥ 


14. Visamasamabhayanamadhiksitam girbhiru 
svyasasam grnimasi. Gnabhirvisvabhiraditi- 
manarvanamaktoryuvanam nrmana adha patim. 


With songs of praise we celebrate Agni, ruling 
divine power abiding at heart among these fearless 
people, the divinity glorious by its own actions. Along 
with all the world’s divine powers of nature and 


892 RGVEDA 


humanity, we also praise Aditi, imperishable Prakrti, 
the moon, youthful ruler of the night, and the self- 
existent, self-refulgent sun, gracious life giver of the 
people. 


रेभदत्र जनुषा पूर्वो अङ्धिरा orator ऊर्ध्वां अभि चक्षुरध्वरम्‌। 
येभिर्विहाया अभ॑वद्विचक्चणः पाथ॑ः सुमेकं स्वधिंतिर्वं- 
न॑न्वति ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Rebhadatra janusa purvo angira gravana urdhva 
abhi caksuradhvaram. Yebhirvihaya abhavadvi- 
caksanah pathah sumekam svadhitirvananvati. 


By birth, the first and foremost sage Angira sings 
the song of divinity, the soma makers look up and watch 
the process of divine creation and all those powers by 
which the all watching creator waxes great and his 
omnipotence creates and provides the highest kind of 
food for humanity for the journey ahead. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 93 
Vishvedevah Devatah, Tanva Parthya Rshi 


महिं द्यावापृथिवी भूतमुर्वी नारीं यही न रोद॑सी सदं नः। 
तेभिर्नः पातं सह्य॑स एभिर्न: पातं शूषणि। ।॥ ९ ॥ 


93. Mahi dyavaprthivi bhiutamurvi nari yahvi na 
rodasi sadam nah. Tebhirnah patam sahyasa 
ebhirnah patam Susani. 


May the great earth and high heaven be vaster 
and greater, and always waxing and rising for us, may 
they like mothers help us rise and grow. May they, 
stronger and more prosperous, promote us by those 
heavenly gifts of light and rain. May they, ever stronger, 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 93 893 


amiable, procreative and productive, help us grow with 
these gifts of rain and food. 


यज्ञेयज्ञे स मर्त्यो देवान्त्संपर्यति। 
यः सुम्नैदीं घश्ुत्तम आविवांसात्येनान्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Yajneyajne sa martyo damvantsaparyati. 
Yah sumnairdirghasruttama avivasdatyenan. 


That mortal man serves and augments the 
divinities who, risen in knowledge and wisdom by 
reading and listening to the utmost, serves them in every 
yajnic programme with holy works of cleansing and 
replenishment to be creative and productive more and 
more. 


विश्वेषामिरज्यवो देवानां वार्महः | 
विश्वे हि विशुवमंहसो विश्वे यज्ञेषुं यज्जियाः ॥ ३ ॥ 
Visvesamirajyavo devanam varmahah. 
Visve hi visvamahaso 1751८ yajnesu yajniyah. 
O masters of the world, great is the glory of the 


divinities. All of them command universal majesty, all 
of them are adorable in yajnic congregations. 


Tare अमृत॑स्य मन्द्रा अर्यमा पित्रो वरुणः परिज्मा। 
HSA नृणां स्तुतो मरुतः पूषणो भगं ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Te gha rajano amrtasya mandra aryama mitro 
varunah parijma. Kadrudro nrnam stuto marutah 
pusano bhagah. 

They are lights of immortality, happy and 


joyous, harbingers of well being to humanity: Aryama, 
spirit of justice and rectitude in conduct, Mitra, divine 


894 RGVEDA 


love, friendship and unity, Varuna, spirit of judgement 
and choice, Parijma, all moving air, Rudra, destroyer of 
suffering, Maruts, cosmic currents of energy, Pushana, 
energy and nourishment for growth, Bhaga, spirit of 
divine glory and human power and prosperity. Everyone 
of them is valued, loved and respected by humanity. 


उत नो नक्तमपां वुंषण्वसू सूर्यामासा सदनाय सधन्या | 
सचा यत्साद्येषामहिर्बध्नेषु aera: ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Uta no naktamapam vrsanvasu suryamasa 
sadanaya sadhanya. Saca yat sadyesamahir- 
budhnesu budhnyah. 


And those harbingers of rain and wealth, the 
Ashvins, the sun and moon, auspicious givers of wealth 
for the home, the clouds of vapour floating in the skies 
and their auxiliaries which abide in nature, may all these 
be friendly and bless us with wealth and joy day and 
night. 


sa नों देवावश्विना शुभस्पती धाम॑भिरर्मिंत्रावरुणा 
उरुष्यताम्‌ पहः स राय wads ति धन्वेव दुरिता ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Uta no devavasvina subhaspati dhamabhir-mitra- 
varuna urusyatam. Mahah sa raya esate’ ti dhan- 
veva durita. 


And may the divine Ashvins, complementary 
currents of natural energy, Mitra and Varuna, prana and 
udana energies of the body system vibrating in nature, 
protect and promote us. One whom they protect and 
promote rises great in wealth, rules it as the master and 
crosses over all evils with a single leap. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 93 895 


उत नो eat चिन्मृव्छतामण्विना विश्वे देवासो रथस्पतिर्भगः | 
ऋभुर्वाज ऋभुक्षणः परिज्मा विश्ववेदसः ॥ ७॥ 


des Uta no rudra cinmrlatamasvina visve devaso 
rathaspatirbhagah. Rbhurvaja rbhuksanah 
parijma visvavedasah. 


And may the health giving Rudra pranas, the 
Ashvins, prana and apana energies, all brilliant holy men 
of the world, Bhaga, spirit of honour, power and 
prosperity of life, the presiding power of the chariot of 
human life for the individual and society, Rbhu, the wise 
sage of creative expertise, Vaja, commander of strength 
and progressive advancement, Rbhuksha, skilful 
technician, all moving wind energy, and managers of 
the world’s wealth be kind and good for our welfare. 


ऋभुऋशभुश्चा ऋभूर्विधतो मद आ ते हरी yaar 
वाजिनं । दुष्टरं यस्य साम॑ चिदुधंग्यज्ञो न मानुषः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Rbhurrbhuksa rbhurvidhato mada 4 te hari 
jJujuvanasya vajina. Dustaram yasya sama 
cidrdhagyajno na manusah. 


Great is Indra, cosmic energy, great is the joy of 
the creator of cosmic energy. O mighty lord of cosmic 
energy, great are the complementary currents of your 
energy circuit. Grand, not easy, is the knowledge and 
articulation of the divine energy of nature, and its 
management too at the human level as yajnic process is 
not easy. 


Het नो अह्यो देव सवितः स च॑ स्तुषे मघोनाम्‌। सदो न 
इन्द्रो वदहिथिर्न्येषां चर्षणीनां चक्र रश्मिं न योंयुवे॥ ९ ॥ 


896 RGVEDA 


9. Krdhi no ahrayo deva savitah sa ca stuse magho- 
nam. Saho na indro vahnibhirnyesam carsaninam 
cakram rasmim na yoyuve. 


Savita, O lord of light and life’s creativity, 
admired and exalted by the strong and powerful, pray 
make us bold and self-confident, let us never be 
subjected to shame and ignominy. Indra, lord of power, 
controls and directs the power and wisdom of these 
people of the earth with psychic currents of pranic 
energies as a driver controls and directs the movement 
of the chariot by reins and the wheels. 


एेषु द्यावापृथिवी धातं महदस्मे वीरेषुं विश्वचर्षणि sre: । 
पृक्चं वाजस्य सातये gat रायोत तुर्वणे ॥ ९०॥ 


10. 4747 dyavaprthivi dhatam mahadasme viresu 
visvacarsani Sravah. Prksam vajasya sataye pr- 
ksam rayota turvane. 


O earth and heaven, mother and father of 
humanity, pray vest high honour and fame of universal 
human order in these brave heroes. Exalt them with food 
and energy, honour and enthusiasm, and wealth and 
excellence for the achievement of victory and conquest 
over evil forces. 


एतं शंस॑मिन्द्रास्पयुष्ट्रं कुचित्सन्तं सहसावन्नभिष्टये सद। 
पाह्यभिष्टये | मेदतां वेदतां वसो ॥ ९९॥ 
11. Etam samsamindrasmayustvam kucit santam 


sahasavannabhistaye sada pahyabhistaye. 
Medatam vedata vaso. 


Indra, lord omnipotent, you are our father, 
mother, protector and all, pray accept this celebrant all 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 93 897 


time wherever he be, protect him for his good, promote 
him for his cherished happiness and well being. Pray 
take on the seeker, enlighten the lover, save me, O shelter 
home of the world. 


एतं मे स्तोमं तना न सूर्ये दयुतद्यामानं वावृधन्त नुणाम्‌। 
संवननं नाश्व्यं तष्टे वान॑पच्युतम्‌॥ ९२॥ 


12. Etam me stomam tana na surye dyutadyamanam 
vavrdhanta nrnam. Samvananam nasvyam taste- 
vanapacyutam. 


May the singers of divinity and celebrants of 
humanity exalt and extend this my song of divine 
adoration and united human celebration like radiant rays 
of the sun spreading light or a craftsman launching an 
infallible automotive fast chariot on boundless ways. 


arad येषां राया युक्तैषां हिर ण्ययीं । 
नेमधिता न पौंस्या वृथेव विष्टान्ता ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Vavarta yesam raya yuktaisam hiranyayl. 
Nemadhita na paumsya vrtheva vistanta. 


The prayer of devotees whose words are replete 
with the wealth of conscience and sincerity naturally 
and spontaneously bears the golden fruit of divine love 
and salvation, just as the heroic exploits of warriors in 
battle, united and directed to the same one end, lead to 
victory and never go waste. 


प्र तदुःशीमे पृथ॑वाने वेने प्र रामे वोचमसुंरे मघवंत्सु । 
ये युक्त्वाय usd शतास्मयु. पथा विश्राव्यषाम्‌॥ ९४ it 


14. Pra tadduhsime prthavane vene pra rame 
vocamasure maghavatsu. Ye yuktvaya panca sata- 
smayu patha visravyesam. 


898 RGVEDA 


To the restless, celebrated, emotional, sensual, 
exuberant and powerful, let me speak of that knowledge 
and wisdom which is heard of these our well wishers of 
humanity who control and direct five hundred 
fluctuations of their mind by meditation to peace and 
divinity. (That is the path of living, knowing and 
speaking.) 


अधील््वत्र सप्तिं च॑ wa oi सद्यो दिदिष्ट ard: सद्यो 
दिदिष्ट पार्थ्यः सद्यो दिदिष्ट मायवः ।॥ ९५॥ 


15. Adhinnvatra saptatim ca sapta ca. Sadyo didista 
tanvah sadyo didista parthyah sayo didista 
mayavah. 

Here in the matter of body and mind, divine 
nature gives and simultaneously orders and controls 


seventy seven nerves of the body, seventy seven bone 
structures, and seventy seven articulatory functions. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 94 
Gravana Devata, Arbuda Sarpa Kadraveya Rshi 


Ue व॑दन्तु प्र वयं व॑दाम ग्राव॑भ्यो वाचं वदता aaa: | 
यद॑द्रयः पर्वताः साकमाशवः शत्ोकं घोषं भरथेन्द्राय 
सोमिनः ॥ ९॥ 


॥ Praite vadantu pra vadama gravabhyo vacam 
vadata vadadbhyah. Yadadrayah parvata 
sakamasavah slokam ghosam bharathendraya 
sominah. 


Let these veteran sages speak, let us also speak 
the Word from the sages who speak for us. You too, O 
yajakas, speak the Word when the sages of eminent 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 94 899 


standing, bearers of soma, together passionately offer 
the words of divine praise to Indra. 


एते व॑दन्ति शतव॑त्सहस्त्र॑वद्भि क्रन्दन्ति हरितेभिरासभिः 1 
विष्ट्वी orator: सुकृतं: सुकृत्यया होतुश्चित्पूर्वे हविरद्य॑ 
मारत ॥ २॥ 


2 Ete vadanti Satavat sahasravadabhi krandanti 
haritebhirasabhih. Vistvi gravanah sukratah 
sukratyaya hotuscit purve haviradyamdSata. 


The sages speak as they do to hundreds and 
thousands, and proclaim the Word loud and bold with 
resounding voice. Eloquent sages of long standing, 
noble performers, sitting on the vedi, speak with noble 
tongue in sacred language and partake of the yajnic 
hospitality of the yajamana. 


एते व॑दन्त्यविंदन्नना मधु न्यूंङ्खयन्ते अधिं पक्व आमिरंषि। 
वृक्षस्य शाखामरुणस्य बप्स॑तस्ते Guat वृषभाः प्रेम॑रा- 
विषुः ॥ ३ ॥ 

Ete vadantyavidannana madhu nyunkhayante 
adhi pakva amisi. Vrksasya Ssakhamarunasya 
bapsataste subharva vrsabhah premaravisuh. 

They speak only when they know the subject 
by experience, having tasted with relish the honey 
sweets of the juice in the ripe fruit. Enjoying the fruit of 
life on the bright branch of the tree of existence they, 
mighty wise, bearing the knowledge by experience in 
the mind, speak the word of wisdom and reveal the truth. 


aqeeatea मदिरेण मन्दिनेन्द्रं क्रोशन्तोऽ विदन्नना Fel | 
संरभ्या धीराः स्वसरंभिरनर्तिषुराघोषयन्तः परथिवी - 
पल्दिभिंः ॥ ४ ॥ 


900 RGVEDA 


4. Brhadvadanti madirena mandinendre kro- 
santo ’vidannana madhu. Samrabhya dhirah sva- 
srbhiranartisuraghosyantah prthivimupabdibhih. 


They speak wide and bold, exalt Indra with joy 
in words of ecstasy, tasting, knowing and proclaiming 
sweets of honey by music of the tongue. Having 
experienced and enjoyed the taste of sweetness 
repeatedly, the veterans express the ecstasy in dance 
with gestures, movements and expressions, the earth 
resounding with the music of their joy. 


सु पर्णा वाचमक्रतोप द्यव्याखरे कृष्णा इषिरा अनर्तिषुः | 
न्य ङ्नि यन्त्युप॑रस्य निष्कृतं पुरू रेतों दधिरे सूर्य 
fad: ॥ ५॥ 


Suparna vacamakratopa dyavyakhare krsna isira 
anartisuh. Nyanni yantyuparasya niskrtam 
puri reto dadhire suryasvlitah. 

Birds of imagination fly up to the bounds of 
heaven and raise their voice of adoration, vibrant clouds 
dance in the deepest caverns of space and celebrate their 
joy, the spirits distil the ecstasy of highest realisation 
and, pure and radiant as sunlight, receive profuse 
showers of immortal life. 


उग्राइव Wada: समाय॑मुः साकं युक्ता वृष॑णो बिभ्र॑तो 
et: । यच्छ सन्तो जग्रसाना अराविषुः श्वृण्व एषां प्रोथथो 
अर्वतामिव ॥ ६॥ ति 

6. Ugra iva pravahantah samayamuh sakam yukta 
vrsano bibhrato dhurah. Yacchvasanto jagrasana 
aravisuh S$rnva esam prothatho arvatamiva. 


Like virile bulls yoked together bearing the 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 94 901 


chariot pole and drawing the chariot forward, they, 
inspired and mighty enthusiastic, lead humanity 
forward. Breathing, panting, happily accepting all 
pleasure and pain of social experience, they go on 
proclaiming their message, and the echoes of their 
proclamation is heard like the breathing of victorious 
race horses. 


दशावनिभ्यो दर्शकश्ष्येभ्यो दरशयोक्त्रेभ्यो दरयोजनेभ्यः। 
दशश।भीशुभ्यो अर्चताजरेभ्यो दश धुरो दश॑ युक्ता 
Geet: ॥ ७॥ 


7. Dasavanibhyo dasakaksyebhyo dasayoktrebhyo 
dasayojanebhyah. Dasabhisubhyo arcataja- 
rebhyo dasa dhuro dasa yukta vahabdbyah. 


Honour those who work at ten levels of earthly 
life and create the soma joy of existence, ten equal 
cooperators like the ten fingers, ten equal cooperative 
faculties such as the senses, ten possible cooperatives 
such as energies of passion and understanding, ten 
partners such as the pranic energies, ten dynamic forces 
such as will and determination, ten unaging ones such 
as desires and ambitions, ten burden bearers joined to 
carry on the tenfold business of living such as the rules 
of personal and social discipline. 


ते अद्र॑यो दश॑यन्त्रास आशवस्तेषामाधानं पर्येति हर्यतम्‌। 
त ऊ सुतस्य॑ सोम्यस्यान्ध॑सोंऽ शोः पीयूषं प्रथमस्य 
भेजिरे ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Te adrayo dasayantrasa asavastesamadhanam 


paryeti haryatam. Ta u sutasya somyasyandha- 
som’ soh ptyusam prathamasya bhejire. 


902 RGVEDA 


They are the sages and scholars strong as 
adamant, high as mountains, roaring as clouds, working 
with tenfold discipline and freedom of mind, fast and 
instant workers and thinkers whose total energy and 
attention is concentrated on the one central end and aim 
of life: the creation of joy. And they alone share and 
enjoy the first, original and immortal nectar sweet of 
the blissful energy and ecstasy of life created and refined 
by sages. 


ते सोमादो हरी इन्द्र॑स्य Prods शं दुहन्तो अध्यासते गवि । 
तेभिरदुग्धं प॑पिवान्त्सोम्यं मध्िन्द्रो वर्धते प्रथ॑ते वृषायते ॥ ९ ॥ 


0. Te somado hari indrasya nimsatem’ sum duhanto 
adhyasate gavi. Tebhirdugdham papivantsomyam 
madhvindro vardhate prathate vrsayte. 


They, tasting of soma joy, attain to both 
knowledge and action toward both secular and sacred 
aims of life under divine dispensation and, distilling 
the joy of life, abide confident in the state of yoga on 
the earth and then on higher planes as well. Indra, the 
soul, drinking of the honey sweet milk of divine ecstasy, 
rises, expands and expresses itself in showers of creative 
joy and positive activity. 
तृषां वो अंशुर्न fot रिषाथनेव्छवन्तः सदपित्स्थनार्शिं ताः | 
रैवत्येव मह॑सा चार॑वः स्थन यस्य॑ ग्रावाणो अजुंषध्व- 
AeA I ९०॥ 

10. Vrsa vo amsurna kila risathanelavantah sadamit 


sthanasitah. Raivatyeva mahasa caravah sthana 
yasya gravano ajusadhvamadhvaram. 


O lovers and creators of soma, strong, generous 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 94 903 


and inexhaustible is your soma of joy. You would never 
be hurt or violated. Blest with food, energy and 
enlightenment, live ever satisfied and happy. O sages, 
abide in life as great and brilliant as with the spirit of 
the wealth, honour and excellence of life. The stalk of 
your joy whose yajna you live by is deep, eternal and 
immortal. 


Gfacn अतुंदित्तासो अद्रयोऽश्रमणा अशृधिता अमूंत्यवः। 
अनातुरा अजराः स्थाम॑विष्णवः सुपीवसो sid fear 
अतुंष्णजः॥ ९९॥ 


11. Trdila atrdilaso adrayo’sramanaa asrthita amr- 
tyavah. Anatura ajarah sthamavisnavah supi-vaso 
atrsita atrsnajah. 


O revered sages, be ever relentless, inviolable, 
destroyers of evil, indefatigable, immortal, unafflicted, 
unaging, steadfast and dynamic, strong and healthy, 
uninhibited and unfrustrated, and free from greed. 


garva व॑ः पितरों aaa श्चेम॑कामासः सद॑सो न asata | 
अजुर्यासिो' हरिषाचो हरिद्रव आ द्यां रवेण पृथिवीम॑श्‌- 
श्रवुः ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Dhrva eva vah pitaro yugeyuge ksemakamasah 
sadaso na yunjate. Ajuryaso harisajo haridrava 
a dyam ravena prthivimasusravuh. 


O veteran sages, parental lovers of humanity, 
be all time strong and steadfast, well wishers of all as 
members of one joint family. Untouched by age, lovers 
of life’s greenery, inspirers of life’s joy, speak so that 
your voice resounds and is heard across the earth and 
skies. 


904 RGVEDA 


तदिद्ध॑दन्त्यद्रयो विमोचने याप॑न्रञ्जस्पाइव घेदुपद्दिभिः। 
वप॑न्तो बीज॑मिव धान्याकृत॑ः पृञ्चन्ति सोमं न मिनन्ति 
ata: 123 1 


13. Tadidvadantyadrayo vimocane yamannanjaspa 
iva ghedupabdibhih. Vapanto bijamiva dhanya- 
krtah prncanti somam na minanti bapsatah. 


Veteran sages on way to freedom from the bonds 
of mortality speak of immortal Indra like bards in a state 
of ecstasy. As the farmer, having sowed the corn, guards 
it till ripeness, they, enjoying the soma experience, guard 
and mature the nectar, they do not violate it, never 
destroy the taste of immortality. 


सुते steak अधि वाच॑मक्रता ऋ्रीव्ठयो न मातरं Tard: | 
वि षू मुञ्चा सुषुवुषो! मनीषां वि व॑र्तन्तामद्र॑यश्चाय॑- 
मानाः॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Sute adhvare adhi vacamakratakrilayo na mata- 
ram tudantah. Vi su mufica susuvuso manisam vi 
vartantamadrayascayamanah. 


Just as children in love vex the mother while 
playing, so when the yajna is on and soma is extracted, 
let the sages recite the hymns with love and a sense of 
freedom and release in spontaneity and then let them 
retire with love and reverence into rest and silence. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 95 


Devata: Urvashi (1, 3, 6, 8-10, 12, 14, 17), Pururava (2, 
4, 5, 7, 11, 13, 15, 16, 18), Rshi: Pururava Aila (1, 3, 6, 8- 
10, 12, 14, 17), Urvashi (2, 4, 5, 7, 11, 13, 15, 16, 18) 


(This sukta is a dialogue between Pururava, the 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 95 905 
man, and Urvashi, the consort.) 


हये जाये मन॑सा तिष्ट घोरे वचांसि पिश्रा कुणवावहे नु | 
ननौ मन्त्रा अनुदितास एते मय॑स्कर न्परंतरे चनाह॑न्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


0 Haye jaye manasa tistha ghore vacamsi misra 
krnavavahai nu. Na nau mantra anuditasa ete 
mayaskaran paratare canahan. 


Hey venerable one, awful too though, stay 
awhile with mind at ease. Let us have a dialogue between 
us, words of mutual interest, of love and sweetness. 
These words and thoughts have remained unexpressed 
between us. Will they not do some good to us some 
later day? 


किमेता वाचा कुणवा तवाहं प्राक्रमिषपमुषसांमग्रियेवं। 
पुरूरवः पुनरस्तं परेहि दुरापना are saranda ॥ २॥ 

Zi Kimeta vaca krnava tavahah prakra-misamu- 
sasamagriyeva. Pururavah punarastam parehi 
durapana vata ivahamasmi. 


What shall we do with these words of yours? I 
am yours but I go like mist of the morning before dawn. 
Go back to your abode, Pururava, I am unattainable, 
elusive like the winds. 


इषुर्न fara इषुधेरसना गोषाः शतसा न रंहिः । 
अवीरे रतौ वि द॑विद्युतन्नोरा न मायुं चितयन्त धुन॑यः ॥ २॥ 


a: Isurna Sriya isudherasana gosah satama na ram- 
hih. Avire kratau vi davidyutannora na mayum 
citayanta dhunayah. 


I am not able to shoot the arrow from the quiver 


906 RGVEDA 


for victory and glory, and though I am strong and brave, 
I cannot win the hundreds of lands with the roar of 
victory. O lady bereft of the brave, I shine not in the 
rising battles of life, my own powerful forces forsake 
me; 


(The dialogue develops as a dialogue between 
man in love with life and the search for inspiration, 
purpose and consummation of living. The love is 
intense, excessive and vociferous like the thundering 
cloud’s and the inspiration is lovely and seductive like 
the elusive lightning. It can be interpreted as a dialogue 
between the ambitious ruler and the social power, and 
ultimately, between the liver (man) and the possibilities 
of life, the passion and the unattainable, the dawn and 
the day, the night and the morrow.) 


Note that Pururava is Aila, child of Ila, nature, 
and Urvashi is infinite beauty, and their consummation 
is joy and creativity. 


सा वसु दध॑ती श्वशुराय वय उषो यदि वशयन्तिंगृात्‌। 
अस्तं ननश्चे यस्मिंञ्चाकन्दिवा नक्तं श्नथिता वैतसेन tt ४ ॥ 


4. Sa vasu dadhti Svasuraya vaya uso yadi vastya- 
ntigrhat. Astam nanakse yasmincakan diva 
naktam Ssnathita vaitasena. 


If Urvashi (electric energy or the dawn) bearing 
light and nourishment for the coming day were to rise 
from the depth of space or darkness of night, and 
stricken with love as catalytic agent, were to visit the 
lover’s chamber, the heart of the cloud or the sun on the 
rise, then she would be struck with three way charge of 
positive, negative and consummative ‘vaitasa’, process 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 95 907 


of nature’s evolutionary activity. Day and night, all time? 


(‘Vaitasa’ is the name of a process of movement, 
attainment, fertility, enlightenment, extension, 
consumption and evolution in the natural cycle. The 
catalytic agent does not stay with the mode it causes to 
change and move toward growth. The electric charge 
causes the cloud thunder, breaks the cloud into rain, 
and that causes the earth to produce vegetation. The 
processes of catalysation, rain and growth are described 
in the Brahmanas and quoted by Swami Dayananda in 
his commentaries on Vedic mantras.) 


fr: स्प ard: श्नथयो वैतसेनोत स्म मेऽ व्य॑त्यै पृणासि। 
पुरूर वोऽ नुं ते केतमायं राजां मे वीर तन्व१स्तदासीः ॥ ५॥ 


Trih sma mahnah snathayo vaitasenota sma 
me’vyatyai prnasi. Pururavo’nu te ketamayam 
raja me vira tanva tadasth. 


O Pururava, cloud, day, thrice in a unit of time 
you would move me with the energy of procreative 
nature and thus achieve the fulfilment of nature’s 
purpose. Come to your chamber thus for fulfilment, O 
brave one, you would be the ruler of my body. (But stay 
I cannot.) 

Mantras 4 and 5 are spoken by Urvashi like a 
thoughtful soliloquy. 


या सुंजुर्णिः श्रेणिः सुम्नआंपिहदेच॑क्षर्न ग्रस्थिनीं चरण्युः | 
ता अञ्जयोऽ रुणयो न da: भिये गावो न धेनवोऽ - 
नवन्त US Il 

6. Ya sujurnih srenih sumnapirhradecaksurna gran- 
thint caranyuh. Ta anjayo’runayo na sasruh Sirye 
gavo na dhenavo’navanta. 


908 RGVEDA 


Waves of energy flow, exciting, wavy, soothing, 
successive and cyclic, and move in circuit, beautiful, 
shining red rays, harbingers of beauty and prosperity 
like young loving cows of the family. 


सम॑स्िञ्जाय॑मान आसत या उतेमंवर्धत्नद्य : स्वगुर्ताः। 
महे यत्त्वां पुरूरवो रणायावर्धयन्दस्युहत्याय देवाः ॥ ७॥ 


Samasminjayamana asata gna utemavardhan 
nadyah svagurtah. Mahe yat tva pururavo 
ranayavardhayan dasyuhatyaya devah. 


When this roaring cloud is formed or when the 
sun is risen for the day, then many forces like divine 
consorts of nature join and, self-energised and fluent 
like showers of rain and streams of water, exalt it. O 
Pururava, then the devas too, brilliant divinities of nature 
and humanity, prepare and exalt you for the mighty battle 
against want and darkness to destroy evil from nature 
and society. 


(The metaphor of natural forces here may be 
said to touch the field of human society. Many divine, 
natural and human forces join in the wedding of the 
young man and in the investiture of the ruler in his office. 
Both are like the cloud formed for showers and like the 
sun risen for the day, and the function of both is to dispel 
want and darkness from nature and society.) 


सचा यदासु जह॑तीष्वत्कमर्मानुषीषु मानुषो निषेवे । अप॑ 
स्म मत्तरसंन्ती न भुज्युस्ता अंत्रसत्रथस्पुशो नाश्वाः ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Saca yadasu jahatisvatkamamanusisu manuso 


niseve. Apa sma mat tarasanti na bhujyusta 
atrasan rathasprso nasvah. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 95 909 


When Pururava, the mighty cloud, takes over 
earthly form and joins the unearthly forms of nature 
after they have given up their natural super-human 
character, they, which earlier had feared him like the 
game fearing the hunter, do not fear him as horses joined 
to the chariot do not fear the master. 


यदासु मर्तो अमूर्तासु निस्पृक्सं श्चोणीभिः क्रतुं भिर्न os । 
ता आतयो न तन्वः शुम्भत स्वा अश्वासो न क्रीठ्छयो 
दन्द॑शानाः॥ ९ ॥ 
त्र Yadasu marto amrtasu nisprk sam ksonibhih 
kratubhirna prnkte. Ta atayo na tanvah sumbhata 
sva asvaso na krilayo dandasanah. 
When the mortal Puruava loving these immortal 
beings joins them with loving words as well as with 
noble actions, then they, like swans playing in water, 


shine and show their bodies like horses playing with 
the bridle in their teeth. 


विद्युन्न या पत॑न्ती दविंद्यो द्धरन्ती मे अप्या caret । 
जनिष्टो अपो नर्यः सुजातः प्रोर्वशी तिरत दीर्घमायुः ॥ ९० ॥ 

10. Vidyunna ya patanti davidyodbharanti me apya 
kamyani. Janosto apo naryah sujatah prorvasi 
tirata dirghamayuh. 

Like lightning, falling and flashing, bringing me 
cherished gifts of water showers, Urvashi who creates 
blissful floods and streams for humanity blesses me with 
long life and health. 

जज्ञिष इत्था गोपीथ्याय fe दधाथ तत्पुंरूरवो म ओजं: । 
अशासं त्वा विदुषी सस्मिन्रहन्न म आभ्युणोः किमभुग्वं- 
दासि।॥। eeu 


910 RGVEDA 


11.  Jajnisa ittha gopithyaya hi dadhatha tat pururavo 
ma ojah. ASasam tva vidust sasminnahanna ma 
asrnoh kimabhugvadasi. 


Pururava, you are born and destined for the 
protection of earth and promotion of life. Pray bear and 
command the lustre of life for me. Educated and cultured 
in the art of home life, I advised you day in and day out, 
pray listen to me. What can you say if you do not serve 
life and mother earth? Nothing. 


कदा सूनुः पितरं जात इच्छाच्यक्रन्नाश्च वर्तयद्विजानन्‌। को 
दम्प॑ती सम॑नसा वि यूयोदध यदिः श्वशुरेषु दीद॑- 
यत्‌॥ ९२॥ 


12. Kada sunuh pitaram jata icchaccakranasru 
vartayadvijanan. Ko dampati samanasa vi yuyo- 
dadha yadagnih svasuresu didayat. 


When would the progeny born, grown, knowing 
and coming without tears and actively doing love and 
favour the parents? And who would separate the couple 
wedded in mutual love when the passion for life shines 
among the brave? None. 


प्रतिं ब्रवाणि वर्तय॑ ते अश्रं चक्रन्न क्रन्ददाध्येशिवायै। 
प्र तत्त हिनवा यत्ते अस्मे परेह्यस्तं नहि मूर माप॑ः॥ ९३॥ 
13. Prati bravani vartayate asru cakran na kranda- 


dadhye Ssivayai. Pra tat te hinava yat te asme 
parehyastam nahi mura mapah. 


And I say to you, Pururava, by way of warning: 
if the untoward happens in case of separation, the child 
would come to you crying, in tears, yearning for 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 95 911 


consolation and comfort. I would send him to you who 
is now ours and spurn you off: O fool, impetuous, 
infructuous man, go off your way, I am not for you! 


सुदेवो अद्य प्रपतेदनावृत्परावतं परमां गन्तवा उ। अधा 
शयीत निऋतेरुपस्थेऽधैनं वृका रभसासो अद्युः ॥ ९४॥ 

14. Sudevo adya prapatedanavrt paravatam para- 
mam gantava u. Adha sayita nirrterupasthe ’dhai- 
nam vrka rabhasaso adyuah. 


Urvashi, if such a calamity befall, let the ardent 
lover immediately fall to no redemption, go far to the 
farthest distance, let him lie in the depth of denial and 
adversity, and let voracious wolves devour him. 


पुरूरवो मा den ara dat ar cart aentat अशिवास उ 
क्चन्‌। न वै स्त्रैणानि सख्यानि सन्ति सालावृकाणां हद्‌ 
यान्येता HAE ति 

15. Pururavo ma mrtha ma pra papto ma tva vrkaso 
asivasa u ksan. Na vai strainani sakhyani santi 
salavrkanam hrdayanyeta. 


Pururava, let this never be: do not die, never 
fall, never must cursed wolves devour you, such are 
not the loves and friendships of women. It is only women 
of wolfish heart that deceive and betray the covenant. 


यद्विरूपाच॑रं मर्त्येष्ववसं well: शरदश्चत॑स््रः । घतस्य 
स्तोकं Gees आश्नां तादेवेदं तातुपाणा च॑रामि ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Yadvirupadcaram martyesvavasam ratrihsarada- 
scatasah. Ghrtasya stokam sakrdahna asnam 
tadevedam tatrpanda carami. 


When I came down from the divine into this 


912 RGVEDA 


different earthly form living happily for four years 
among mortals, I have lived on one time little drop of 
ghrta a day, and content with that alone I sojourn among 
men. 


अन्तरिश्चप्रां रज॑सो विमानीमुप शिश्चाम्युर्वशीं वसिं ठः । उप॑ 
त्वा रातिः सुकृतस्य तिष्ठान्नि व॑र्तस्व हृद॑यं तप्यते मे ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Antarisapram rajaso vimanimupa Siksamyur- 
vasim vasisthah. Upa tva ratih sukrtasya tisthanni 
vartasva hrdayam tapyate me. 


I, Vasishtha, closest ardent lover, speak to 
Urvashi, spirit of boundless beauty, light and love, and 
celebrate this ranger of the skies, controller of vapours 
and breaker of the cloud. May the bounty of divine 
generosity ever abide by you. My heart is burning, pray 
turn, return and fulfil the divine purpose. 


इतिं त्वा देवा इम stigias यथेमेतद्धव॑सि मृत्युब॑न्धुः । प्रजा 
ते देवान्हविषां यजाति स्वर्गं उ त्वमपिं मादयासे ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Iti tva deva ima ahuraila yathemetadbhavasi 
mrtyubandhuh. Praja te devan havisa yajati 
svarga u tvamapi madayase. 


Pururava Aila, child of nature, word of divinity, 
this is what the divines have spoken: Kinsman of death 
you would be, your children would serve the divinities 
with homage and fragrant havi into the yajna fire, and 
you too would abide in paradise and be happy. 


(This sukta is a myth, a mystery, until it is 
unraveled.) 


It is a myth of the love between man and woman, 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 96 913 


fickle as well as unbreakable and sacred. The flower 
and fruit of it is the child, continuance of the race. And 
it may be called the myth of Purusha and Prakrti and 
the cycle of existence. It is a myth of the cloud, thunder 
and lightning. The cloud is a mass of gases, then the 
electric charge, thunder, lightning, rain and life on earth. 
And it points to a wonder possibility: 


The thunderous cloud, Pururava, is ineffective 
without Urvashi, the lightning charge. Urvashi, the 
heavenly nymph, lives on one drop of ghrta per day. 
The children of the couple live and perform yajna, and 
the parents abide in paradise. Can we say: One drop of 
ghrta into the yajna fire per day feeds Urvashi which 
causes the cloud to rain and the yajaka contributes to a 
life of paradise on earth? 


Mandala 10/Sukta 96 
Hari Devata, Baru Angirasa or Sarvahari Aindra Rshi 


प्रते महे विदथे शंसिषं हरी प्र ते वन्वे वनुषो eid wer 
घृतं न यो हरिभिश्चारु सेच॑त आ त्वां विशन्तु हरिवर्पसं 
गिरः ॥ ९॥ 


| Pra te mahe vidathe sSamsisam hari pra te vanve 
vanuso haryatam madam. Ghrtam na yo hari- 
bhiscaru secata a tva visantu harivarpasam girah. 


O lord omnipotent, Hari, in your great cosmic 
yajna, I adore your forces of Rtam and Satyam. Lord of 
beauty, glory and bliss, I pray for the joy of your ecstatic 
bliss, which, beautiful and beatific with showers of joy, 
blesses life on earth as ghrta exalts the sacred fire. May 
our words of adoration and prayer reach your blissful 
presence immanent in the universe. 


914 RGVEDA 


हरि हि योनिमभि ये समस्व॑रद्िन्वन्तो हरी दिव्यं यथा 
सद्‌: । आ यं पृणन्ति हरिभिर्न धेनव इन्द्राय शूषं हरिं वन्त- 
Waa २॥ 


2. Harim hi yonimabhi ye samasvaran hinvanto hari 
divyam yatha sadah. A yam prnanti haribhirna 
dhenava indraya Susam harivantamarcata. 


You, who in concert adore and exalt Hari, 
omnipotent original cause of the universe as he pervades 
the divine spatial home, whom hymns of Veda and rays 
of the sun please and fulfil with their vibrations and 
radiations as cows fulfil the yajna with ghrta and milk, 
whose powers of Rtam and Satyam with their centrifugal 
and centripetal forces you praise, please study and 
honour that power of his which bears the burden of the 
world of nature and humanity. Do so for the sake of the 
honour and excellence of life on the way forward. 


सो अस्य वज्रो हरितो य आयसो हरिर्निकामो हरिरा 
गभ॑स्त्योः । द्युम्नी सुशिप्रो हरिमन्युसायक इन्द्रे नि रूपा 
हरिता मिमिक्षिरे ।॥ ३॥ 


2. So asya vajro harito ya ayaso harirnikamo harira 
gabhastyoh. Dyumni susipro hariman-yusayaka 
indre ni rupa harita mimiksire. 


That power of Hari, omnipotent Indra, is the 
thunderbolt, and the thunderbolt is electric, magnetic, 
unfailing in aim and desire and it is borne in the hands 
of centrifugal and centripetal forces. It is bright and 
blazing, mighty passionate, punitive and destructive for 
the evil. Indeed in Indra as in the sun, all forms, all 
colours and all beauties are integrated. 


MANDAL - 10 / ऽ <^ - 96 915 


दिवि न केतुरधि धायि हर्यतो विव्यचद्वजो हरितो न रंह्या । 
तुददहिं हरिशिप्रो य अयसः सहस्त्र॑शोका अभवन्द- 
Rar: usu 


4. Divi na keturadhi dhayi haryato vivyacadvajro 
harito na ramhya. Tudadahim harisipro ya 
ayasah sahasrasoka abhavaddharimbharah. 


The power of Indra, the Bajra, is held as the sun 
blazing in heaven. It expands and pervades like the 
bright rays radiating all over space. Destroying evil, 
breaking the clouds of darkness, glorious and mighty, 
the adamantine Bajra of a thousand flames shines as 
the symbol of the power of omnipotence. 


त्वंत्व॑महर्यथा उप॑स्तुतः पूर्वेभिरिन्द्र हरिकेश arate: 1 
त्वं हर्यसि तव विश्व॑मुक्थ्य१ मसामि राधो हरिजात 
हर्यतम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


a, Tvam tvamaharyatha upastutah purvebhirindra 
harikesa yajvabhih. Tvam haryasi tava visva- 
mukthyamasami radho harijata haryatam. 


Indra, lord of light and knowledge, self- 
manifested universal spirit of light, love and beauty, 
loved and adored by the earliest celebrant sages, you 
alone received, acknowledged and blest the adorations 
of the past, and you alone are the sole, unique, beloved, 
universally adorable giver of success and fulfilment who 
love, receive, acknowledge and bless the gifts of 
adoration and yajna offered to you. 


ता विणं मन्दिनं स्तोम्यं मद्‌ इन्द्रं रथे वहतो हर्यता हरीं । 
पुरूण्यस्मै सव॑नानि eta इन्द्राय सोमा eat दध- 
Faring u 


916 RGVEDA 


6. Ta vajrinam mandinam stomyam mada indram 
rathe vahato haryata hari. Purunyasmai savanani 
haryata indraya soma harayo dadhanvire. 


Those adorable carriers, centrifugal and 
centripetal forces of divine nature, bear and sustain the 
power and presence of the thunder armed, joyous, 
adorable Indra in the divine blissful chariot as the 
universe of existence. For this Indra, blissful lord, many 
yajna sessions, soma oblations and beautiful gifts of 
homage are prepared and offered. 


अरं कामाय हर॑यो caret fen हिन्वन्हर॑यो हरी तुरा | 
अर्व दधिर्यो हरिभिर्जोषमीयते सो अस्य कामं हरिंवन्त- 
मानो ॥ ७ ॥ 


7. Aram kamaya harayo dadhnvire sthiraya hinvan 
harayo hari tura. Arvadbhiryo haribhyirjo- 
samtiyate so asya kamam harivantamanase. 


The dynamics of divine nature sustain the 
refulgent Indra for its holy solar purpose. The same 
powers energise the gravitational forces to hold the sun 
in balanced orbit. By these energy forces does Indra’s 
presence vibrate in the universe with love. And through 
these very forces does Indra fulfil his dear divine 
purpose. 


हरिश्मशासर्हरिंकेश आयसस्तुरस्पेये यो ¢itar अवंर्धत। 
अर्वद्भिर्यो हरिंभिर्वांजिनींवसुरति विर्वा दुरिता पारिं- 
wed eu 

8. Harismasarurharikesa ayasasturaspeye yo 


haripa avardhata. Arvadbhiryo haribhirvajin- 
tvasurati visva durita parisaddhari. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 96 917 


The world’s greenery is his hair, golden rays of 
light, his locks. Wielding thunder and gravitation, his 
radiation enters waters of the earth and vapours of space, 
he expands in power and presence, and with powers of 
instant radiation, he shines as lord of abundant earth 
and overcomes all evils of disease and darkness with 
his catalytic forces. 


aaa यस्य हरिणी विपेततुः शिप्रे वाजाय हरिणी 
दविध्वतः । प्र यत्कृते च॑मसे मर्मजब्धरी पीत्वा मद॑स्य 
हर्यतस्यान्ध॑सः॥ ९॥ 


a Sruveva yasya harini vipetatuh Sipre vajaya harini 
davidhvatah. Pra yat krte camase marmrjaddhari 
pitva madasya haryatasyan-dhasah. 


His golden eyes, sun and moon, move and 
radiate light as two ladles of ghrta feed and exalt the 
fire, and the heaven and earth like his golden jaws move 
for the food, energy and advancement of life. In his 
created world, having tasted of the delicious and 
inspiring food and drink, man refines and exalts his will 
and understanding. 


उत स्म सद॑ हर्यतस्य॑ पस्त्यो इरत्यो न वाजं eat अचि- 
wad! मही चिद्धि धिषणाहर्यदोजसा बृहद्वयो दधिषे 
हर्यतण्चिदा ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Utasma sadma haryatasya pastyoratyo na vajam 
harivam acikradat. Mahi ciddhi dhisanaharya- 
dojasa brhadvayo dadhise haryatascida. 


Potent and charming Indra pervades the regions 
of heaven and earth as his home and with his power 
and presence roars like a hero going to war. With his 


918 RGVEDA 


might he wields both the great earth and the refulgent 
heaven, loves them and bears abundant food, strength 
and joy for life there. 


आ रोद॑सी हर्यमाणो महित्वा नव्यंनव्यं हर्यसि मन्म नु 
प्रियम्‌। प्र पस्त्यमसुर हर्यतं गोराविष्कुधि हर॑ये 
सू्यीय ॥ ९९॥ 


11. A rodasi haryamano mahitva navyamnavyam 
haryasi manma nu priyam. Pra pastyamasura 
haryatam goraviskrdhi haraye suryaya. 


Lord of love and beauty, loved and loving all, 
you beautify and beatify the heaven and earth with new 
and newer favours, you love and create fresh and rising 
thoughts of admiration and adoration. O lord of vital 
energy and inspiration, pray open the homely state of 
earth and humanity to the illumination of the sun and 
light divine. 


आ wat हर्यन्तं प्रयुजो जनानां tal वहन्तु हरिंशिप्रमिन्दर । 
पिबा यथा प्रतिभृतस्य मध्वो हर्यन्यनज्ञं स॑धमादे दशो- 
णिम्‌॥ ९२॥ 


12. A (वं haryatam prayujo jananam rathe vahantu 
harisipramindra. Piba yatha pratibhrtasya 
madhvo haryan yajnam sadhamade dasonim. 


Indra, may the radiations of your light bear and 
bring you, glorious lord of golden visor, by your cosmic 
chariot to the people so that you, loving the yajna, drink 
of the honey sweet soma extracted and prepared with 
utmost dexterity of hand and care in the hall of yajna. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 97 919 


अपाः पूर्वेषां हरिवः सुतानामथो इदं सव॑नं केवलं ते। 
ममद्दि सोमं मधुमन्तमिन्द्र सत्रा वंषञ्जठर आ वुंष- 
स्व।॥ ९३॥ 


13. Apah purvesam harivah sutanamatho idam sava- 
nam devalam te. Mamaddhi somam madhu- 
mantamindra satra vrsanjathara a vrsasva. 


Indra, lord of light divine and solar radiations, 
you have drunk of the soma of the ancients of earliest 
sessions. This yajna session and the soma extracted in 
here is only for you. O lord of generous showers in this 
session, pray, drink of the honey sweet soma of our love 
and faith and let the showers of bliss flow and fill the 
skies and space unto the depth of our heart. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 97 
Oshadhayah Devata, Bhishag Atharvana Rshi 


या ओष॑धीः पूवी जाता देवेभ्य॑स्तरियुगं पुरा । 
मनै नु बभ्रुण।महं शतं धामानि aa ae 


॥; Ya osadhih purva jata devebhyasriyugam pura. 
Manai nu babhunamaham satam dhamani sapta ca. 


Let me observe, investigate and know the herbs, 
ancient and best for all the three seasons and ages, born 
of the divine gifts of nature for people, herbs yellow, 
ripe and brown, and hundred and seven of them with 
places where they grow and where they work. (‘Shatam 
dhamani sapta cha’ can also be interpreted as seven 
hundred herbs and the places where they grow.) 


शतं वो अम्ब erat सहस्त्र॑मुत वो Ge: । 
अधां शतक्रत्वो यूयमिमं A अगदं कत ॥ २॥ 


920 RGVEDA 


2: Satarn vo amba dhamani sahasramuta vo ruhah. 
Adha satakratvo yuyamimam me agadam krta. 


O mother herb, hundreds are the places where 
you arise and work, thousands your varieties and 
extensions, and hundreds your gifts and efficacies. Pray 
make this life free from affliction and disease. 


ओष॑धीः प्रति मोदध्वं पुष्पवतीः प्रसूव॑रीः। 
अश््वाइव सलित्व॑रीर्वीरुधंः पारयिष्णवः ॥ ३ ॥ 

2 Osadhih prati modadhvam puspavatih prasu- 
varih. ASva iva sajitvarirvirudhah parayisnvah. 


O herbs, plants and creepers ever growing, rise 
and rejoice in response to life’s health, blossoming and 
fragrant, procreative and fructifying, victorious like 
winsome life energy itself, taking us across all suffering 
and disease. 


ओषधीरिति मातर स्तद्ो' देवीरुप aa 
सनेयमश्वं गां वास॑ आत्मनं तव॑ पूरुष ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Osadhiriti matarastadvo devirupa bruve. 
Saneyamasvam gam vasa atmanam tava purusa. 


“O herbs, mothers, divine gifts of nature,” thus 
do I speak of you in confidence and say: O man, the 
horse, the cow, the home, even your body, mind and 
soul, I entrust for health to the herbs.” 


अश्वत्थे वो! Fradt पर्णे वों वसतिष्कृता। 
गोभाज इत्किलासथ यत्सनव॑थ पूरुषम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


3. Asvatthe vo nisadanam parne vo vasatiskrta. 
Gobhdqy it kilasatha yat sanavatha purusam. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 97 921 


Your seat is on the ashvattha tree, on the air and 
the cloud, your residence is made on the leaf and on the 
parna tree, you share your efficacy with the earth, sun 
rays and the cow by which you bestow health and vitality 
for life. 


यत्रौष॑धीः स॒मग्म॑त॒ राजानः सपिंताविव। 
विप्रः स उच्यते भिषग्रंक्षोहामींवचातंनः॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yatrausadhih samagmata rajanah samitaviva. 
Viprah sa ucyate bhisag raksohamivacatanah. 


Where herbs and medicines concentre as ruling 
powers in consult, that sagely scholar is called 
‘physician’, destroyer of evil, eliminator of disease and 
ill health. 


अश्वावतीं सोमावतीमूर्जय॑न्तीमुदोजसम्‌। 
आविंत्सि सर्वां ओष॑धीर॒स्मा अरिष्टतातये ॥ ७॥ 


7. ASvavatim somavatimurjayantimudojasam. 
Avitsi sarva osadhirasma aristatataye. 


For the recovery and rehabilitation of the sick 
and for his freedom from ailment in future, I know and 
can provide all herbal medicines, for example, 
Ashvavati, the herb for revival and energy, Somavati, 
for soothing and energising, Urjayanti for strengthening, 
and Udojas, exceedingly powerful for life saving, and 
others. 


उच्छुष्मा ओष॑धीनां गावो गोष्ठादिवेरते | 
धनं सनिष्यन्तीनामा त्मानं तव॑ पूरुष॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ucchusma osadhinam gavo gosthadiverate. 
Dhanam sanisyantinamatmanam tava purusa. 


922 RGVEDA 


And the strength and vitality of herbs which, O 
man, they bestow on you as the wealth of health for 
your body, mind and soul, stream forth to you like cows 
emerging from their stall or light rays radiating at dawn. 


इष्करतिर्नामं वो माताथो यूयं स्थ निष्कतीः। 
सीराः प॑तत्रिणी' स्थन यदामय॑ति Freer ९॥ 
9. Iskrtirnama vo matatho yuyam stha niskrtth. 
Sirah patatrinth sthana yadamayati niskrtha. 
O herbs, the name of your mother is Ishkrti, good 
health, immunity and prevention, gifts of food, earth 
and nature. And you are cleansers and protectors. Be 


circulating in veins and arteries, throw out all that ails 
the body’s health. 


अति fasat: परिष्ठाः स्तेनइव व्रजम॑क्रमुः । 
ओष॑धीः प्राचुंच्यवुर्यत्किं च॑ तन्वो रप॑ः ॥ ९०॥ 

10. Ati visvah paristhah stena iva vrajamakramuh. 
Osadhih pracucyavuryat kim ca tanvo rapah. 


Just as a thief breaks into a cattle stall (and is 
thrown out) so should all the herbals circulating all over 
the body attack and throw out the ailments that afflict 
the body. 


यदिमा वाजयंन्रहमोष॑धीर्हस्त॑ आदधे । 
आत्मा यक्ष्म॑स्य नश्यति पुरा जीवगृभो! यथा ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Yadima vajayannahamosadhirhasta adadhe. 
Atma yaksmasya nasyati pura jivagrbho yatha. 


When I take up these medicines in hand to 
administer them against ailments, it is like a warning of 
death for them and their very soul and root disappears, 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 97 923 


totally destroyed, even before the dose. 


यस्यौषधीः प्रसर्पथाद्ध द्धं परुष्परुः | 
ततो यक्ष्मं वि बाधध्व उग्रो म॑ध्यमशीसिवि॥ ९२॥ 


12. Yasyausadhth prasarpathangamangam paruspa- 
ruh. Tato yaksmam vi badhadhva ugro madhya- 
mastriva. 


O herbals, cure the sick whose body you spread 
over part by part, joint by joint, stop and throw out the 
disease like a sharp and aggressive mediator. 


साकं den प्र da चाषेण किक्छिदीविना। 
साकं वात॑स्य ध्राज्या साकं न॑श्य निहाकया ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Sakam yaksma pra pata casena kikidivina. 
Sakam vatasya dhrajya sakam nasya nihakaya. 


Consumptive disease is cured with increase in 
appetite, administration of medicine by mouth and 
cleansing by vomiting, with bitter medication, with 
strong and deep breathing in clean air, and cleansing of 
the system by eliminating the sputum and congestion. 


अन्या at अन्याम॑वत्वन्यान्यस्या sated 
ताः adt: संविदाना इदं मे urdat aa: uexn 
14. Anya vo anyamavatvanyanyasya upavata. 
Tah sarvah samvidana idam me pravata vacah. 
Let one medicine supplement and cover another, 
and let the other follow another with the same effect, 


and let them all thus accordant and cooperative justify 
and prove this word of mine in effect. 


924 RGVEDA 


याः फलिनीर्या अंफ़ल्का अपुष्पा याश्च पुष्पिणीः । 
ल्रहस्पतिंप्रसूतास्ता AY मुञ्चन्त्वंहसः ॥ १५ ॥ 

15. Yah phalinirya aphala apuspa yasca puspinth. 
Brhaspatiprasutasta no muncantvamhasah. 

Let those herbs which bear fruit, and those which 
do not bear fruit, let those which bloom with flowers 
and those which do not blossom, and all of those blest 
by Brhaspati, ripened by the sun, and prepared and 
energised by the physician deliver us from suffering. 

Foard मा शपथ्या ई दथो' वरुण्यादुत | 

अथो यमस्य पड्वींशात्सर्वस्मादेवकिल्विषात्‌॥ ९६ ॥ 
16. Muncantu ma sapathyadatho varunyaduta. 4110 

yamasya padvisat sarvasmaddevakilvisdt. 


Let them deliver me from ailments caused by 
curses and imprecations, dampness and stagnant waters, 
stiffness of joints and the whole body, and those coming 
from disturbance and depression of mind and senses. 


अवपतंन्तीरवदन्दिव ओष॑धयस्परिं। 
यं जीवमश्नवामहै न स रिष्याति पूरुषः ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Avapatantiravadan diva osadhayaspari. 
Yam jivamasnavamahai na sa risyti purusah. 


Descending from heaven the herbs, by their 
fragrance, energy and vitality, declare: the person whose 
life we pervade and vitalise comes to no harm. 


या ओष॑धीः सोम॑राज्ञीर्बह्मीः शतविचक्षणाः | 
तासां त्वम॑स्युत्तमारं कामाय शं हृदे ॥ ९८ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 97 925 


18. Ya osadhith somarajnirbahvih satavicaksanah. 
Tasam tvamasyuttamaram kamaya sam hrde. 
Of all those herbs which shine with the soma 
element from the moon, which are abundant and 
instantly effective, you that fulfil the desire and are 
blissful for the heart are the best. (That is soma.) 


या ओष॑धीः सोम॑राीर्विष्ठिंताः पृथिवीमनु । 
ल्ह स्पतिप्रसूता अस्यै सं द॑त्त वीर्यम्‌॥ eeu 

19. Ya osadhth somarajnirvisthitah prthivimanu. 
Brhaspatiprasuta asyai sam datta viryam. 


You herbs which shine and abound in soma 
element and overspread the earth, blest by Brhaspati 
and energised by the sun, pray bless this ailing body 
with life saving vitality. 


मा वों रिषत्खनिता यस्मै चाहं खनामि a: | 
द्विपच्यतुष्पदस्माकं सर्व'मस्त्वनातुरम्‌॥ २०॥ 

20. Ma 1© risat khanita yasmai caham khanami vah. 
Dvipacchatuspadasmakam sarvamastvanaturam. 


Let not the man who digs you from earth violate 
you, nor should he come to harm, nor should I come to 
harm who dig you out. May all human beings, all our 
animals, and all others be free from suffering and 
disease. 


याश्चेदमुंपश्ण्वन्ति याश्च॑ दूरं परागताः | 
स्वी: संगत्य॑ वीरुधोऽस्यै सं द॑त्त वीर्यम्‌॥ २९॥ 


21. Yascedamupasrnvanti yasca duram paragatah. 
Sarvah samgatya virudho’syai sam datta viryam. 


926 RGVEDA 


Those herbs which hear this word close by, and 
those which grow far away, may all these herbs join 
together and give life’s vitality to this patient. 


ओष॑धयः सं व॑दन्ते सोमेन सह Tat | 
यस्मै कृणोति ब्राह्मणस्तं राजन्पारयामसि ॥ २२॥ 

22. Osadhayah sam vadante somena saha rajna. 
Yasmai krnoti brahmanastam rajan parayamasi. 


The herbs joined together with the ruling radiant 
soma say: O ruling lord of health and life, for whosoever 
the sagely physician makes use of us we save and pilot 
him over suffering and disease. 


त्वमुत्तमास्योंषधे तवं वृश्चा उप॑स्तयः। 
उपस्तिरस्तु सो ३5 स्माकं यो अस्माँ अंधिदासंति ॥ २३॥ 


23. Tvamuttamasyosadhe tava vrksa upastayah. 
Upastirastu so’smakam yo asmam abhidasati. 


O herb, O medicine, you are the best, most 
efficacious. The trees such as peepal and banyan are 
your auxiliaries, they are solid concentrations, next to 
you, of medical properties diffused all over. May all 
that helps us with health and comfort be our ally. May 
all that harms us, such as disease, be under our control. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 98 
Devah Devata, Devapi Arshtishena Rshi 
बृह॑स्पते प्रतिं मे देवतामिहि मित्रो वा यद्रुणो वासि Far | 
आदित्यैर्वा यद्वसुभिर्मरुत्वान्त्स पर्जन्यं शन्तनवे वृषाय ॥ ९॥ 


I Brhaspate prati me devatamihi mitro va yadva- 
runo vasi pusa. Adityairva yadvasubhirmaru- 
tvantsa parjanyam samtanave vrsaya. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 98 927 


Brhaspati, lord of unbounded rain and thunder, 
come and bless me as the epitome of divine powers, 
whether you are Mitra or Varuna or Pusha or commander 
of the Marut winds with Adityas and Vasus. Let the cloud 
rain for the man of peace and lover of knowledge. 


(This mantra is a prayer for physical as well as 
for spiritual rain of water and peace for the lover of 
knowledge and peace. Brhaspati, Mitra, Varuna and 
other devas are physical powers of rain, and this process 
of vapourisation, electric catalysis of gases and 
condensation has been explained in his essays on the 
composition of water and atmosphere by late Pandit 
Gurudatta Viyarthi in his book Wisdom of the Rshis, 
republished by Dr. Ravi Prakash Arya, Email : 
vedicscience @ hotmail.com). 


आ देवो दूतो अंजिरश्चिंकित्वान्त्वदैवापे अभि माम॑गच्छत्‌। 
प्रतीचीनः प्रतिः मामा व॑वृत्स्व दधामि ते द्युमतीं वाचं॑- 
मासन्‌॥ २॥ 

2 A devo dito ajirascikitvan tvaddevape abhi 
mamagacchat. Praticinah prati mama vavrtsva 
dadhami te dyumatim vacamasan. 

May the divine messenger, fast and brilliant, 
harbinger of collected light of knowledge come to me. 

Brhaspati, come to me constantly and continuously in 


circuitous series. I receive your illuminant Word into 
my mind and speech. 


अस्मे धेहि द्युमतीं ardura-geerd अनमी वामिरंषिराम्‌। 
यया वृष्टं शन्तनवे वनाव दिवो द्रप्सो मधुमाँ आ विवेश ॥ ३ ॥ 


928 RGVEDA 


a Asme dhehi dyumatim vacamasan brhaspate 
anamivamisiram. Yaya vrstim Santanave vanava 
divo drapso madhumam ठ vivesa. 


Infinite lord of nature, knowledge and the divine 
word, bring us for our mind and speech illuminant 
shower of the divine voice, immaculate, unrestrained 
and inspiringly energetic by which we may bring about 
an earthly rain of peace and enlightenment for the lover 
of knowledge and well being for all, and let a shower 
of paradisal honey sweets bless the earth from heaven. 


आ नो द्रप्सा Hela विशच्त्विन्द्र देद्यधि॑रथं सहस््र॑म्‌। 
नि षीद होत्रमूंतुथा य॑जस्व देवान्द वापे हविषा सपर्यं ।॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ano drapsa madhumanto visantvindra dehyadhi- 
ratham sahasram. Ni sida hotramrtutha yajasva 
devan devape havisa saparya. 


Let showers of honey bless us, Indra, give us a 
thousandfold wealth of peace and prosperity of high 
order. O harbinger of Devas, sit on the vedi, perform 
the yajna according to the seasons and serve the 
divinities with oblations of havi as required for the 
purpose. 


आर्टिषेणो दहोत्रमृषिर्निषीदंन्देवापिर्देवसु पतिं चिकित्वान्‌ । 
स उत्तरस्मादधरं समुद्रमपो दिव्या अंसृजद्वष्यौ अभि ॥ ५॥ 

a: Arstiseno hotramrsirnisidan devapirdevasumatim 
cikitvan. Sa uttarasmadadharam samudramapo 
divya asrjadvarsa abhi. 


Arshtishena Devapi, sagely seer knowing the 
dynamics of yajnic creation and the qualities and 
functioning of different divine facts of nature and life 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 98 929 


in full knowledge of the moods of beneficent divinities, 
may seat himself on the vedi of yajna, create clouds of 
divine water in the vast sky above and bring down 
showers from the ocean above to the earth for fields, 
rivers and the seas. 


अस्मिन्त्संमुद्रे अध्युत्त॑रस्मिन्नापो! eafurigar अतिष्ठन्‌। 
ता अद्रवन्नार्टिषेणेनं ger देवापिना प्रेषिता मृक्षिणीषु ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Asmintsamudre adhyuttarasminnapo devebhir- 
nivrta atisthan. Ta adravannarstisenena srsta 
devapita presita mrksinisu. 


In this upper oceanic sky water vapours stay held 
up by divine forces of nature. Catalised by electric 
charge caused by divine marut energies, they condense, 
and, sent down into clouds, they shower, upon the earth 
in torrents. 


यदेवापिः wera पुरोहितो gore वृतः कृपयन्नदीधेत्‌ | 
देवश्रुतं वृष्टिवनिं रराणो बृहस्पतिर्वचिंमस्मा अयच्छत्‌ 19 


44 Yaddevapih samtanave purohito hotraya vrtah 
krpayannadidhet. Devasrutam vrstivanim rarano 
brhaspatirvacamasma ayacchat. 


When Devapi, friend of divinities, the priest 
appointed for the purpose of rain yajna, prays and shines 
with adoration, Brhaspati, listening to his prayer to 
divinity for rain, waxes with joy and grants him the gift 
of thunderous Word and shower for the peace and 
prosperity of humanity. 


यं त्वा देवापिं शुशुचानो अग्र आर्टिषेणो Ape: समीधे । 
विश्वेभिर्देवैरनुमद्यमानः प्र पर्जन्य॑मीरया वृष्टिमन्त॑म्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


930 RGVEDA 


8. Yam tva devapih susucano agna arstiseno manu- 
syah samidhe. Visvebhirdevairan-upadyamanah 
pra parjanyamiraya vrstimantam. 


Agni, whom Devapi, priest and sagely scholar 
of the science of rain, shining with ardent adoration 
among men, lights and serves with sacred fire and 
prayer, be pleased along with all the divine powers and 
move the clouds laden with rain showers for humanity. 


त्वां पूर्वं ऋष॑यो गीर्भिरायन्त्वाम॑ध्वरेषुं पुरुहूत fava | 
सहस््राण्यधिंरथान्यस्मे आ नो यज्ञं रोहिदश्चोपं are ९॥ 


9. Tvam purva rsayo girbhirayan tvamadhvaresu 
puruhuta visve. Sahasranyadhirathanyasme 
ano yajnam rohidasvopa yahi. 


Agni, universally invoked and adored yajnic 
power and showers of rain, saints and seers of the world 
of all time approached you with songs of adoration and 
prayer in yajna. O lord of red flames and thunderous 
voice, pray visit our yajna and grant us a thousandfold 
gifts overflowing our chariots of life. 


एतान्यगरे नवतिर्नव त्वे आहुतान्यधिरथा सहस्रां । तेभिर्वर्धस्व 
aa: शूर पूर्वीर्दिवो at वृष्टिमिंषितो रिरीहि॥ ९०॥ 


10. Etanyagne navatirnava tve ahutanyadhiratha 
sahasra. Tebhirvardhasva tanvah Sura purvirdivo 
no vrstimisito rirthi. 


Agni, these ninety and nine chariots of life laden 
with overfulls of a thousand gifts of homage are offered 
to you. With these, O Lord Almighty, rise in flames of 
glory and grace and, thus loved and adorned, pray move 
the eternal showers of bliss for us from the light of 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 98 931 
heaven. 


एतान्य॑गरे नवतिं सहस्रा सं प्र य॑च्छ वृष्ण इन्द्राय भागम्‌। 
विद्वान्पथ ऋतुशो देवयानानप्यौलानं दिवि देवेषु धेहि ॥ ९९१॥ 


11. Etanyagne navatim sahasra sam pra yaccha vrsna 
indraya bhagam. Vidvan patha 11/50 devayana- 
napyolanam divi devesu dhehi. 


Agni, these ninety and nine thousand gifts of 
homage, pray, send up to Indra, generous lord of 
showers, for our share of his divine service and, knowing 
the paths of the divine movements of nature according 
to seasons, put the clusters of vapour in heaven among 
the divinities, Maruts, Mitra, Varuna and others for 
showers of rain. 


(‘Aulana’ may also be interpreted as the devout 
human soul and ‘showers’ as showers of divine bliss.) 


अग्ने बाध॑स्व वि मृधो वि दुर्गहापामीवामप रक्षांसि सेध। 
अस्मात्स॑मुद्राद्‌ बुं हतो दिवो नोऽ पां भूमानमुप॑ नः 
BASU ९२॥ 


12. Agne badhasva vi mrdho vi durgahapamivam-apa 
raksamsi sedha. Asmat samudradbrhato divo 
no’pam bhumanamupa nah srjeha. 


Agni, drive away the violent, open up the 
impassables, eliminate ill health and disease, repel and 
destroy the evil, and from that infinite ocean of the 
waters of life, release the showers of heavenly bliss on 
earth for us. 


932 RGVEDA 


Mandala 10/Sukta 99 
Indra Devata, Vamra Vaikhanasa Rshi 


कं diaahiovata चिकित्वान्पुंथुग्मानं वाश्रं वावृधध्यै । 
कत्तस्य दातु शव॑सो व्युष्टौ ass वृत्रतुरमपिन्वत्‌॥ ९॥ 


1. Kam nascitramisanyasi cikitvan prthugmanam 
vasram vavrdhadhyai. Kat tasya datu Savaso 
vyustau taksadvajram vrtraturamapinvat. 


Knowing us all, Indra wishes us well, gives us 
comfort and well being, gifts wondrous and varied, 
expansive and admirable, for our progress and 
advancement. Great is his gift of bliss, the mighty one, 
for our fulfilment. And what could be our gift in return 
for his kindness? He creates and wields the thunder for 
breaking the cloud and strikes the thunderbolt to destroy 
the evil, and he gives us the showers that we may grow 
and rise in life. 


a fe ae विद्युता वेति सामं पृथुं योनिंमसुरत्वा dare | 
स witatu: प्रसहानो अस्य भातुर्नं ऋते सप्तथ॑स्य 
मायाः॥ २॥ 


De Sa hi dyuta vidyuta veti sama prthum yonima- 
suratva sasada. Sa sanilebhih prasahano asya 
bhraturna rte saptathasya mayah. 


He, challenger of adversaries and destroyer of 
suffering and violence, goes on with light and lightning, 
pervades the vast space, and rules and breaks the mighty 
clouds with his kindred Maruts. Such is the power and 
splendour of the ruler and sustainer of the highest 
heavens. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 99 933 


स वाजं यातापदुष्पदा यन्त्स्वर्षाता परि षदत्सनिष्यन्‌। 
अनर्वा यच्छतदुरस्य वेदो श्रज्छिषश्नदेवां अभि वर्प॑सा 
UCU ॥ 

2. Sa vajam yatapaduspada yantsvarsata pari sadat 
sanisyan. Anarva yacchatadurasya vedo ghnan- 
chisnadevam abhi varpasa bhiut. 


He goes on with the dynamics of existence by 
straight unfailing paths of law and rectitude, giving 
showers of joy, presiding over it all, keen to share it 
with one and all, irresistible and unhurting, opening a 
hundred doors of possibility for wealth and excellence, 
and subduing the demons of lust and impiety with force, 
the one supreme ruling power. 


स यद्वयो ३ऽ वनीर्गोष्वर्वां जुहोति प्रधन्यांसु are: | 
अपादो यत्र युज्यासोऽ CAT AOA ATA ईरते घृतं वाः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Sa yahvyo’vanirgosvarvajuhoti pradhanyasu 
sasrih. Apado yatra yujyaso’ratha dronyasvasa 
trate ghrtam vah. 


That mighty Indra, moving, flowing and 
advancing, showers torrents of rain over fertile lands 
where fast and deep streams, cooperative friends of 
Indra, receive and make the precious waters move of 
themselves by gravity, without external aids such as legs 
and chariots. 


(In the third and fourth mantras, Indra may be 
interpreted as human soul in the context of yoga 
meditation and control over mind and senses. In this 
context, the flow would mean the flow of consciousness. 
In the physical sense Indra may be interpreted as Vayu, 


934 RGVEDA 


the catalytic electric energy that breaks the clouds of 
vapour into showers of rain. Indra as the supreme cosmic 
power that rules and sustains the world of existence, of 
course, is obvious throughout the hymn.) 


स रुद्रेभिरशस्तवार seat हित्वी गयमारेअवद्य आगात्‌। 
वम्रस्य मन्ये मिथुना विवव्री अन्नमभीत्यारोदयन्मुषा- 
यन्‌॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Sa rudrebhirasastavara rbhva hitvi gayamare 
avadya agat. Vamrasya manye mithuna vivavri 
annamabhityarodayanmusayan. 


That Indra, mighty energy, free from despicables 
and undesirables, and possessed of indescribable wealth 
of force, moves with Rudras, catalytic forces, in serial 
motion leaving one place for another and, I believe, it 
gets to the gaseous couple that produce and deliver the 
waters, and having broken the cloud and taken away 
the waters, food of life, leaves it roaring. 


स sald तुवीरवं ulad-doat त्रिशीर्षाणं दमन्यत्‌। अस्य 
त्रितो न्वोज॑सा वृधानो विपा व॑राहमयोअग्रया SL ६ ॥ 


6. Sa iddasam tuviravam patirdan salaksam trisir- 
sanam damanyat. Asya trito nvojasa vrdhano vipa 
varahamayo agraya han. 


That Indra, sustainer of life, attacking the six- 
eyed three-headed cloud, subdues it, and Trita, threefold 
Agni power, rising by the power and lustre of Indra, 
with currents sharp as razor’s edge, breaks the cloud 
and delivers the rain. 


(The cloud is six eyed because it is active and 
awake all the six seasons of the year. It is three headed 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 99 935 


because it arises from three regions: from the solar 
region as soma, from the middle regions as parjanya 
and from the earthly region as water vapour. 


Agni is threefold, Trita, because it has three 
varieties of its form and function: terrestrial fire as agni, 
middle region vayu or electric energy, and solar region 
aditya or light, and all of them play their part in the 
formation of the cloud in the form of water vapour on 
earth, parjanya in the middle region and soma in the 
solar region.) 


स द्रुहणे ade ऊर्ध्वसान आ साविषदर्शसानाय ररुम्‌। 
स नृत॑मो नहंघोऽ स्मत्सुजा तः पुरोऽ भिनदर्हन्दस्युहत्ये ॥ ७ ॥ 


a Sa druhvane manusa urdhvasana व savisadar- 
Sasanaya Sarum. Sa nrtamo nahuso’smat sujatah 
puro’bhinadarhan dasyuhatye. 


Indra, lord supreme, highest potent, best and 
foremost leader among humanity committed to truth and 
right and controller of the lawless and violent, strikes 
the weapon of justice and punishment against the forces 
of jealousy, enmity and destruction and, risen to nobility 
and grandeur of personality in his own right, deserving 
the highest position, destroys the strongholds of 
negativity in our struggle against anti-social and anti- 
life elements. 


सो अभ्रियो ada उटन्यन्क्षयाय गातुं faecal अस्मे । 
उप यत्सीददिन्दुं शरीरः श्येनोऽ योपाष्टिर्हन्ति दस्यन्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. So abhriyo na yavasa udanyan ksayaya gatum 
vidanno asme. Upa yat sidadindram Ssariraih 
Syeno’yopastirhanti dasyun. 


936 RGVEDA 


Just as the cloud waxing with water vapours 
goes down in showers on earth for the nourishment of 
fields and pastures, so does Indra, ruling soul, 
overflowing with generosity, goes forward to the earth 
for our peaceful home life and with the iron spur of his 
heels strikes and drives away the evils around us, since 
he, a tempestuous soul in body like the eagle, sits close 
to the Indu, blissful source of the nectar of life. 


स व्राध॑तः शवसानेभिरस्य कुत्साय शुष्णं कृपणो परादात्‌ | 
अयं कृ विम॑नयच्छस्यमानमत्कं यो अस्य सनितोत 
नृणाम्‌॥ ९॥ 


2, Sa vradhatah savasanebhirasya kutsaya Susnam 
krpane paradat. Ayam kavimanayacchasyamana- 
matkam yo asya sanitota nrnam. 


He throws off the violent with his powerful 
forces, he removes drought and adversity, and he thereby 
gives strength and confidence to the supplicant devotee. 
He leads that man of vision and imagination to the 
heights of fame and admiration who, of all men, knows 
his real form and nature and in his spirit realises his 
divine presence. 


अयं dora Raves दस्मो देवेधिर्वरुणो न मायी । 
अयं कनीन ऋतुपा अवेद्यमिमीताररुं यश्चतुष्पात्‌ | ९० ॥ 
10. Ayam dasasyan naryebhirasya dasmo devebhir- 
varuno na mayi. Ayam kanina rtupa avedyami- 
mitararum yaSscatuspat. 
He, generous giver of favours by the dynamics 


of his divine powers, gracious and wondrous like 
Varuna, cosmic spirit of justice and retribution, throws 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 99 937 


off evil, violence and negativity. He is known as gentle 
and kind, protector and ordainer of the seasons of the 
world and, existent in four states of cosmic being, 
overcomes jealousy and aggression. 


अस्य स्तोमेभिरोशिज ऋजिश्वा व्रजं द॑रयद्‌ ब॒षभेण feat: 1 
सुत्वा यद्य॑जतो दीदयद्रीः पुर॑ इयानो अभि वर्पसा 
WAN ९९ ॥ 

11. Asya stomebhirausSija rjisva vrajam darayadvr- 
sabhena piproh. Sutva yadyajato diyayadgth pura 
iyano abhi varpasa bhit. 


When the simple, natural and ardent yajaka, 
having prepared the soma of adoration, shines with his 
words of praise, then, crossing the physical, pranic, 
mental and intellectual covers of the soul’s existential 
state, and breaking into the secret cave of the soul’s 
divinity by the showers of the grace of the lord giver of 
life and spiritual strength, he becomes established in 
his essential nature and shines in his natural spiritual 
essence. 


एवा महो अंसुर वक्षथाय ane: पड्भिरुप सर्पदिन्द्र॑म्‌। 
स इयानः करति स्वस्तिम॑स्मा इषमूर्ज' सुक्षितिं विश्व- 
माभाः।॥ ९२॥ 


12. Eva maho asura vaksathaya vamrakah padbhi- 
rupa sarpdindram. Sa tyanah karati svastimasma 
isamurjam suksitim visvamabhah. 

Thus, O lord of life and pranic energy of the 
universe, the humble devotee bursting forth in song and 
adoration step by step moves on to you, great burden 
bearer and ordainer of the universe. Thus does the lord 


938 RGVEDA 


revealing the presence does good to this devotee giving 
him all the world’s wealth of food, energy, peace and 
shelter of divinity and shines to him in full glory. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 100 
Vishvedevah Devatah, Duvasyu Vandana Rshi 


इन्द्र Ga मघवन्त्वावदिद्धुज इह स्तुतः Gar बोधि नो 
वृधे । देवेभिर्नः सविता urea श्रुतमा सर्वतातिमदितिं 
वृणीमहे ।। ९॥ 


i, Indra drmhya maghavan tvavadidbhuja tha stutah 
sutapa bodhi no vrdhe. Devebhirnah savita pra- 
vatu Srutama sarvatatimaditim vrnimahe. 


Indra, lord almighty of universal glory, pray 
strengthen the soul akin to you so that it may be happy 
and feel exalted with life. Pleased with our songs of 
adoration here, accepting the soma of our love and faith, 
pray let the Presence be revealed to us for our spiritual 
growth. With our mind and senses and the Vishvedevas, 
all divinities of nature and humanity, may the self- 
refulgent spirit of light, life and energy, Savita. protect 
and promote our knowledge already revealed to us and 
bless us that we may by reason, faith and choice abide 
by the eternal, divine, imperishable spirit of total 
existence. 


भराय सु भ॑रत भागमृत्वियं प्र वायवे शुचिपे ऋन्ददिं्टये। 
गौरस्य यः पय॑सः पीतिमानश आ सर्वतातिमदितिं 
वणीमहे॥ २॥ 

(५१ Bharaya su bharata bhagamrtviyam pra vayave 


Sucipe krandadistaye. Gaurasya yah payasah 
pitimanasa व sarvatatimaditim vrnimahe. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 100 939 


For the divine sustainer, bear and bring your 
part of homage and yajnic offerings for the vibrant winds 
and roaring clouds of divinity, all purifying for our good. 
They accept, taste and enjoy the nectar sweets of the 
songs and homage of the enlightened devotees. By 
reason, faith and choice of will, we wholly abide in and 
by the divine imperishable mother spirit of total 
existence. 


आ नों देवः सविता alfaugae ऋजूयते यज॑मानाय सुन्वते । 
यथा देवान्प्र॑तिभूषेम पाकवदा सर्वतातिमदितिं वृणी- 
महे॥ ३॥ 


3; A no devah savita savisadvaya rjuyate yajama- 
naya sunvate. Yatha devan pratibhusema paka- 
vada sarvatatimaditim vrnimahe. 


May the self-refulgent generous Savita, divine 
inspirer and light giver, bless the simple, natural and 
creative yajamana with good health, long life and wealth 
of maturity and discipline of performance, so that we 
may serve and exalt the devas with homage and piety 
of mind and soul. With total submission and faith, we 
love and adore the universal mother Infinity. 


इन्द्रो अस्मे सुमना अस्तु विश्वहा राजा सोम॑: सुवितस्या- 
ध्ये तुनः । यथायथा सित्रधिंतानि सन्दधुरा सर्वतातिमदितिं 
वृणीमहे ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Indro asme sumana astu visvaha raja somah 


suvitasyadhyetu nah. Yathayatha mitradhitani 
samdadhura sarvatatimaditim vrnimahe. 


May Indra, lord of cosmic energy, ever be good 
and gracious to us, may the refulgent and inspiring soma, 


940 RGVEDA 


spirit of universal peace, bless us with prosperity, may 
all the divinities bear and bring all the good things of 
divine value for friends and devotees according to time 
and need. We honour and adore the universal spirit and 
power of imperishable eternal mother Infinity. 


इन्द्र॑ उक्थेन शव॑सा परुर्दधे बृह॑स्पते प्रतरीतास्यायुंषः । यज्ञो 
मनुः प्रम॑तिर्नः पिता हि कमा सर्वतातिमदितिं वृणीमहे ॥ ५ ॥ 


a: Indra ukthena savasa parurdadhe brhaspate 
prataritasyayusah. Yajno manuh pramatirnah 
pita hi kama sarvatatimaditim vrnimahe. 


With divine energy realisable by adoration, 
Indra sustains every state and every stage of life and its 
structure. O lord of Infinity, Brhaspati, you are the 
harbinger of life and health of higher order for us. 
Reflected in yajna, power of thought and meditation, 
holiness of intelligence, you are our sustainer as father 
giver of happiness. We honour and adore Aditi, 
imperishable Infinity, the universal mother. 


इन्द्र॑स्य नु Gad दैव्यं सहोऽ भिर्गहे ज॑रिता मेधिरः कविः। 
यज्ञश्च भूद्धिदथे चारूरन्त॑म आ सर्वतातिमदितिं auit- 
महे ।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Indrasya nu sukrtam daivyam saho’ gnirgrhe 
jarita medhirah kavih. Yajnasca bhudvidathe 
carurantama व sarvatatimaditim vrnimahe. 


Agni in the home is a version and reflection of 
mighty Indra itself, holy performer, divine power, 
celebrant divinity, adorable in yajna, creator and giver 
of light and poetic vision, which is yajna itself, closest 
and most beautiful in the holiest creative and social acts. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 100 941 


We honour and adore Aditi, mother Infinity of universal 
and imperishable order of divine generosity. 


न वो गुहा चकृम भूरिं दुष्कृतं नाविष्ट्यं वसवो देवहेव्ठनम्‌ | 
माकिनो देवा अनुंतस्य वर्पस आ सर्वतातिमदितिं 
quire ॥ ७ ॥ 


di Na vo guha cakrma bhuri duskrtam navistyam 
vasavo devahelanam. Makirno deva anrtasya 
varpasa ठ sarvatatimaditim vrnimahe. 


O Devas, generous divinities of nature and 
humanity, O Vasus, givers of peace and settlement at 
heart, never must we do any act of sin and violence 
open or covert toward you, never incur the displeasure 
of divinity. Never must we put on the garb of untruth in 
thought, word and deed. We honour and adore the 
universal imperishable mother spirit of divine nature. 


अपामीवां सविता साविषन््यवैग्वरीय sad सेधन्त्वद्र॑यः। 
ग्रावा यत्र॑ मधुषुदुच्यते बृहदा सर्वतातिमदितिं वृणीमहे ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Apamivam savita savisannyagvariya idapa 
sedhantvadrayah. Grava yatra madhusuducyate 
brhada sarvatatimaditim vrnimahe. 


May Savita, self-refulgent light of the world, 
ward off and destroy all pollution and disease. May the 
wise, like clouds and mountains, stall and wash off even 
the tempting most irresistible sin and wrong wherever 
abundant soma is extracted and the wise are highly 
respected. We honour and adore the universal generosity 
and imperishable wisdom and purity of divinity. 


942 RGVEDA 


ऊर्ध्वो ग्रावां वसवोऽ स्तु सोतरि विश्वा दवेषांसि सनुतर्युयोत । 
स al देवः सविता पायुरीड्य आ सर्वतातिमदितिं वृणी- 
महे।॥ ९॥ 


9. Urdhvo grava vasavo’stu sotari visva dvesamsi 
sanutaryuyota. Sa no devah savita payuridya a 
sarvatatimaditim vrnimahe. 


O Vasus, givers of peace and shelter, may the 
learned be highly respected in the soma yajaka’s yajna. 
Uproot and throw off all jealousies and enmities of the 
world from afflicted hearts. May the self-refulgent 
Savita be our saviour, protector and our adorable lord 
and master. We honour and adore the all generous and 
blissful imperishable mother Infinity. 


ऊर्ज" गावो यव॑से पीवो! अत्तन ऋतस्य याः सद॑ने कोशं 
अङ्ध्वे। तनूरेव तन्वों अस्तु भेषजमा सर्वतातिमदितिं 
वणीमहे॥ ९० ॥ 


10. Urjam gavo yavase [7170 attana rtasya yah sadane 
kose andhve. Tanureva tanvo astu bhesajama 
sarvatatimaditim vrnimahe. 


O cows, knowledge, wisdom and culture, just 
as cows feed on grass in the pasture, drink from the 
water reservoir, grow and produce energy giving milk, 
similarly, O holy words of wisdom and knowledge, feed 
on whatever you find in the house of eternal truth on 
the flow, and in the depth of the heart core of spirit, 
grow abundant with light and energy, and let the body 
of language be the medicinal corrective and sanative 
for the body of knowledge and culture. We honour the 
universal imperishable Mother Nature and mother Ila 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 100 943 


and Sarasvati for our mother land, Mahi and Bharati, 
for universal progress of knowledge and culture. 


क्रतु प्रावां जरिता शश्व॑तामव इन्द्र SEs प्रम॑तिः सुता- 
व॑ताम्‌ । पूर्णमूधर्दिव्यं यस्य॑ fama आ सर्वतातिमदितिं 
quis eeu 


11. Kratuprava jarita sasvatamava indra idbhadra 
pramatih sutavatam. Purnamudhardivyam yasya 
siktaya a sarvatatimaditim vrnimahe. 


Giver of success in actions, appraiser of the 
permanent, protector and promoter of the makers of 
soma, Indra is the giver of noble intelligence, 
understanding and wisdom for all. Full is his treasure 
of wealth like the mother cow’s stream of milk. We 
honour and adore the universal generosity of divine 
imperishable inexhaustible Mother Nature. 


fared भानुः क्रतुप्रा अभिष्टिः सन्ति eget! जरणिप्रा 
ste ST: | रजिंछटया रज्या पर्व आ गोस्तूतूर्षति पर्यग्रं 
दुवस्युः UVR UU 


12. Citraste bhanuh kratupra abhistih santi sprdho 
jJaranipra adhrstah. Rajisthaya rajya pasva a 
gostutursati paryagram duvasyuh. 


Wondrous is your light, adorable your gift of 
success in action, irresistible your will and power which 
gives fulfilment to the devotees. Just as a shepherd can 
lead a cow forward by a simple rope, so may the devotee 
realise your presence directly revealed before him by 
simple prayer and adoration. 


944 RGVEDA 


Mandala 10/Sukta 101 
Vishvedevah or Rtvijah Devatah, Budha Saumya Rshi 


उद्‌ बुध्यध्वं सम॑नसः सखायः समयिपमिन्ध्वं बहवः 
war: | दधिक्रामभिमुषसं च देवीमिन्द्रवतोऽ aa नि 
ह्वये वः॥ ९॥ 


I; Udbudhyadhva samanasah sakhayah samagni- 
mindhvam bahavah sanilah. Dadhikramagni- 
musasam ca devimindravato’vase ni hvaye vah. 


Awake, arise, O friends of equal mind, light the 
fire together, more than many living and working 
together under the same one roof of equal order, lovers 
of energy, worshippers of Indra, one lord omnipotent 
of nature and entire humanity. I call upon you and exhort 
you for the sake of mutual defence and protection and 
for common progress of all. Light and develop the fire 
energy of the earth, atmospheric energy of thunder and 
lightning of the sky, and the divine energy of the rising 
dawn of the sun. 


मन्द्रा कुणुध्वं धिय आ त॑नुध्वं नाव॑मरित्रपरंणीं कृणुध्वम्‌ । 
इष्कृ णुध्वमायुधारं कृ णध्वं प्राञ्चं यज्ञं प्र णयता 
सखायः ॥ २॥ 


0.0 Mandra krnudhvam dhiya a tanudhvam nava- 
maritraparanim krnudhvam. Iskrnudhvam-ayu- 
dharam krnudhvam prancam yajnam pra nayata 
sakhayah. 


Create peace and joy, develop rational thought 
and science and extend the field of action, design and 
develop boats and ships to cross the seas with oars, 
produce food for body, mind and soul, promote the arms 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 101 ०45 


of peace and security, and take the yajnic programme 
forward that faces you upfront, O my friends and friends 
of humanity. 


युनक्त सीरा वि युगा त॑नुध्वं कृते aril वपतेह बीजंम्‌। 
गिरा च॑ श्रुष्टिः सभ॑रा असंत्नो नेदीय इत्सृण्य॑; पक्व 
म्यात्‌ ३ ॥ 


3. Yunakta stra vi yugad tanudhvam krte yonau 
vapateha bijam. Gira ca Srustih sabhara asanno 
nedtya it srnyah pakvameyat. 


Take up the plough, yoke the bullocks and 
extend the process, and when the soil is prepared sow 
the seed. With songs of thanks and joy, let the crop grow 
green and mature, and when the grain is ripe, let the 
sickle approach to harvest the grain. 


सीरा युञ्जन्ति क्‌ वयो! युगा वि त॑न्वते पृथ॑क्‌। 
धीर। देवेषु सुम्नया ॥ ४॥ 


4. Sira yunjanti kavayo yuga vi tanvate prthak. 
Dhira devesu sumnaya. 


Intelligent and enlightened farmers use the 
plough for production and develop the infrastructure 
separately in each department, and the wise with peace 
and vision direct their efforts for development to human 
values and the divine gifts of nature and environment. 


निराहावान्कुणोतन सं व॑रत्रा द॑धातन। 
सिञ्चामहा अवतमुद्रिणं वयं सुषेक मनुंपक्चितम्‌॥ ५ ॥ 
Di Nirahavan krnotana sam varatra dadhatana. 


Sincamaha avatamudrinam vayam susekaman- 
upaksitam. 


946 RGVEDA 


Develop the sources of water, manage the 
connections, and let us replenish and maintain the full 
water sources inexhaustibly good for the purpose of 
consumption and irrigation. 


इष्कुताहावमवतं सुवरत्रं सुषेचनम्‌ | 
उद्रिणं सिञ्चे अद्ितम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Iskrtahavamavatam suvaratram susecanam. 
Udrinam since aksitam. 


Protect and maintain the water reservoir well 
connected between the source and the outlet, keep it 
full for drinking and irrigation purposes, let it be self- 
abounding and inexhaustible, let me water plants and 
orchards and also keep it replenished. 


प्रीणीतार्वान्हितं जयाथ स्वस्तिवाहं रथमित्कुणुध्वम्‌। 
द्रोणाहावमवतमश्म॑चक्रमंसंत्रकोशं सिञ्चता नृपार्णम्‌।॥। ७॥ 
7. Prinitasvan hitam jayatha svastivaham rathamit 
krnudhvam. Dronahavamavatamasmacakra- 
mamsatrakosam sincata nrpanam. 

Keep the horses well fed. Realise your common 
interests. Design, make and maintain the chariot that 
brings you comfort, peace, prosperity and well being. 
Protect and maintain the big water vessel. Maintain the 


rain cycle and keep the supply line on by drinking water 
tanks and wells for human consumption and irrigation. 


asi कणुध्वं a fe al Foran वर्म सीव्यध्वं ager gar । 
पुरः कृणुध्वमाय॑सीरधुंशा मा व॑: सुस्रोच्चमसो dear 
तम्‌॥ ८॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 101 947 


8. Vrjam krnudhvam sa hi vo nrpano varma sivya- 
dhvam bahula prthuni. Purah krnudhvamaya- 
stradhrsta ma vah susroccamaso duhata tam. 


Establish stalls for cattle, build roads, sew 
corselets and build great walls, that would be the safety 
and security measure for people. Build cities of steel 
undaunted. May your ladle of yajna divine and human 
never suffer leakage. Strengthen the ladle, raise and 
expand the quality of life. 


आ वो धियं यज्ञियां ad ऊतये देवां देवीं य॑जतां यज्ञियामिह। 
सा नो दुहीयद्यव॑सेव गत्वी सहस्त्र॑धारा पय॑सा मही गोः ॥ ९ ॥ 


A vo dhiyam yajniyam varta itaye deva devim 
yajatam yajniyamaiha. Sa no duhiyadyavaseva 
gatvi sahasradhara payasa mahi gauh. 


O saints and scholars, noble people all, I exhort 
your spirit of self-sacrifice for thought and action, exalt 
this holy yajnic spirit, will and intelligence. And may 
this great spirit and divine will bring us a thousand 
streams of nectar joy and prosperity like the cow fed on 
grass which gives us milk for life and health. 


आ तू षिञ्च हरिमीं द्रोरुपस्थे वाशीभिस्तक्षताश्मन्मयींभिः। 
परि ष्वजध्वं दशं कश्च्यांभिरुभे धुरौ प्रति ate Garhi ९० ॥ 


10. A tu sifica harimim drorupasthe vasibhistaksata- 
smanmayibhih. Pari svajadhvam dasa kaksya- 
bhirubhe dhurau prati vahnim yunakta. 


O yajaka, pour inspiring soma into the cask, fill 
it to the brim, refine the cask with chiselled strokes of 
adamantine will, season the soma and secure the cask 
with ten sensitive fingers, and yoke the horse to the two 


948 RGVEDA 
suspension poles of the chariot. 


उभे धुरौ वद्धिरापिन्द॑मानोऽ न्तर्योनिंव चरति द्विजानि: 1 
वनस्पतिं वन आस्थापयध्वं नि षू दधिध्वमखनन्त 
उत्संम्‌॥ VV 


11. Ubhe dhurau vahnirapibdamano’ntaryoneva 
carati dvijanih. Vanaspatim vana asthapaya- 
dhvam ni su dadhidhvamakhananta utsam. 


Bearing two poles of life, the mind, like a chariot 
horse, goes voluble flying like a bird over the sky. O 
yajaka, place the fire amid the samits, dig into depths 
of the soul and hold on there. 


कपुंन्नरः कपुथमुहंधातन चोदय॑त Wed वाज॑सातये | 
निष्टिग्र्यः पुत्रमा च्यावयोतय इन्द्रं सबाधं इह सोम॑- 
पीतये ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Kaprnnarah kaprthamuddadhatana codayat 
khudata vajasataye. Nistigryah putrama cyava- 
yotaya indram sabadha iha somapitaye. 

Noble yajakas, Divinity is kind. Hold the 
gracious presence in the depths of the mind, move it for 
grace, rejoice in the presence and pray for food, energy 
and fulfilment of life. Adore and exalt the divine spirit 
of Eternity, Indra, for freedom from bondage and for 
the ecstasy of being here on earth itself. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 102 
Drughana or Indra Devata, Mudgala Bharmyashva Rshi 
प्रते रथं मिथूकृतमिन्द्रोऽ वतु धृष्णुया । 
अस्मिन्नाजौ deed श्रवाय्यः धनभक्षेषु नोऽ व ॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 102 949 


im Pra te ratham mithukrtamindro’vatu dhrsnuya. 
Asminnajau puruhiuta sravayye dhanabhaksesu 
no’va. 


O ruler and commander, may Indra with his 
irresistible might and weapon protect your chariot 
designed and structured by the team of scientist and 
technologist and working on double stream of energy. 
O universally invoked leader, in this famous and terrible 
battle of the nation against all-destroying forces, pray 
protect us and lead us to victory. 


sen वातो वहति वासो अस्या अधिरथं यदज॑यत्सटस्त्र॑म्‌। 
र थीर॑भूमु द्वल्ानी गविष्टौ भरे कृतं व्य॑चेदिन्द्रसेना ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Ut sma vato vahati vaso asya adhiratham 
yadajayat sahasram. Rathirabhunmudgalani 
gavistau bhare krtam vyacedindrasena. 


The wind raises and unfurls the banner of this 
force of Indra on the chariot which wins over thousands. 
The mace of the waxing force of Indra rides the chariot 
as commander in the heat of battle, the army moves and 
extends its exploits (against malice, hate and enmity). 


अन्तर्यच्छ जिघांसतो वज्र॑मिन्द्राथिदास॑तः। 
दासंस्य वा मघवन्नार्यस्य वा सनुतर्यवया वधम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


2; Anaryaccha jighamsato vajramindrabhida-satah. 
Dasasya va maghavannaryasay va sanutaryavayd 
vadham. 


Indra, lord of glory, ruling soul of the human 
system, blunt, revert and recycle the weapons of hate 
and enmity of the violent who destroy and enslave the 
spirit of love and freedom. Whether the weapon of 


950 RGVEDA 


negativity belongs to a destroyer or a dynamic person, 
always turn it off from negativity and re-employ the 
energy for positive good. 


उद्नो हृदमंपिबज्नर्हषाणः कूटं स्म तूंहदभिमांतिमेति। प्र 
मुष्कभारः श्रव॑ इच्छमानोऽ Rat बाहू अभर त्सिषासन्‌॥। ठ ॥। 


4. Udno hradamapibajjarhrsanah kutam sma 
trmhadabhimatimeti. Pra muskabharah srava 
icchamano jiram bahu abharat sisasan. 


Indra, exalted spirit of energy and joyous 
generosity, overflows with the spirit of life and love 
and enmity. Abundant and rapturous as a roaring cloud, 
loving order and enlightenment, he wields the twin arms 
of positive and negative power and, building and 
breaking, breaking and building, he advances upon the 
areas of conflict and darkness seeking to bring in light 
and love. 


न्य॑क्रन्दयन्नुपयन्तं एनममेहयन्वृषभं मध्य॑ sist: | 
तेन add शतवत्सहस्रं गवां ade: प्रधने जिगाय ॥ ५॥ 


= Nykrandayannupayanta enamamehayan vrsa- 
bham madhya ajeh. Tena subharvam Satavat 
sahasram gavam mudgalah pradhane jigaya. 


In the battle between the positive and negative 
forces of nature and humanity, the powers of evolution 
strike this abundant cloud of concentrated wealth and 
energy at the closest and make it roar as it breaks into 
showers. Thus, by the evolutionary process of positive 
catalysis, does Mudgala, Indra, joyous ruling power of 
nature and humanity in the struggle for progress, win a 
hundred-thousandfold sustaining wealth of lands, cows 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 102 951 


and culture of enlightenment against darkness and 
negativity. 


ककर्दवे वृषभो युक्त आंसीदवावचीत्सारंथिरस्य केशी । 
दुधेर्युक्तस्य द्रव॑तः Gere ऋच्छन्ति ष्मा निष्पदो! मुद्ध 
त्कानीम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Kakardave vrsabho yukta asidavavacit sarathi- 
rasya kest. Dudheryuktasya dravatah sahanasa 
rechanti sma nispado mudgalanim. 


Generous and joyous, lord of evolution and 
progress is Indra, Vrshabha, Mudgala, terribly strong, 
committed to positivity. Its chariot conductor like the 
electric force in the firmament, magnetic force on earth 
and socio-political forces in society, is vocal, thunderous 
and far reaching like hair on the head and radiations of 
the sun. Of this determined, committed, radiant lord in 
state alongwith its conductive force, the allies are like 
atoms of energy in nature and individuals in society. 
These all join its consort power, Mudgalani, of their 
own will, without any coercion or outside basis of 
supportive and persuasive elements. 


उत प्रधिमुद॑हन्नस्य विद्धानुपायुनग्वंस॑ंगमत्र feet 
इन्द्र उदावत्पतिमघ्न्यानामरंहत पद्याभिः HEIL ७॥ 


is Uta pradhimudahannasya vidvanupayuna- 
gvamsagamatra siksan. Indra udavat patima- 
ghnyana-maramhata padyabhih kakudman. 


And taking on to the steering wheel of the 
system, the scholar leader should take to the leading 
power, at the same time energising it. Thus does Indra 
animate and drive the master power of the circuit of 


952 RGVEDA 


currents, imperishable energies, and, more and more 
powerful, moves on his mission by motions of the 
wheels. 


(The mantra may be applied to the individual 
human system and its spiritual advancement. Indra, the 
soul, takes on the Buddhi, intelligential steering wheel, 
controlling the master power of the senses, that is, the 
mind, and using the senses of perception and will for 
onward motion, lives a dynamic life of success and 
progress.) 


Wager वरत्रायां दार्वानह्यमानः | नूम्णानिं 
कृण्वन्बहवे जनाय गाः प॑स्पशानस्तविंषीरधत्त Ut ८ ॥ 


8. Sunamastravyacarat kapardi varatrayam darva- 
nahyamanah. Nrmnani krnvan bahave janaya gah 
paspasanastavistradhatta. 


The dynamic disciplined soul, Indra, insulated 
within the circuitous energies of the self by inviolable 
control of the fluctuations of mind, moves on happily 
on way to spiritual progress, and similarly the self- 
disciplined leader and ruler, concentrating on social 
welfare against outer disturbances, creating many 
positive gifts for all people, watching his personal 
actions and movements of society, bears and commands 
the strength and glory of the nation. 


इमं तं usa वृषभस्य युञ्जं काष्ठाया vel द्रुघणं शयानम्‌। 
येन॑ जिगाय शतवत्सहस्रं गवां ade: पृतनाज्येषु ।॥ ९ ॥ 
9. Imam tam pasya vrsabhasya yunjam kasthaya 
madhye drughanam sayanam. Yena jigaya Satavat 
sahasram gavam mudgalah prtandjyesu. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 102 953 


Watch this, the power and force of the might 
and mace of Indra within the battle field of existence, 
destroying hate and enmity and abiding at peace by 
which Mudgala, generous lord of abundance in the 
warlike contests of life forces, has won a hundred 
thousandfold wealth of lands, cows and culture for the 
enlightenment of people. 


आरे अघा को Fajen cast यं युञ्जन्ति तम्वा 
स्थापयन्ति | नास्मै तृणं नोदकमा भरन्त्युत्तरो धुरो व॑हति 
प्रदेदिंशत्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. Are agha ko nvittha dadarsa yam yunjanti tamva 
sthapayanti. Nasmai trnam nodakama bhara- 
ntyuttaro dhuro vahati pradedisat. 


Who has seen that which thus drives away sin 
and crime, hate and enmity, poverty and adversity, the 
power which they use and establish among themselves? 
For this generous and virile power they bring no grass, 
no water, the one that is higher and higher as you try to 
know and see, that bears the centre hold of the world, 
points out the paths of life and directs us on the way. 


परिवृक्तेवं पतिविद्य॑मानट्‌ पीप्याना कूचक्रेणेव सिञ्चन्‌ । 
एषैष्या चिद्रथ्या जयेम Gass सिन॑वदस्तु सातम्‌॥ ९९॥ 


11. Parivrkteva patividyamanat pipyana kucakreneva 
sincan. Esaisya cidrathya jayema sumangalam 
sinavadastu satam. 


Like a woman who has missed her husband for 
long and on reunion waxes with joy, like a water wheel 
that constantly moves and provides water for irrigation, 
let us win happiness and well being for life by constant 


954 RGVEDA 


endeavour and dynamic will and power, and let our 
victory be the giver of prosperity and fulfilment. 


त्वं विश्व॑स्य जग॑तश्चक्षुरिन्द्रासि चक्षुषः । वृषा यदाजिं 
वृष॑णा सिषाससि चोदयन्वधिंणा युजा ॥ ९२ ॥ 


12. Tvam visvasya jagatascaksurindrasi caksusah. 
Vrsa yadajim vrsana sisasasi codayan vadhrina 
yuja. 

Indra, lord of power and energy, giver of 
fulfilment, you are the real and ultimate eye of the vision 
of the entire world of existence who, lord omnipotent, 
joined with cosmic powers of nature, inspiring and 
energising, win the battle of life’s evolution and rule 
over the world. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 103 
Indra (1-3, 5-11), Brhaspati (4), Apva (12), Indra or 
Maruts (13) Devatah; Apratiratha Aindra Rshi 


आशुः शिशानो वृषभो न भीमो घनाघनः क्षोभंणण्चर्ष- 
णीनाम्‌। संक्रन्द॑नोऽ नियिष एकवीरः तं सेनां अजयत्सा- 
कमिन्द्रः॥ ९॥ 


1. Asuh 5754770 vrsabho na bhimo ghanaghanah 
ksobhanascarsaninam. Sakrandano’nimisa 
ekavirah Satam sena ajayat sakamindrah. 


Instantly swift, sharp as a lazer beam, terrible 
like a bull, breaker of the darkest cloud, shaker of mighty 
men, roaring awful without a wink, sole hero without a 
second, Indra overthrows a hundred armies together at 
once. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 103 955 


संक्रन्दंनेनानिपिषेण जिष्णुना युत्कारेण दुरुच्यवनेनं 
धृष्णुना । तदिन्द्रंण जयत तत्सहध्वं युधो नर इषुहस्तेन 
तृष्णा ॥ २॥ 


2. Samkrandanenanimisena jisnuna yutkarena 
duscyavanena dhrsnuna. Tadindrena jayata tat 
sahadhvam yudho nara isuhastena vrsna. 


O warriors, leading lights of heroes, take up that 
challenge of antilife forces, fight that war and win with 
Indra, roaring and terrifying the enemy forces, relentless 
fighter, ambitious for victory, expert tactician, 
unshakable, irresistible, generous and brave, and armed 
with unfailing missiles for victory. 


स इषुहस्तैः स निंषद्धिभिर्वशी dest स युध इन्द्रो गणनं I 
संस्रष्टजित्सोँमपा alegre ग्रध॑न्वा प्रतिहिताभिरस्ता ॥ ३ ॥ 
3. Sa isuhastaih sa nisangibhirvasisamsrasta sa 
yudha indro ganena. Samsrstajit somapa bahu- 
sardhyugradhanva pratihitabhirasta. 


Indra is the warrior with bow and arrows in 
hand, conquers with joint armed forces, multiple enemy 
hosts, and wins over concentrated forces. Protector and 
promoter of soma peace and joy of life, strong of arms 
wielding a terrible bow, he throws out the enemies with 
the shots of his unfailing arrows. 


seed Uf दीया tas रक्षोहामित्रौ अपबाधंमानः। 
प्रभजञ्जन्त्सेनौः प्रमृणो युधा जयंन्नस्माक॑मेध्यविता रथा- 
नाम्‌॥ ४॥ 

4. Brhaspate pari diya rathenaraksohamitram 


apabadhamanah. Prabhanjantsenah pramrno 
yudha jayannasmakamedhyavita rathanam. 


956 RGVEDA 


Fly by the chariot, Brhaspati, destroyer of 
demons, repeller of enemies, breaking through and 
routing their forces. Fighting and conquering by battle, 
come, defend and save our chariots of the social order. 


बलविज्ञायः स्थविर : प्रवीरः सहस्वान्वाजी सह॑मान Sa: | 
अभिवीरो अभिसत्वा सहोजा जैत्रमिन्द्र रथमा fas 
गोवित्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


5: Balavijnayah sthavirah pravirah sahasvan vaji 
sahamana ugrah. Abhiviro abhisatva sahoja 
jaitramindra rathama tistha govit. 


Indra, tactical organiser of deployable forces, 
venerable, strong, undisturbed and invulnerable, stout 
and brave, challenging, impetuous, blazing, steadfast, 
commander of the brave, highly intelligent, valiant, 
illustrious, pray ascend the chariot of victory over 
rebellious lands. 


गो त्रभिदं गोविदं वज्र॑बाहुं जय॑न्तमच्यं प्रमृणन्तमोजसा । 
इमं संजाता अनु वीरयध्वमिन्द्रं सखायो अनु सं र॑भ- 
ध्वम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Gotrabhidam govidam vajrabahum jayanta- 
majma pramrnantamojasa. Imam sajata anu 
virayadhvamindram sakhayo anu sam rabha- 
dhvam. 


O friends, unite, prepare and mount the assault 
with Indra, our friend and comrade, breaker of enemy 
strongholds, winner of lands, hero of thunder arms and 
victorious breaker of dark mighty clouds by his valour. 
Follow the brave and advance. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 103 957 


अभि गोत्राणि सह॑सा गार्ह॑मानोऽ दयो वीरः शतमन्युरिन्द्रः 1 
दुश्च्यवनः पुंतनाषाव्ठयुध्यो ३ ऽ स्माकं सेना अवतु प्र 
युत्सु ॥ ७॥ ति ति 

i Abhi gotrani sahasa gahamano’dayo virah Sata- 
manyurindrah. Duscyavanah prtanasalyudhyo 
*smakam sena avatu pra yutsu. 


May Indra, breaker of clouds and enemy 
strongholds, with his courage and valour, unmoved by 
pity, hero of a hundredfold passion, shaker of the 
strongest evils, destroyer of enemy forces, irresistible 
watrior, protect our army in our assaults and advances. 


इन्द्र॑ आसां नेता बृहस्पतिर्दश्चिणा यज्ञः पुर एतु A: | 
देवसेनानामभिभज्जतीनां जय॑न्तीनां मरुतो यन्त्वग्र॑म्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Indra asam neta brhaspatirdaksina yajnah pura 
etu somah. Devasenanamabhibhanjatinam 
jJayantinam maruto yantvagram. 


Of these armies of the Devas, divine forces of 
nature and humanity, men of noble intentions and far 
sight, breaking through and conquering evil and 
negative elements of life, Indra of lighting power is the 
leader and commander, Brhaspati, commanding 
knowledge, tactics and wide vision, is the guide with 
yajna on his right, and Soma, lover of peace and felicity, 
is the inspiration, while Maruts, warriors of passion and 
enthusiasm, march in front. 


इन्द्रस्य वृष्णो वरूणस्य राज्ञं आदित्यानां मरुतां शर्ध उग्रम्‌। 
महाम॑नसां भुवनच्यवानां घोषो देवानां जय॑तामुद- 
स्थात्‌॥ ९॥ 


958 RGVEDA 


„8 Indrasya vrsno varunasya rajna adityanam maru- 
tam Sardha ugram. Mahamanasam bhuvana- 
cyavanam ghoso devanam jayatamudasthdat. 


Great is the valour and passion of victorious and 
virile Indra, of the ruler Varuna, visionary Adityas and 
impetuous Maruts, all great and magnanimous at heart 
who shake the world with their vision and performance, 
and so let these victorious divinities’ tumulluous uproar 
of victory rise and reverberate in the skies. 


vata मघवन्नायुधान्युत्सत्व॑नां मामकानां मनांसि i उद्‌ 
eat वाजिनान्युद्र्थानां जय॑तां यन्तु घोर्षाः ।॥ ९०॥ 


10. Uddharsaya maghavannayudhanyut satvanam 
mamakanam manamsi. Udvrtrahan vajinam 
vajinanyudrathanam jayatam yantu ghosah. 


Indra, Maghavan, lord of glory, ruler of the land, 
raise, calibrate and sharpen your weapons, raise the mind 
and morale of my brave warriors, O breaker of the clouds 
and darkness of evil, raise the calibre and hitting 
efficiency of the fast moving forces of cavalry, armour 
and air force, and let the roar of the victorious warriors 
rise and rumble in space. 


अस्माकमिन्द्रः समृतेषु ध्वजेष्वस्माकं या इष॑वस्ता Sard | 
अस्माकं वीरा उत्त॑रे भवन्त्वस्मां S देवा अवता हवेषु ।॥ ९९ ॥ 


11. Asmamamindrah samrtsu dhvajesvasmakam ya 
isavasta jayantu. Asmakam vira uttare bhava- 
ntvasmam u deva avata havesu. 


In international gatherings, let Indra, our leader, 
raise our flag high in the flag lines, may our shots of 
arrows hit the targets and win the battles, let our brave 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 104 959 


progeny and our brave warriors be higher than others 
in excellence, and may the divinities protect us in the 
call to action in the battle field. 


अपीषां चित्तं प्रतिलोभयन्ती eros teres परेहि। अभि 
प्रेहि निर्दह हृत्सु शोकैरन्धेनापित्रास्तम॑सा सचन्ताम्‌ ९२ ॥ 


12. Amisam cittam pratilobhayanti grhananganyapve 
parehi. Abhi prehi nirdaha hrtsu Sokairandhe- 
namitrastamasa sacantam. 


Get off, schizophrenia, that torment the heart 
and delude their mind, depart, ill health, that afflict and 
disable the body system of those who are children of 
light. Go forward, be there and burn with pain in the 
heart of those who are negative souls and love to abide 
with darkness of mind and sloth of body with suffering 
and unfriendliness as their food of life. 


प्रेता जय॑ता नर इन्द्रो a: शर्म यच्छतु | 
उग्रा व॑ः सन्तु बाहवोऽ नाधृष्या यथासथ ॥ ९३ ॥ 

13. Preta jayata nara indro vah Sarma yacchatu. 
Ugrah vah santu bahavo’nadhrsya yathasatha. 


Go forward, leading lights, achieve your goals 
and win your victories. May Indra, lord omnipotent of 
honour and glory, bless you with peace and fulfilment. 
Let your arms be strong and bold so that you may live 
an active life of irresistible honour and joy without fear. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 104 
Indra Devata, Ashtaka Vaishvamitra Rshi 


असावि सोम॑ः पुरुहूत तुभ्यं हरिभ्यां asad याहि तूय॑म्‌ । 
तुभ्यं गिरो विप्र॑वीरा इयाना द॑धन्विर इन्दर frat सुतस्य 2 


960 RGVEDA 


1. Asavi somah puruhuta tubhyam haribhyam 
yajnamupa yahi tuyam. Tubhyam giro vipravira 
iyana dadhanvira indra piba sutasya. 

Indra, omnipotent ruler of the world, lord 
invoked by all people, our soma of love and adoration 
is prepared and seasoned for you, come soon to our yajna 
by the radiations of your refulgent presence. Vibrant 
poets and sages have prepared songs of adoration for 
you. Pray come, accept and enjoy our homage, and 
protect and promote this world of your own creation 
for us. 


अप्सु धूतस्य॑ हरिवः पिबेह नृभिः सुतस्य जठरं yor | 
पिपिक्षुर्यमद्रय इन्द्र तुभ्यं तेभिर्वर्धस्व मद॑मुक्थवाहः 1 २ ॥ 


os Apsu dhutasya harivah pibeha nrbhih sutasya 
jatharam prnasva. Mimiksuryamasraya indra 
tubhyam tebhirvardhasva madamukthavahah. 


Indra, lord omnipotent, Hariva, saviour from 
suffering and commander of nature’s forces, drink of 
the ecstatic soma created and seasoned in the joyous 
currents of our karma at heart in the soul by enlightened 
sages. Pray accept, protect and promote this soma of 
joy showered by clouds and seasoned by sages for you, 
and feel exalted with them all to your full satisfaction 
and ever increase the joy. 


प्रोग्रां पीतिं acct इयमिं सत्यां wa सुतस्य॑ हर्यश्व तुभ्य॑म्‌ । 
इन्द्र धेनाभिरिह मादयस्व धीभिर्विश्वाभिः राच्या 
गृणानः ॥ ३ ॥ 

a: Program pitim vrsna tyarmi satyam prayai suta- 
sya haryasva tubhyam. Indra dhenabhiriha mada- 
yasva dhibhirvisvabhih Sacya grnanah. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 104 961 


O lord of showers and nature’s radiant rays, I 
move this prayer and offer this soma drink distilled so 
true and exalting for your pleasure. Indra, adored and 
exalted by all our songs, thoughts and holy actions here, 
pray rejoice and exalt us too. 


ऊती शचीवस्तव वीर्येण वयो दर्धाना उशिज ऋतज्ञाः । 
प्रजाव॑दिन्द्र्‌ मनुषो दुरोणे तस्थुर्गणन्त॑ः सधमाद्यासः ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Uti Sacivastava viryenavayo dadhana usija rta- 
jnah. Prajavadindra manuso durone tasthurgrna- 
ntah sadhamadyasah. 


Indra, lord of holy actions of creation, 
sustenance and finale, under your protection by your 
power and generosity, ardent devotees bearing food, 
good health and long age, knowing and pursuing the 
laws of truth and yajnic living, blest with good progeny 
and noble humanity, abide in their yajnic home, singing, 
rejoicing and celebrating your generosity. 


woifatas हर्यश्व सुष्टोः dame पुरूरुचो जनांसः। 
मंहिंछामूतिं वितिरे दर्धानाः स्तोतारं इन्द्र तव॑ सूनु- 
ताभिः॥५॥ 


=e Pranitibhiste haryasva sustoh susumnasya puru- 
ruco janasah. Mamhisthamutim vitire dadhanah 
stotara indra tava sunrtabhih. 


Indra, lord of radiant powers, adorable, gracious 
and self-refulgent, noble people, your celebrants, 
bearing the advantage of your generous protection, cross 
the seas of existence by virtue of your divine directions 
and the wisdom of your words of eternal truth. 


962 RGVEDA 


उप ब्रह्माणि हरिवो हरिभ्यां सोम॑स्य याहि cera ares । 
इन्द्र॑ त्वा यज्ञः क्षम॑माणमानड्‌ दाश्वां अंस्यध्वरस्यं प्रकेतः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Upa brahmani harivo haribhyam somasya yahi 
pitaye sutasya. Indra tva yajnah ksamama- 
namanad dasvam asyadhvarasya praketah. 


Indra, lord of radiant powers, come by the 
radiations of your divine presence to our songs and acts 
of adoration to listen and to drink the soma of our love 
and homage distilled from the heart. May our yajna reach 
you, lord omnipotent, gracious and forgiving. You are 
the generous giver, you know the yajna, and you award 
the fruits of yajna. 


सहस्त्र॑वाजमभिमातिषाहं सुतेर॑णं मघर्वानं Gara 
उप॑ भूषन्ति गिरो अप्र॑तीतमिन्द्रं नमस्या ज॑रितुः प॑नन्त ॥ ७ ॥ 


7, Sahasravajamabhimatisaham sutenanam magha- 
vanam suvrktim. Upa bhisanti giro apratita- 
mindram namasya jarituh pananta. 


Him, who is lord of a thousand powers, subduer 
of challenging enmities, lover of soma and his own 
creation, mighty glorious, adorable, matchless Indra, 
songs of adoration exalt and salutations of celebrants 
praise. 


सप्तापो देवीः सुरणा अमसरक्ता याभिः सिन्धुमत॑र इन्द्र UP 


नवतिं स्रोत्या नव॑ च स््रव॑न्तीर्देवेभ्यो' गातुं मनुषे च 
विन्दः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Saptapo 4८171 surana amrkta yabhih sindhuma- 
tara indra purbhit. Navatim srotyad nava ca 
sravantirdevebhyogatum manusae ca vindah. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 105 963 


Indra, lord breaker of the strongholds of 
darkness, want and negativities, seven are the divine 
streams which flow free and unobstructed, by which 
you fill the sea and help us cross it, ninety are the streams 
flowing, and nine the sources of the flow by which you 
bless the divines and humans to find and follow the 
paths of life to the destination. 


अपो महीरभिश॑स्तेरमुञ्चोऽ जांगरास्वधिं देव एक॑ः । इन्द्र 
यास्त्वं वृत्रतूर्ये चकर्थ ताभिर्विश्वायुंस्तन्वं पुपुष्याः ॥ ९ ॥ 


ध Apo mahirabhisasteramunco jagarasvadhi deva 
ekah. Indra yastvam vrtraturye cakartha tabhir- 
visvayustanvam pupusyah. 


The great streams of water which you released 
from ignominious self-containment, i.e., from the 
hoarding clouds and the adamantine mountains, and 
over which you, the sole one divinity, keep relentless 
watch, ever awake, Indra, those which you brought into 
being by breaking the cloud and whatever else you did, 
by the same streams, O life of life, nourish and promote 
the body and health of all living beings of the world. 


वीरेण्यः क्रतुरिन्द्रः सुशस्तिरुतापि धेनां gees 
sea वृत्रमकृणोदु Sieh संसाहे शक्रः पृत॑ना 
अभिष्टिः Qo 

10. Virenyah kraturindrah suSastirutapi dhena puru- 


hutamitte. Ardayadvrtramakrnodu lokam sasahe 
Sakrah prtana abhistih. 


Indra is brave, noble doer, admirable, and so 
does the Vedic voice adore him, universally loved and 
invoked. He breaks the demons of darkness, want and 


964 RGVEDA 


ignorance, brings in light, and, mighty protector as he 
is, conquers all antilife forces. 


शुनं gan मघवानमिन्द्रमस्मिन्भरे नृत॑मं वाजसातौ । 
श्रृण्वन्त॑मुग्रमूतये' समत्सु wed वृत्राणि संजितं धना- 
नाम्‌।॥ ९९॥ 

11. सावी huvema maghavanamindramasmin bhare 


nrtamam vajasatau. Srnvantamugram- utye 
samatsu ghnantam vrtrani samjitam dhananam. 


We invoke and adore Indra, lord of bliss, 
glorious, best of men and leaders, in this our battle of 
life for protection, victory and further progress. He is 
the best listener, illustrious, blazing in battles, destroyer 
of the demons of darkness and winner of wealth and 
honours. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 105 
Indra Devata, Sumitra or Durmitra Kautsa Rshi 


कदा dat स्तोत्रं हर्य॑त॒ आव॑ श्मशा रुधद्वाः | 
दीर्घं सुतं वाताप्याय ॥ ९॥ 

1. Kada vaso stotram haryata ava $masa rudhadvah. 
Dirgham sutam vatapyaya. 


O Vasu, shelter home of life, when does the spirit 
inspire, impel and create the joyous song of celebration 
for Indra? When it controls the various flow of the mind, 
then the lasting soma is prepared for the ecstatic soul. 


हरी यस्य॑ सुयुजा विव्र॑ता वेरर्वन्तानु Brat 
उभा रजी न केशिना पतिर्दन्‌॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 105 965 


2. Hari yasya suyuja vivrta verarvantani Sepa. 
Ubha raji na kesina patirdan. 


The person whose senses of perception and 
volition are properly under control, dedicated to the soul 
in repose and illuminative like the sun and moon in 
unison, is blest by the master with the gift of peace and 
divine ecstasy in the state of grace. 


अप योरिन्द्रः पाप॑ज आ मर्तो न शश्रमाणो fasitars 
शुभे यद्युंयुजे तविरंषीवान्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 

Apa yorindrah papaja त marto na Sasramano 
bibhivan. Subhe yadyuyuje tavisivan. 


Repeller is Indra for the man of sin, fearsome 
like a person sitting in judgement for punishment, but 
for the man dedicated to good and joined to the divine 
spirit, he is the giver of light and power. 


सचायोरिन्द्रश्चर्कुष ओं उपानसः संपर्यन्‌। 
नदयोर्विव्रतयोः शूर इन्द्र॑ः US ॥ 

4. Sacayorindrascarkrsa am upanasah saparyan. 
Nadayorvivratayoh sura indrah. 


For the person dedicated to him, serving him 
and faithfully depending on him as the master, Indra is 
a friend and comrade and does every good thing for 
him, but for the vociferous and the refractory, he is a 
mighty awful punitive and corrective power. 


अधि यस्तस्थौ केशवन्ता व्यचस्वन्ता न UST । 
तनोति शिप्राभ्यां शिप्रिणीवान्‌॥ ५॥ 


=) Adhi yastasthau kesvanta vyacasvanta na pustydi. 
Vanoti Ssiprabhyam Siprinivan. 


966 RGVEDA 


Indra who, like the sun of radiant and expansive 
light, abides and rules over the world of heaven and 
earth with his potent and pervasive presence for the 
evolution and progress of life, wins over the contraries 
and provides everything for the pious and law abiding 
by both his promotive and punitive powers. 


प्रास्तौदुष्वौजां ऋष्वेभिंस्ततश्च शूर : शव॑सा। 
ऋभुर्न क्रतुं भिर्मातरिश्वा ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Prastaudrsvauja rsvebhistataksah surah Savasa. 
Rbhurna kratubhirmatarisva. 


Indra, glorious lord of omnipotence, is 
universally adored and served by cosmic forces and he, 
Matarishva, mighty presence active in universal nature, 
as Rbhu, cosmic architect, creates and structures the 
universe by his divine vision, intelligence and shaping 
powers. 


ag यश्चक्रे सुहनाय दस्य॑वे हिरीमशो दहिरीमान्‌। 
TOTES तं न रजं: ॥ ७॥ 


des Vajram yascakre suhanaya dasyave hirimaso 
hirtman. Arutahanuradbhutam na rajah. 


He, the lord who made the Vajra, cosmic force 
of universal dynamics, for breaking and building, 
consumption and creation through transformation of the 
forms in evolutionary process, and for emergence of 
light over darkness and positive over negative, is the 
lord of golden glory. He commands golden blissful 
powers and inviolable creative imagination, and is 
mysterious and sublime like the expansive space and 
time continuum. 


MANDAL - 10 / ऽक - 105 967 


अवं नो वृजिना शिंशीह्यूचा व॑नेमानृचंः | 
नाब्र॑ह्या यज्ञ ऋधग्जोषंति त्वे ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ava no vrjina Ssisthyrca vanemanrcah. 
Nabrahma yajna rdhagjosati tve. 


Reduce and remove our sin and crookedness. 
Let us win over the negationists with hymns of positive 
celebration of nature and divinity. Yajna, pursuit of 
knowledge and joint action, without grateful celebration 
of divinity with Vedic hymns does not at all win your 
approval and blessing. 


Beat यत्तं त्रेतिनी भूद्यज्ञस्यं धूर्षु सदा॑न्‌ । 
सजूनविं स्वय॑शसं सचायोः ॥ ९॥ 


9. Urdhva yat te tretini bhudyajnasya dhursu 
sadman. Sajurnavam svayasasam sacayoh. 


Your Trinity of divine glory and power rising 
with the flames of cosmic yajna, the Trinity of Purusha, 
Prakrti and Jiva, the soul, which pervades the threefold 
universe of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, matter, energy and 
thought, which pervades the three worlds of heaven, 
earth and the skies, which activates divine stuti, 
prarthana and upasana (adoration, prayer and 
meditation) rising in the hearts of yajakas, and which 
perfumes the house of cosmic yajna in space, that is the 
ark, friend of humanity, with its own divine glory, and 
life companion of the human soul in the world of 
existence: that ark of life and divinity may we embark 
with the three-dimensional mantra of Rk, Sama and 
Yajus and cross the seas of existence. 


968 RGVEDA 


Bra ते पृशिनिरुपसेच॑नी भूच्छ्यि afar: | 
यया स्वे पात्रे सिञ्चस उत्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. Sriye te prsnirupasecani bhucchriye darvira- 
repah. Yaya sve patre sincasa ut. 


Let the sun, the skies and the divine voice be 
for your glory, expression of the showers of bliss. Let 
the yajnic ladle of immaculate ghrta be for the 
celebration of your glory without a trace of human 
selfishness. By these you shower the grace of your light 
and bliss with water on your own seat of humanity, the 
earth. 


शतं वा यद॑सुर्य प्रतिं त्वा सुमित्र इत्थास्तौदुर्मित्र इत्थास्तौत्‌। 
आवो ated कुत्सपुत्रं प्रावो यर्द॑स्युहत्ये' कुत्सव- 
त्सम्‌॥ ९९॥ ` ट ति 

11. सवव va yadasurya prati tva sumitra ittha- 
stauddurmitra itthastaut. Avo yaddasyuhatye 
kutsaputram pravo yaddasyuhatye kutsavatsam. 


O lord of cosmic energy of pranic existence, thus 
does the positive friend of divinity adore you a hundred 
ways and more. Thus does the negative friend of 
negativities adore you a hundred times and more, you 
who save the child of the pious in the elimination of 
evil, you who protect the darling child of the celebrant 
in the struggle against negationists. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 106 
Ashvins Devate, Bhutansha Kashyapa Rshi 


उभा उ नूनं तदिदर्थयेथे fa त॑न्वाथे धियो वस्त्रापसेव । 
सध्रीचीना यात॑वे प्रेम॑जीगः Geta पूश्च आ तंसयेथे ॥ ९ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 106 ०69 


im Ubha u nunam tadidarthayethe vi tanvathe dhiyo 
vastrapaseva. Sadhricinad 241417८ premajigah 
sudineva prksa a tamsayethe. 


O Ashvins, complementarities of nature’s energy 
and human resources, you want just that medium and 
opportunity for your operation by which you may extend 
your field of action like the weavers extending the warp 
and woof of their cloth. The yajamana has been waiting 
and waking so that you come together and, as in happy 
time, you may add beauty and comfort to life with joint 
relations and corporate activity. 


उष्टारैव फर्वरेषु श्रयेथे प्रायोगेव श्वात्र्या शासुरेथः | 
दूतेव हि टो यशसा जनेषु माप॑ स्थातं महिषेवावपानात्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Ustareva pharvaresu Srayethe prayogeva $vatrya 
sasurethah. Duteva hi stho yaSasa janesu mapa 
statam mahisevavapanat. 


As the loving and shining twins of nature at the 
beginning of creation, you take on work worth 
completion. Like a perfect team of fast and united 
experts, you move and work within the master’s order 
and design. Stay within the community with honour and 
fame like welcome prophets of good news, do not stay 
away as veteran achievers do not go away from their 
ideal station of self- fulfilment. 


साकंयुजा शकुनस्येव पश्चा पश्वेव चित्रा यजुरा NET | 
अभिसिव देवयोर्दीदिवांसा परिज्मानेव यजथः पुरुत्रा ॥ ३॥ 

x Sakamyuja Sakunasyeva paksa paSsveva citra 
yajura gamistam. Agniriva devayordidivamsa 
parijmaneva yajathah purutra. 


970 RGVEDA 


Team of simultaneous workers like wings of a 
bird, wondrous as visionaries, lovers of divinity bright 
as fire, come and join our yajna together and, like the 
winds blowing all time and seasons over spaces, 
continue the programme abundantly. 


आपी at अस्मे fara पुत्रोगरेवं रुचा नृपतीव तुर्यै । 
इर्येव पुष्ये किरणेव भुज्ये श्रुष्टीवानेव हवमा ग॑मिष्टम्‌॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Api vo asme pitareva putrogreva ruca nrpativa 
turyai. Iryeva pustyai kiraneva bhujyai Ssrusti- 
vaneva havama gamistam. 


Twin brothers of ours, protective as parents for 
children, bright as blazing fire and the sun, instant 
achievers like ruling twins, nourishing and 
strengthening life like pranic energies, soothing as 
warmth of sun rays for comfort and joy, pray listen to 
our call and come immediately as success itself. 


aaa पूषयीं शिम्बातां fare ऋता तरा शातंपन्ता । 
amare वय॑सा घर्म्येष्ठा wearer स॑पर्या३ पुरीषा ॥ ५ ॥ 


5: Vamsageva pusarya Simbata mitreva rta Satara 
Satapanta. Vajevocca vayasa gharmyestha mese- 
vesd saparyad purisa. 


Providers of food and nourishment like a team 
of bullocks, givers of love and peace like friends, 
omnipresent observers of truth and law, hundredfold 
performers, saviours and protectors in a hundred ways, 
high and great like the spirit of energy, harbingers of 
good health and age, dedicated to Dharma, strong like 
rams in raiment like the golden fleece, and worthy of 
service and reverence, that’s what you are. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 106 971 


सृण्येव जर्भरी तुर्फरीतू नैतोशेव तुर्फरीं पर्फरीका | 
उदन्यजेव Saat मदेरू ता A जराय्वजरं मरायु ॥। ६ ॥ 


6. Srnyeva jarbhari turpharitu naitoseva turphari 
parpharika. Udanyajeva jemand maderu ta me 
jJarayvajaram marayu. 


Shining and supporting like the moon, 
destroyers of hate and enmity, distributors of boons, 
powers of punishment for evil, breakers of darkness, 
pearls of the sea, victorious, joyous, may the Ashvins 
give the aging mortal like me the gift of unaging health 
and immortality. 


wa चर्च\रं जारं मरायु क्षदोवार्थेषु तर्तरीथ sar | 
ऋभू नाप॑त्वरमजा खरजुंर्वायुर्न प॑फरत्क्षयद्रयीणाम्‌ i ७॥ 


qt Pajreva carcaram jaram marayu ksadmev- 
arthesu tartaritha ugra. Rbhu napat kharamajra 
kharajrurvayurna parpharat ksayadrayinam. 


Ashvins, like mighty fast and illustrious pilots, 
take the uncertain, transitory, aging mortal through the 
objects of value and desire across the seas. Like artists 
of perfect expertise and builders of the chariot, may the 
Ashvins come like impetuous winds and bring us wealth 
and life’s fulfilment. 


घर्मेव मधु जठरे सनेरू भगेविता तुर्फरी फारिवार॑म्‌। प तरेवं 
चचरा चन्द्रनिंर्णीङ्‌ west मनन्या३ न जग्मी ve ॥ 


8. Gharmeva madhu jathare saneru bhagevita 
turphari pharivaram. Patareva cacara candra- 
nirnin manarnga mananya na jagmi. 


Like the warmth and cool of the sun and moon, 


972 RGVEDA 


you make us share the honey sweets of life at the heart 
of the nation. Protectors of the nation’s honour, well 
equipped with power, force, and armaments for defence, 
ever on the watch like birds on the move, blissful of 
form like the moon, dynamic as mind in action, 
perceptive and responsive as visionary wise sages and 
tacticians: Such you are, rulers and warriors of the nation 
of humanity. 


geda गम्भरेषु प्रतिष्ठां पादेव गाधं ata विदाथः। 
कर्णेव शासुरनु हि स्मराथोऽ शव नो भजतं Farrag: ॥ ९॥ 


9. Brhanteva gambharesu pratisthampadeva 
gadham tarate vidathah. Karneva sasuranu hi 
smarathom’seva no bhajatam citramapnah. 


Like all great men, you have attained stability 
of mind and action in the deeper situations of life. Like 
the feet of the traveller fording a stream, you feel the 
depth of the water. Like the ears, you listen to the ruler 
and you remember and remind all others of their duty. 
Pray, like rays of the sun, please share the wonders of 
our karma. 


आर क्गरेव मध्वेर॑येथे सार घेव गवि नीचीन॑बारे | कीनारेव 
स्वेद॑मासिष्वदाना amar सूयवसात्सचेथे ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Arangareva madhverayethe saragheva gavi 
nicinavare. Kinareva svedamasisvidana ksame- 
vorja suyavasat sacethe. 


In approval and appreciation of our performance 
you excite and inspire us with the sweetness of life. 
Like humming bees filling the honey comb hanging 
down, you bring the milk and honey of nature from 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 107 973 


above down to the earth and the cow. Like toiling 
farmers sowing the seeds of their sweat in the field and 
the earth yielding food from crops and herbs, you bring 
life energy for the body, mind and soul. 


रध्याम स्तोमं सनुयाम वाजमा नो मन्तरं सरथेहोपं यातम्‌ । 
यशो न पक्वं मधु गोष्वन्तरा भूतांशो' अश्विनोः कामं- 
WOT: ULV 


11. Rdhvama stomam sanuyama vajama no mantram 
sarathehopa yatam. Yaso na pakvam madhu 
gosvantara bhutamso asvinoh kamamaprah. 


Let us realise and extend the meaning and 
application of the mantric song of life and achieve 
further progress. O Ashvins, come close by your car, 
share and confirm our mantras and mantric success in 
practice. And may the honour and excellence of the 
nation as well as ripe grain, honey, and milk in the cow’s 
udders and our knowledge of the physical essence of 
the world fulfil the hopes and expectations of the 
Ashvins and of the men and women of the world. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 107 
Dakshina or Dakshina-datarah Devata, Divya Angirasa 
or Dakshina Prajapatya Rshi 

आविरंभून्महि माघोनमेषां विश्वं जीवं तम॑सो Frater । 
महि ज्योतिः पितृभिर्दत्तमागादुरुः पन्था दक्षिणाया 
अदि ॥ ९॥ 

0 Avirabhunmahi maghonamesam visvam jivam 
tamaso niramoci. Mahi jyotih pitrbhirdattamaga- 
duruh pantha daksinaya adarsi. 


974 RGVEDA 


Revealed and manifest is the great light and 
glory of these sun-rays, the entire life of the world is 
revealed and released from darkness. Mighty light given 
by parental radiations of the sun is come, yajna is 
accomplished, and the broad flow of generosity is seen 
on high. 


ven दिवि दक्षिणावन्तो अस्थुर्ये अश्वदाः सह ते सूर्येण | 
हिरण्यदा अमृतत्वं ward वासोदाः ala प्र तिरन्त 
आयुः ॥ २॥ 


2. Ucca divi daksinavanto asthurye asvadah saha 
te suryena. Hiranyada amrtatvam bhajante 
vasodah soma pra tiranta ayuh. 


Generous givers of dakshina holy gift, abide on 
high in the regions of light and bliss. Those who give 
horse in charity ride with the sun. Givers of gold win 
immortality. O Soma, friend of peace and joy, givers of 
shelter and clothes cross the hurdles of life and live a 
long age. 


दैवीं ufdd fatun देवयज्या न कवारिभ्यो! नहि ते पृणन्ति | 
अथा नरः प्रय॑तदश्चिणासोऽ वद्यभिया बहवः पृणन्ति ॥ २॥ 


of Daivi purtirdaksina devayajya na kavaribhyo 
nahi te prnanti. Atha narah prayatadaksinaso- 
*yadyabhiya bahavah prnanti. 


Divine fulfilment and yajnic dakshina for the 
holy Devas is not for the stingy, selfish and the mean, 
because they give not for anyone, anything. And many 
are those who give liberally for fear of ignominy and 
shame, they give for the fulfilment of the deserving holy 
ones. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 107 975 


शतधारं वायुमर्कं स्वर्विदं नृचक्षसस्ते अभि चंश्चते ater: | 
ये पृणन्ति प्र च यच्छन्ति संगमे ते दश्चिणां दुहेत सस- 
मातरम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Satadharam vayumarkam svarvidam nrcaksa- 
saste abhi caksate havih. Ye prnanti pra ca ya- 
cchanti samgame te daksinam duhate saptama- 
taram. 


They know and give liberal dakshina for Vayu 
blowing in a hundred streams, for the sun in heaven 
and for many other Devas who love, watch and guard 
humanity. And those who serve the devas and offer 
homage and gifts in yajna wherein they join the 
divinities themselves receive the fruits of yajna flowing 
in by seven streams. 


दक्िंणावान्प्रथमो ea Ufa दक्चिणावान्ग्रामणीरग्रमेति । 
तमेव म॑न्ये नृपतिं जनानां यः प्र॑थमो दरक्चिणामाविवायं ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Daksinavan prathamo hita eti daksinavan gra- 
maniragrameti. Tameva manye nrpatim jananam 
yah prathamo daksinamavivaya. 


The giver of dakshina is first invited and goes 
about in advance of all, the giver of dakshina is chosen 
as leader and head of the community and goes to occupy 
the first place. I accept him as leader and ruler of the 
people, who rises first and highest as the man of 
generous giving. 


तमेव ऋषिं ad ब्रह्माणमाहुर्यज्ञन्यं सामगामुंक्थशासंम्‌। 
स शुक्रस्य॑ तन्वो वेद तिस्त्रो यः प्र॑ंथमो दश्चिणया र॒राध॑ ॥ ६ ॥ 


976 RGVEDA 


6. Tameva rsim tamu brahmanamahuryajnanyam 
samagamukthasasam. Sa sukrasya tanvo veda 
tisro yah prathamo daksinaya raradha. 


He alone they call Rshi, the seer, Brahma, 
presiding priest of yajna, Adhvaryu, prime organiser, 
Samaga, singer of Saman hymns, and Ukthashasa, 
scholar specialist of the Rks, and he alone is the knower 
of immaculate divinity, who has first realised the three 
mantras of Aum, three branches of Veda, Rk, Yajuh and 
Sama, three orders of yajnic fire, Agni, Vayu and Aditya, 
and who has first fulfilled the basic part and pre-requisite 
of yajna, Dakshina. 


दक्चिणाश्वं afaton गां द॑दाति दक्षिणा चन्द्रमुत यद्धि 
र॑ण्यम्‌। दश्चिणान्नं वनुते यो न॑ आत्मा दश्चिणां वर्म कृणुते 
विजानन्‌ 9 0 

Ts Daksinasvam daksina gam dadati daksina 
candramuta yaddhiranyam. Daksinannam vanute 
yo na atma daksinam varma krnute vijanan. 


He who gives a horse as dakshina, who gives a 
cow, who gives silver, who gives gold, gives food and 
food grains, that giver is our own, the very soul of yajna 
and, knowing this secret of yajna, he creates a protective 
cover for himself by dakshina. 


न भोजा det न्यर्थमींयुर्न रिष्यन्ति न व्य॑थन्ते ह AIST: | 
इदं यद्विश्वं भुव॑नं स्व॑श्यैतत्सर्वं दक्षिणैभ्यो ददाति ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Na bhoja mamrurna nyardhamiyurna risyanti na 
vyathante ha bhojah. Idam yadvisvam bhuvanam 
svascaitat sarvam daksinaibhyo dadati. 


The givers of food die not, nor do they suffer 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 107 977 


want and poverty, they are never hurt, never violated, 
never suffer pain, because they give food in charity. And 
all this that the world is, all this that is comfort, joy and 
bliss, all this, Dakshina gives to those who give in 
charity. 


भोजा Req: सुरभिं योनिमग्रे भोजा जिग्युर्वध्वं या 
सुवासाः । भोजा जिंग्युरन्तःपेयं सुराया भोजा जिग्युर्ये 
अहूताः प्रयन्ति ॥ ९॥ 


1 Bhoja jigyuh surabhim yonimagre bhoja jigyur- 
vadhvam ya suvasah. Bhoja jigyurantahpeyam 
suraya bhoja jirgyurye ahutah prayanti. 


The givers of food and relief first get a good 
fragrant home, liberal givers win a fair accomplished 
wife, generous givers reach the end sweetness of all 
drinks, and they win over even those who assail them, 
without challenge or provocation. 


भोजायाश्वं सं प्र॑जन्त्याशुं भोजायास्ते कन्या ३ शुम्भ॑- 
माना | भोजस्येदं पुंष्क्रिणीव वेश्म परिष्कृतं देवमानेवं 
यित्रम्‌॥ gon 


10. Bhojayasvam sam mrjantyasum bhujayaste kanya 
sumbhamana. Bhojasyedam puskariniva vesma 
pariskrtam devamaneva citram. 


For the generous giver they embellish and adorn 
the fleet horse, for the generous groom the maiden waits 
and sits on the wedding vedi in all her finery, and for 
the generous man is this home, lovely as a rose bouquet 
and decorated, wonder worked and sanctified as a 
temple of divinities. 


978 RGVEDA 


भोजमश्वाः सुष्ठुवाहो वहन्ति सुवृद्रथो, वर्तते दक्षिणायाः | 
भोजं दैवासोऽ वता भरेषु भोजः शत्रून्त्समनीकेषु जेत। ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Bhojamasvah susthuvaho vahanti suvrdratho 
vartate daksinayah. Bhojam devaso’vata bharesu 
bhojah Satruntsamanikesu jeta. 


Well trained horses bear the generous master 
along in his travels, by dakshina gift to the craftsman a 
comfortable chariot is obtained, the divinities protect 
and advance the generous yajamana in all his yajnic 
battles for life, and the generous giver alone is the winner 
over oppositions in all conflicts. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 108 
Devata: Sarama (7, 3, 5, 7, 9), Panayah (2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 
11); Rshi: Panayah Asurah (1, 3, 5, 7, 9), Sarama 
Devashuni (2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 11) 

This sukta is a dialogue between the Panis who 
are also Asuras, and Sarama. At the physical level the 
Panis are the dark clouds of vapours, and Sarama is 
thunder and lightning. At the spiritual, the Panis are the 
senses and pranas and Sarama is the energy of the spirit, 
the soul’s urge for living, elan vital or Ashish. 


किमिच्छन्ती सरमा प्रेदमानड्‌ दूरे ह्यध्वा sate: परायैः। 
कास्मेहितिः का परितक्म्यासीत्कथं Carat अतरः 
पयांसि ॥ ९॥ 


Le Kimicchanti sarama predamanad dure hyadhva 
jJagurih paracaih. Kasmehitih ka paritakmyasit 
katham rasaya atarah payamsi. 


What does she want? Sarama, thunder voice of 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 108 979 


divinities, that is come here? The path which the higher 
ones tread is far off, not here. And what is our interest 
here in her coming? How deep is the darkness like the 
unfathomable night! How has she crossed the floods of 
the skies. (This is what the Panis say in response to 
Sarama’s approach.) 


इन्द्रस्य दूतीरिषिता च॑रामि मह इच्छन्ती! पणयो 
निधीन्व॑ः। अतिष्कदो भियसा ast आवत्तथां रसार्या 
अतरं पयांसि ॥ २॥ 


2. Indrasya dutirisita carami maha icchanti panayo 
nidhin vah. Atiskado bhiyasa tanna avat tatha 
rasaya ataram payamsi. 


Sarama: O clouds, O pranic energies, I am the 
dynamic spirit of Indra, inspired by Indra, I sojourn here, 
anxious to take on the treasures and pleasures of your 
living possibilties. I wander from the boundless force 
of Indra, and I wander with fear. May Indra protect us. 
That’s how I have crossed the floods of water and the 
golden greens of Indra’s court. 


की दूङ्डिनन्द्रः सरमे का दृशीका यस्येदं दूतीरसरः 
पराकात्‌। आ च गच्छास्ित्रमेना दधामाथा गवां 
गोप॑तिर्नो भवाति ॥ ३॥ 


a Kidrnnindrah sarame ka drsika yasyedam 
dutirasarah parakat. A ca gacchanmitramena 
dadhama’tha gavam gopatirno bhavati. 


Panis: O Sarama, voice of thunder and lightning, 
O dynamic spirit of life, what sort is this Indra? What is 
his strength and splendour whose messenger you come 
travelling from far, whom we should receive as a friend 


980 RGVEDA 


and bear as one that he may be our master and the master 
of our cows, our powers and potentials for living? 


नाहं तं वेद्‌ दभ्यं दभत्स यस्येदं दूतीरस॑रं पराकात्‌। 
न तं tetra स्रवतो गभीरा हता SHOT पणयः शयध्वे NN ४ ॥ 


4. Naham tam veda dabhyam dadhat sa yasyedam 
dutirasaram parakat. Na tam guhanti sravato 
gabhira hata indrena panayah sayadhve. 


Sarama: O Panis, O clouds, O senses and pranic 
powers of practical living, I do not comprehend that 
power, Indra, which is undaunted, which is 
overpowering, whose messenger I am, come from afar. 
Mighty rolling oceans of unfathomable depth cannot 
cover it, nor contain it. Indeed, struck by Indra, the 
clouds fall in showers and lie on the ground. 


इमा गाव॑ः सरमे या tes: uf feat अन्तान्त्सुभगे 
पतन्ती । कस्तं एना अव॑ सृजादयुध्व्युतास्माकमायुधा 
सन्ति तिग्मा NG 


a: Ima gavah sarame ya aicchah pari divo antan 
subhage patanti. Kasta ena ava srjadayudhvyu 
tasmakamayudha santi tigmd. 

Panis: O noble and glorious Sarama, these 
streams of rain, these vibrations of senses, mind and 
energies which you want, travelling unto the bounds of 
heaven, who would release these for you without 
struggle? And our weapons too are sharp and powerful. 


असेन्या व॑ः पणयो वचांस्यनिषव्यास्तन्व॑ः सन्तु पापीः। 
syst व एतवा अस्तु पन्था बृहस्पतिर्व उभया न 
Wears ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 108 981 


6. Asenya vah panayo vacasyanisavyastanvah santu 
papth. Adhrsto va etava astu pantha brhaspatirva 
ubhaya na mrlat. 


Sarama: O Panis, clouds of vapour, mind and 
sense vibrations, your words are not worthy of fight, 
your bodies are too tenuous for the arrows, your path of 
motion too is not strong enough for any campaign. And 
even Brhaspati, lord of speech and space, himself would 
not be too indulgent toward you. You are too lost in the 
dust around to be free from sin. 


अयं निधिः स॑रमे अद्रिबुध्नो गोभिरश्वेधिर्वसुिन्यु्टः। 
रक्षन्ति तं पणयो ये सुगोपा रेक पदमलकमा ज॑गन्थ ॥ ७ ॥ 


6 Ayam nidhih sarame adribudhno gobhirasve- 
bhirvasubhirnyrstah. Raksanti tam panayo ye 
sugopa reku padamalakama jagantha. 


Panis: O Sarama, light of lightning, spirit of 
life’s will, this treasure is locked in the cloud, it is vibrant 
with sunlight within, lustre of nature and wealths of 
life. And that treasure, practical possibilities guard. 
Wonderful guards are they. In vain have you come to 
this place, it is void of anything for you. 


एह ग॑मच्नषयः सोम॑शिता अयास्यो अङ्धिरसो नव॑ग्वाः 1 

त एतमूर्वं वि भ॑जन्त गोनामथेतद्वच॑ः पणयो वमन्नित्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Eha gamannrsayah somasita ayasyo angiraso 

navagvah. Ta etamurvam vi bhajanta gona- 

mathaitadvacah panayo vamannit. 


Sarama: O Panis, calculative clouds of small 
gain, here come the sharpest shears of wind, stormy 
gusts of winds, sudden whirl winds, which all will 


982 RGVEDA 


shatter this concentration of waves and vapours of living 
possibilities of the rains of life, (render them 
meaningless and purposeless without the presence of 
Indra, the soul). Mind therefore, and withdraw those 
words. 


एवा च त्वं स॑रम आजगन्थ walfirar सह॑सा दैव्येन | 
स्वसारं त्वा कृणवै मा gaat अप॑ ते गवां सुभगे 
भजाम ॥ ९॥ 


9. Eva ca tvam sarama ajagantha prabadhita sahasa 
daivyena. Svasaram tva krnavai ma punarga apa 
te gavam subhage bhajama. 


Panis: O Sarama, thunderous voice and 
lightning version of Indra, this way, then, you come 
equipped with divine powers and forces. We then accept 
you as our self-fluent and self-energised sister. O 
glorious sister, pray do not go back, we share the waves 
and vapours of life with you, and we give you what is 
yours. 


नाहं वेद भ्रातृत्वं नो स्व॑सृत्वमिन्द्रो विदुरद्धिरसश्च घोराः | 
गोकामा मे अच्छदयन्यदायमपातं इत पणयो वरीयः 11 ९०॥ 


10. Naham veda bhratrtvam no svasrtvamindro 
vidurangarasasca ghorah. Gokama me accha- 
dayan yadayamapata ita panayo vartyah. 


Sarama: O Panis, I know no brotherliness, nor 
sisterhood. Indra and fiery winds and energies of 
nature’s law know what is to be known. Those who want 
to live by senses and pranas, the source whence I come, 
would move and win you. Hence you go off far from 
here, 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 109 983 


afta पणयो वरीय उद्रावो यन्तु eases । बृ हस्पतिर्यां 
अविन्दन्निगुव्न्हाः सोमो ग्रावाण ऋष॑यश्च विप्राः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Duramita panayo variya udgavo yantu minatir- 
rtena. Brhaspatirya avindannigulhah somo 
gravana rsayasca viprah. 


O Panis, O clouds, go far away to the best place 
you can. Let the vapours break the bonds and go up by 
the law of nature, and Brhaspati, master of space and 
rain, Soma, master of herbs, Gravana, scholar scientist 
of vapours and condensation, the sages of vision and 
holily motivated specialists would obtain them wherever 
hidden, however so deep. So will Indra, the soul, win 
the senses and pranas to satisfy the will to live in the 
world of existence. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 109 


Vishvedevah Devata, Brahmajaya Juhu or Brahmaputra 
Urdhvanabha Rshi 


ds वदन्प्रथमा ब्र॑हयकिल्विषेऽ कूपारः ast मातरिश्वा | 
वीव्टुह॑रास्तपं उग्रो म॑यो भूरापो। देवीः प्र॑थमजा ऋतेन 2 


i, Te’vadan prathama brahmakilvise’kuparah salilo 
matarisva. Viluharastapa ugro mayobhurapo 
devih prathamaja rtena. 


In the beginning, to express and reveal the 
joyous manifestation of the creativity of Supreme 
Brahma, those first borns of the dynamics of divine law, 
Akupara, the light principle or Aditya Rshi, Salila, the 
liquid principle or Angira Rshi, Matarishva, the wind 
energy principle or Vayu Rshi, Viduhara, the fiery 
catalytic principle or Agni Rshi, all like yajnic fire 


984 RGVEDA 


burning and creative, illustrious, soothing, flowing, 
divine souls and spirits express and reveal the divine 
voice of the Veda. (This voice is the Ila.) 


सोमो राजां प्रथमो ब्र॑हाजायां पुनः प्राय॑च्छदह॑णीयमानः। 
अन्वर्तिता वरुणो मित्र आसीदगिर्होत। हस्तगृह्या 
Fara २॥ 


2, 90110 raja prathamo brahmajayam punah 
prayacchadahrniyamanah. Anvartita varuno 
mitra asidagnirhota hastagrhya ninaya. 


Soma, the ruling spirit of life, all at peace, having 
first received the divine Word, the Vedic voice, 
concomitant of omniscience, gives it again to Brahma 
in the dynamic Sarasvati form. Varuna, Mitra and Agni 
follow, and the yajaka Agni holds it by hand as in the 
yajnic ladle and leads it on. 


हस्ते नैव ग्राह्यं आधिरस्या ब्रह्मजायेयमिति aeatert । 
न gard प्रह्ये तस्थ एषा तथां राष्ट गुपितं क्चत्रिय॑स्य ॥ ३ ॥ 


Hastenaiva grahya adhirasya brahmajayeyamiti 
cedavocan. Na diutaya prahye tastha esa 
tatha rastram gupitam ksatriyasya. 


The received form of this divine Vak is to be 
practically received by hard discipline. “This is the child 
of heaven,” this having been said, “This is not for 
communication without practice,” this is the important 
injunction. It does not wait for any one, it does not stand 
still, it moves on. Its meaning is hidden like the state of 
the dominion of a ruler. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 109 985 


देवा एतस्यामवदन्त wet सप्तऋषयस्तप॑से ये निषेदुः । भीमा 
जाया त्राह्मणस्योपंनीता दुर्धां द॑धाति परमे व्योमन्‌ ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Deva etasyamavadanta purve saptarsayastapase 
ye niseduh. Bhima jaya brahmanasyopanita 
durdham dadhati parame vyoman. 


The divinities of eternal time and seven ancient 
sages who sit down for tapas and cosmic yajna speak 
and communicate this. It is the mighty companion of 
the devotee of Brahman received through discipline of 
celibacy and initiation. Brhaspati, lord of Infinity holds 
this sublime Vak in infinite space and time. 


ब्रह्माचारी च॑रति वेविषद्विषः स देवानां भवत्येकमङ्कम्‌। 
तेन॑ जायामन्व॑विन्दद्‌ बृहस्पतिः सोमेन नीतां Tel न 
देवाः ॥ ५॥ 


श Brahmacari carati vevisadvisah sa devanam 
bhavatyekamangam. Tena jayamanvavin- 
dadbrha-spatih somena nitam juhvam na devah. 


The Brahmachari, dedicated to this sublime 
subject, goes on pursuing the discpline of the divine 
voice and, internalising it, becomes one of, and with, 
the nature and presence of the Devas. And thereby, O 
sages, the scholar obtains the Word and the wedded wife 
escorted to him by the blissful somaic preceptor like 
the ghrta ladle for yajnic offering and achievement. 


पुनर्वै देवा stag: पुनर्मनुष्या उत । 
राजानः सत्यं कृण्वाना ब्रंह्याजायां पुन॑र्ददुः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Punarvai deva adaduh punarmanusya uta. Raja- 
nah satyam krnvana brahmajayam punardaduh. 


986 RGVEDA 


Noble teachers and scholars continuously go on 
teaching the Vedic voice and noble people conduct the 
yajnic programmes of education. Rulers and brilliant 
men of knowledge and generous disposition serving the 
divine truth carry on the propagation of the holy Word 
and its extension in practice and application. 


पुनर्दायं ब्रह्मजायां कृत्वी देवैर्निंकिल्विषम्‌। 
ऊर्ज पृथिव्या भक्त्वायोरुगायमुपांसते ॥ ७ ॥ 


hs Purardaya brahmajayam krtvi devairnikilvisam. 
Urjam prthivya bhaktvayorugayamupasate. 


Thus do sages, scholars and noble people, 
serving and spreading the light of divine knowledge 
and the Vedic Word, sanctified and energised for life’s 
purity, excellence and joy by Devas, serve Brahma, Lord 
Supreme in order that they may enjoy and extend the 
wealth and creativity of mother earth and the 
environment. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 110 
Apriyaj (Idhama or Samiddhagni, Taru-napat, Ila, Barhi, 
Davidvara, Ushasanakta, Daivyu Hotarau Prachetasau, 
Tisradevyah, Tvashta, Vanaspati, Svahakrtis) Devata, 
Jamadagni Bhargava or Rama Jamadagnya Rshi 
afttetl अद्य मनुषो दुरोणे देवो दवान्य॑जसि जातवेदः | 
आ च वहं मित्रमहश्चिकित्वान्त्वं दूतः कविरसि प्रचेताः ॥ ९॥ 
1. Samiddho adya manuso durone devo devan yajasi 
jatavedah. A ca vaha mitramahascikitvan tvam 
dutah kavirasi pracetah. 


O Jataveda, life pervasive in all that is born, 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 110 987 


lighted fire of life, light of light, greatest friend, bearer 
of the fragrance of life, all awareness, all intelligence, 
you are the poetic seer and creator, and when you are 
lighted faithfully in the human homes you invoke, bring 
in and join the divinities. Pray bring in today for us all 
that is divine in life and nature. 


तनूनपात्पथ ऋतस्य यानान्मध्वां समञ्जन्त्स्वदया ARTE | 
मन्मानि धीभिरुत यज्ञमृन्धन्दवत्रा च॑ कृणुह्यध्वरं न॑: ॥ २॥ 


2 Tanunapat patha rtasya yanan madhva samanja- 
ntsvadaya sujihva. Manmani dhibhiruta yajnamr- 
ndhan devatra ca krnuhyadhvaram nah. 


O Tanu-napat, sustainer of your own existential 
form and promoter of our health and mind, O divine 
light of holy flames, enjoy and sprinkle with honey the 
paths of yajna by which the fragrances rise and the 
yajakas proceed to the divinities by observance of the 
law of Truth, and, augmenting our thoughts with acts 
of holiness and beatifying the yajna, take over our songs 
and yajna of love and non-violence and establish it in 
the heights of divinities. 


sine ईड्यो वन्द्यश्चा याह्यग्ने वसुभिः सजोषाः । 
त्वं देवानामसि यह्व होता स एनान्यक्षीषितो यजीयान्‌ ॥। ३ ॥ 


3 Ajuhvana idyo vandyascayahyagne vasubhih 
sajosah. Tvam devanamasi yahva hota sa enan 
yaksisito yajtyan. 


Invoked and invoking, venerable and adorable 
Agni, come with all the pervasive wealth and 
excellences of life and join this yajna. Mighty great you 
are among the divinities, presiding priest of divine 


988 RGVEDA 


nature, sociable, loved, admired and cherished for 
company, pray bring in the divinities to the yajna. 


प्राचीनं बर्हिः प्रदिशां पृथिव्या वस्तोरस्या dra अग्ने 
stata व्यु प्रथते वितरं वरीयो देवेभ्यो अदितये स्यो- 
नम्‌॥ ॥ 


4. Pracinam barhih pradisa prthivya vastorasya 
vrjyate agre ahnam. vyu prathate vitaram vartyo 
devebhyo aditaye syonam. 


In advance of the days and dawns for the 
vestment of this earth as ever, holy grass is gathered 
and spread out over the vedi by divine ordainment, and 
the creative yajna proceeds and expands wide and high, 
joyous and brilliant for mother earth and the divinities. 


(This yajna may be interpreted either as the daily 
morning yajna or the first creative yajna at the dawn of 
each existential cycle.) 


व्यचंस्वतीरुर्विया वि श्रयन्तां पतिभ्यो न जन॑यः शुम्भ॑- 
art: | देवीद्वारो बृहतीर्विंङ्वमिन्वा दे वेभ्यो भवत 
सुप्रायणाः ॥ ५॥ 


a. Vyacasvatirurviya vi $Srayantam patibhyo na 
janayah sumbhamanah. Devirdvaro brhatirvi- 
svaminva devebhyo bhavata suprayanah. 


Let the doors of divine vision and wisdom open 
wide and high, unbounded, unbarred, universal, 
accommodative and blissful for the divinities of nature 
and humanity, and sustain and promote the people as 
gracious women with open arms inspire and exalt their 
husbands. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 110 989 


आ Gada यजते उर्पाके उषासानक्ता सदतां नि aT । 
दिव्ये योष॑णे बृहती सुरुक्मे अधि श्रियं शुक्रपिशं cet ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. A susvayanti yajate upake usdsanakta sadatam 
ni yonau. Divye yosane brhati surukme adhi 
Sriyam Sukrapisam dadhane. 


Creative, generous and peaceable, companiona- 
ble and adorable day and night, divine, youthful, 
expansive, brilliant and beautiful, wearing and bearing 
grace and grandeur of the purest powerful order may 
abide together and join us in this yajna. 


दैव्या होतारा प्रथमा सुवाचा मिमाना यज्ञं मनुंषो यज॑ध्यै । 
प्रचोदयन्ता विदथेषु कारू प्राचीनं ज्योतिः प्रदिा 
दिशन्ता iio nt 


a Daivya hotara prathama suvaca mimana yajnam 
manuso yajadhyai. Pracodayanta vidathesu karu 
pracinam jyotih pradisa disanta. 

Divine Agni and Aditya, first and foremost 
universal yajakas of noble expression, participants in 
cosmic yajna, promoting all yajnic programmes of 
nature and humanity and projecting the universal light 
of existence, directing and showing it by various paths 
of nature, may, we pray, inspire and promote us in order 
to help us enact and accomplish all our human 
programmes of yajnic nature and purpose. 


आ नो यज्ञं भार॑ती तूय॑मेत्विव्ठा मनुष्वदिह चेतय॑न्ती | 
तिस्त्रो देवीर्बर्हिरेदं स्योनं सर॑स्वती स्वप॑सः सदन्तु ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. A no yajnam bharati tuyametvila manusvadiha 
cetayant. Tisro devirbarhiredam syonam sara- 
svatt svapasah sadantu. 


990 RGVEDA 


May Ila, the spirit of transcendent divinity, 
Sarasvati, dynamic spirit of universal immanent 
omniscience, and Bharati, generous spirit of mother 
nature and mother earth, all three divinities of holy light, 
knowledge and love, noble doers of divine acts, come 
at the earliest and seat themselves here on the lovely 
sacred grass of our vedi like human mothers and bless 
us with vision, wisdom and enlightenment. 


य इमे द्यावापृथिवी जनित्री रूपैरपिं"शद्धव॑नानि विष्वा । 
तमद्य होतरिषितो यजींयान्देवं त्वष्टारमिह afer विद्धान्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Ya ime dyavaprthivi janitri rupairapimsadbhu- 
vanani visva. Tamadya hotarisito yajityan devam 
tvastaramiha yaksi vidvan. 


That shaping power of divinity which adorns 
with beautiful forms these two creative motherly heaven 
and earth and all other natural forms of existence, that 
divine refulgent Tvashta, O learned yajaka, loved and 
venerable, invoke, adore and worship in the yajna here 
today. 


उपावसृज त्मन्या समञ्जन्देवानां पाथ॑ ऋतुथा हवींषि । 
वनस्पतिं: शायिता देवो अगिः स्वदन्तु हव्यं मधुना 
Wat ९०॥ 


10. Updvasrja tmanya samanjan devanam patha 
rtutha havimsi. Vanaspatih samita devo agnih 
svadantu havyam madhuna ghrtena. 


And sincerely with your heart and soul, offer 
holy havis into the yajnic fire, having prepared the holy 
materials, seasoning them with honey and ghrta for food 
of the divinities according to the seasons, and let 


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 111 991 


Vanaspati, nature’s greenery, Shamita, breaker of the 
clouds for showers of peace and prosperity, and the 
refulgent sun taste and consume the offerings with 
delight. 


सद्यो जातो व्य॑मिमीत यज्ञमथिर्देवानामभवत्पुरोगाः। अस्य 
होतुः प्रदिश्यृतस्य वाचि स्वाहा कृतं हविरदन्तु देवाः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Sadyo jato vyamimita yajnamagnirdevana- 
mabhavat purogah. Asya hotuh pradisyrtasya 
vaci svahakrtam haviradantu devah. 


Agni which is the first and pioneer of the 
divinities enacts and lights up the yajna as soon as it 
arises and accomplishes it to the end, so may the 
divinities, under the action and direction of this yajaka, 
share and consume the fragrant havis offered with Svaha 
into the flames of yajnic fire with complete faith and 
dedication. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 111 
Indra Devata, Ashtadanshtra Vairupa Rshi 


मनीषिणः प्र भरध्वं मनीषां यथायथा मतयः सन्ति नृणाम्‌ | 
इन्द्रं सत्येरेर॑यामा कृतेभिः स हि वीरो गिर्वणस्युर्विंदानः ॥ ९॥ 


ll, Manisinah pra bharadhvam manisam yathayatha 
matayah santi nrnam. Indram satyairerayama 
krtebhih sa hi viro girvanasyurvidanah. 


O men of thought and wisdom, judgement and 
reflection, bear your thoughts and offer your songs and 
prayers to Indra according to whatever are the thoughts 
and faith of the people. With our sincere thoughts, words 
and actions, we praise and pray to Indra. He alone is 


992 RGVEDA 


the lord omnipotent and generous, he alone knows all 
that is, and he knows and accepts the thoughtful 
celebrant. 


ऋतस्य हि सद॑सो धीतिरद्यौत्सं sat वुंषभो MATTE 
उदंतिष्ठत्तविषेणा रवेण महान्ति चित्सं विव्याचा रजांसि ॥ २॥ 


2. Rtasya hi sadaso dhitiradyaut sam gastaiyo 
vrsabho gobhiranat. Udatisthat tavisena ravena 
mahanti cit sam vivyaca rajamsi. 

Indra is the splendour and sustainer of the 
regions of light and vapours of skies, he rises and shines, 
playful like the youthful calf of a heifer or Prakrti at the 
dawn and comes up in glory with attendant radiations. 
He rises with the blaze of light and proclamation of its 
might pervading wide and bold the great expansive 
regions of space. 


इन्द्रः fae seat अस्य वेद स fe जिष्णुः प॑थिकृत्सूयीय । 
आन्मेनां कृ ण्वन्नच्युंतो भु वद्रोः पतिर्दिवः Gast 
अप्र॑तीतः ॥ ३॥ 


3 Indrah kila Srutya asya veda sa hi jisnuh pathikrt 
suryaya. Anmenam krnvannacyuto bhuvadgoh 
patirdivah sanaja apratitah. 


Indra knows the course of existence in entirety 
as 1s known by revelation of the Veda. He alone is the 
ultimate victorious over all, he alone sets the orbit for 
the sun, he alone reveals the sacred Word of divine 
knowledge. He alone is the master of heaven and earth, 
imperishable, eternal, infinite. 


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 111 993 


इन्द्रो मह्या म॑ह॒तो stuiaed व्रतामिंनादङ्धिःरोभिर्गणानः। 
पुरूणि चिन्नि त॑ताना रजांसि दाधार यो धरूणं सत्य- 
ata us 


4. Indro mahna mahato arnavasya vratamina- 
dangirobhirgrnanah. Puruni cinni tatana rajamsi 
dadhara yo dharunam satyatata. 


Indra is lord almighty by his own omnipotence, 
ruling the spatial ocean of particles of matter and energy, 
both manifesting and withdrawing them, homage being 
done by vibrant sages and blazing stars of the universe. 
He creates and extends the many many worlds of space 
and he wields the law and the power that holds the entire 
worlds of existence. 


इन्द्रो दिवः प्र॑तिमानं पृथिव्या विश्वां वेद सव॑ना हन्ति 
शुष्णम्‌ । महीं चिद्‌ द्यामात॑नोत्सूर्येण चास्कम्भ॑ चित्कम्भ॑ं नेन 
स्कभींयान्‌॥ ५॥ 


a, Indro divah pratimanam prthivya visva veda 
savana hanti Susnam. Mahi cid dyamatanot 
suryena caskambha cit kambhanena skabhiyan. 


Indra is the maker and measure of heaven and 
earth, knows all operations of the world in existence, 
and destroys drought and adversity by showers of rain 
and divine grace. He enlightens the great heavens by 
the sun and he himself is the pillar of the universe 
holding it in dynamic balance by the law of divine Rtam 
working in nature. 


aan fe dat वृत्रमस्तरदेवस्य years मायाः | वि 
धुष्णो अत्र धृषता ज॑घन्था्थाभवो मघवन्बा ह्यो जाः ॥ ६ ॥ 


994 RGVEDA 


6. Vajrena hi vrtraha vrtramastaradevasya susuva- 
nasya mayah. Vi dhrsno atra dhrsata jaghantha- 
thabhavo maghavan bahvojah. 


O lord of glory, destroyer of darkness, negativity 
and want, destroy the demon of evil by the Bajra, 
unfailing catalytic power of nature you wield. O lord 
indomitable, be the mighty hero of arms of adamant 
and steel, destroy the violent forces of terror, frustrate 
the wiles and designs of the uncreative forces of society 
and be the saviour by unassailable power of Divinity. 


सच॑न्त यदुषसः सूर्येण चित्रामस्य केतवो रामंविन्दन्‌। 
आ aaa caer दिवो न पुनर्यतो नकिरब्दा नु वेद ।॥ ७॥ 


ip Sacanta yadusasah suryena citramasya ketavo 
ramavindan. A yannaksatram dadrse divo na 
punaryato nakiddha no veda. 


When the lights of the dawn join the sun, then 
its rays assume wonderful beauty and glory. Then (in 
the day) I see no (other) star of heaven nor any joining 
the rising dawn again. Why? What is this mystery? Who 
knows of this? (Only Indra). 


दूरं किलं प्रथमा ज॑ग्मुरासामिन्द्रस्य याः Were सस्त्रुराप॑ः। 
ad स्विदग्रं क्व॑ लुध्न आंसामापो मध्यं क्व॑ वो नून- 
मन्तः ॥ ८ ॥ ति ति 
8. Duram kila prathama jagmurasamindrasya yah 
prasave sasrurapah. Kva svidagram kva budhna 
asamapo madhyam kva vo nunamantah. 


At the rise of the sun, the first rays and the first 
mists of the morning move and go far far away. Who 


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 111 995 


knows what and where is their beginning, what is their 
basic foundation, what is their middle, and what and 
where their end? Who among you knows this mystery? 
(Only Indra). 


सृजः सिन्धूँरहिना samt आदिदेताः प्र fafast जवेन । 
मुमुक्षमाणा उत या मुंमुच्रेऽधेदेता न रमन्ते नितिक्ताः ॥ ९ ॥ 


a Srjah sindumrahina jagrasanam adidetah pra 
vivijre javena. mumuksamana uta ya mumucre- 
*‘dhedeta na ramante nitiktah. 


Indra, when you release the showers of rain 
engulfed by the cloud, then these flow down free and 
rapidly. Thus those who want freedom and release from 
bondage are released by Indra, and once released, they 
do not stop on way involved in the bonds (they have 
cast away). 


सध्रीचीः सिन्धुंमुशतीरिवायन्त्सनाज्नार आरितः gftat- 
साम्‌। अस्तमा ते पार्थिवा वसून्यस्मे ज॑ग्मुः सूनृतां इन्द्र 
पूर्वीः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Sadhricth sindhumuSsatirivayantsanajjara aritah 
purbhidasam. Astama te parthiva vasunyasme 
jagmuh sunrta indra purvih. 


Together the streams released by Indra flow and 
join the sea like loving women joining their husband, 
the lord of time and breaker of the existential bonds 
always since eternity is their inspirer and freedom giver. 
O Indra, may all our earthly wealth and excellences of 
sense and mind, all your gifts here, and all our songs of 
adoration and voices of prayer ultimately reach you, 
the destination from existence to the essence. 


996 RGVEDA 


Mandala 10/Sukta 112 
Indra Devata, Nabha Prabhedana Vairupa Rshi 


इन्द्र पिबं प्रतिकामं qaed प्रातःसावस्तव हि पूर्वपींतिः। 
हर्ष॑स्व हन्त॑वे शूर शत्रनुक्थेभि्॑टे वीर्यां प्र ब्र॑वाम ॥ ९॥ 


ke Indra piba pratikamam sutasya pratah savastava 
hi purvapitih. Harsasva hantave Sura Ssatrunu- 
kthebhiste virya pra bravama. 


Indra, lord of glory, drink of the soma of love 
and adoration prepared and offered you as you please 
in response to our desire. This morning prayer, adoration 
and yajnic homage is primarily and exclusively for you. 
Pray be exalted and rise to destroy the enemies and 
negativities of life. With our songs and praise we 
celebrate your acts of omnipotence and generosity. 


यस्ते रथो मन॑सो जवीयानेन्द्र तेन॑ सोमपेयाय aris 
तूयमा ते हर॑यः प्र द्र॑वन्तु येभिर्यासि वृष॑भिर्मन्द॑मानः ॥ २ ॥ 


2: Yaste ratho manaso javiyanendra tena somape- 
yaya yahi. Tuyama te harayah pra dvavantu 
yebhiryasi vrsabhirmandamanah. 


Indra, come by that chariot of yours which is 
faster than the mind, come to taste the sweets of our 
soma of adoration and prayer. May the horses of your 
chariot instantly turn and speed hither, mighty horses 
by which, all happy and blissful, you come and bless 
the devotees. 


हरित्वता वर्चसा सूर्यस्य श्रेष्ठ रूपैस्तन्वं स्पर्शयस्व । 
अस्माभिरिन्द्र सखिंभिर्हवानः detest मादयस्वा 
Frat 3 ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 112 997 


a Haritvata varcasa suryasya sresthai rupaistan- 
vam sparsayasva. Asmabhirindra sakhibhirhu- 
vanah sadhricino madayasva nisadya. 


Let our body, mind and soul be touched by 
golden glory of the sun and transmuted into the highest 
forms of beauties and graces of life. Indra, thus invoked 
and adored by us who yearn for company and 
communion with you, pray come, be seated in the heart 
and soul in union, joyous and exalted, and lead us to 
the divine goal. 


यस्य ward महिमानं मदेष्विमे मही रोद॑सी नाविंविक्ताम्‌। 
तदोक आ हरिभिरिन्द्र युक्तैः प्रियेभिर्ांहि प्रियमन्न- 
मच्छ ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Yasya tyat te mahimanam madesvime mahi rodast 
naviviktam. Tadoka क haribhirindra yuktaih 
priyebhiryahi priyamannamaccha. 


Indra, whose grandeur in the state of divine 
ecstasy even the great heaven and earth do not 
comprehend, exalted in that very halo and glory of 
ecstasy, come by the dear golden radiations of divinity 
harnessed to your chariot and well enjoy the 
presentations of our homage, the food cherished by 
Divinity. 

यस्य शश्व॑त्पपि्वाँ इन्दर्‌ शत्रूननानुकृत्या Tat चकर्थ | 
सते पुरन्धिं तविषीमियर्ति स ते मदाय सुत इन्र सोमः ॥ ५ ॥ 


5: Yasya Sasvat papivam indra satrunandanukrtya 
ranya cakartha. Sa te purandhim tavisimiyarti 
sa te madaya suta indra somah. 


Indra, that soma which you always enjoy, and 


998 RGVEDA 


that yajamana whom you always protect and destroy 
his enemies with inimitable and incomparable weapons, 
that soma is distilled and ready for your drink and, and 
that yajamana solicits your radiant attention and 
generous favour of grace. 


इदं ते पात्रं सनवित्तमिन्द्र fra सोम॑मेना श॑तक्रतो । पूर्णं 
आहावो मदिरस्य मध्वो यं विश्व उद॑भिहर्यन्ति देवाः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Idam te patram sanavittamindra piba somamena 
Satakrato. Purna ahavo madirasya madhvo yam 
visva idabhiharyanti devah. 


Indra, lord of infinite action, this heart and soul 
is ever dedicated to you, pray accept and enjoy the love 
and homage presented by the celebrant. Over flowing 
is the heart and soul with ecstatic joy and honey sweets 
of devotion which all divinities of heaven and earth love 
and cherish. 


fa हि त्वामिन्द्र पुरुधा जनासो हितप्र॑यसो aa ह्यन्ते । 
अस्माकं ते मधुमत्तमानीमा भुं वन्त्सवना ae हर्य ।॥ ७ ॥ 


7. Vi hi tvamindra purudha janaso hitaprayaso 
vrsabha hvayante. Asmakam te madhumattam- 
anima bhuvantsavana tesu harya. 


Many many people with various kinds of 
homage and prayer invoke you, lord of infinite power 
and generosity. All these our presents of love, honour 
and adoration of the sweetest order are for you only. 
Pray accept these with love and favour. 


wd इन्द्र पूर्व्याणि प्र नूनं वीर्यौ वोचं प्रथमा कृतानि | 
सतीनम॑न्युरश्रथायो अद्रिं सुवेदनाम॑कृणोर्ब्रहणे गाम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 112 999 


8. Pra ta indra puryani pra nunam virya vocam 
prathama krtani. Satinamanyurasrathayo adrim 
suvedanamakrnorbrahmane gam. 


Indra, I celebrate and glorify your eternal 
manifestations of might and the highest exploits you 
have ever before accomplished. Lord of essential power 
and passion, you break the cloud, open the mountains, 
and you break the deep silence of the night of 
annihilation and proclaim the Word for the men of vision 
and wisdom. 


निषु सीद गणपते गणेषु त्वार्माहर्विप्र॑तमं कवीनाम्‌ | 
न ऋते त्वत्क्रियते कि चनारे महामर्कं म॑घवच्चित्रमर्च।॥ ९ ॥ 


८8 Ni su sida ganapate ganesu tvamahurvipra- 
tamam kavinam. Na rte tvat kriyate kim canare 
maha-markam maghavanicitramarca. 


O lord of the people, stay and abide with the 
people, they celebrate you as the highest incomparable 
of the poets of the world of existence. Nothing happens, 
nothing is done without you far or near. O lord of glory, 
I offer you the highest and most wonderful tribute and 
homage and adoration. 


अशिख्या at मघवन्नाध॑मानान्त्सखें बोधि व॑सुपते 
सयीनाम्‌। रणं कृधि रणकृत्सत्यशुष्माभक्ते चिदा भ॑जा 
राये अस्मान्‌॥ ९०॥ 

10. Abhikhya no maghavan nadhamanantsakhe bodhi 


vasupate sakhinam. Ranam krdhi ranakrt satya- 
susmabhakte cida bhaja raye asman. 


Pray turn to us, watch us with favour, lord of 


1000 RGVEDA 


glory, we beseech you. O lord of world’s wealth, honour 
and excellence, O friend, know, acknowledge and accept 
the friend of divinity. Fight out our enemies, lord of 
battle, commander of imperishable power and force, lead 
us on to achieve and share the wealth and honour so far 
unshared and unknown. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 113 
Indra Devata, Shataprabhedana Vairupa Rshi 


तम॑स्य द्यावापृथिवी wade विश्वेभिर्देवैरनु शुष्म॑माव- 
ताम्‌। यदैत्कुण्वानो म॑हिमान॑मिद्ियं पीत्वी सोम॑स्य क्रतुमाँ 
अवर्धत ।॥ ९॥ 


1. Tamasya dyavaprthivi sacetasa visvebhirde- 
vairanu Susmamavatam. Yadait krnvano mahima- 
namindriyam pitvi somasya kratumam avardhata. 


May heaven and earth along with all the 
nobilities of nature and humanity, all of equal and 
agreeable mind, follow, protect and promote the might 
of Indra, this ruling power of the world, when he goes 
forward to display that power and grandeur of his mind 
and senses and, exalted by the happy and exhilarating 
glory of his dominion in action, rises in greatness and 
majesty. 


तम॑स्य विष्णर्महिमानमोज॑सांशुं द॑धन्वान्मधुंनो fer teers 
देवेभिरिन्द्रो मघवां सयावंभिर्वत्रं जघन्वां अ॑भवद्वरण्यः ॥ २॥ 
2. Tamasya visnurmahimanamojasam’sum dadha- 
nvan madhuno vi rapsate. Devebhirindro maghava 
sayavabhi rvrtram jaghanvam abhavadvarenyah. 


Vishnu, pervasive power and presence of nature 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 113 1001 


and humanity, holding, sharing and sustaining its own 
part of the power and Dharma of Indra’s dominion by 
virtue of its own might and lustre, exlalts the sweetness 
and grace of his system, and Indra, ruler of the glorious 
dominion, destroying the evil factors of darkness, want 
and ignorance with the assistance of his supporters and 
divine partners rises mightier, proves his greatness and 
majesty and becomes the object of his devotees’ choice 
all the more. 


वृत्रेण यदर्हिना विश्वदायुंधा समस्थिथा युधये शंस॑माविदे । 
विश्वे ते अत्र॑ wed: सह त्मनावंर्धन्चुग्र महिमान॑मि- 
द्द्रियम्‌॥ ३॥ 


3: Vrtena yadahina bibhrdayudha samasthitha 
yudhaye Samsamavide. Visve te atra marutah 
saha tmanavardhannugra mahimanamindriyam. 


When against forces of darkness and serpentine 
crookedness you bear weapons and stand firm to fight, 
win all agreement, approval and admiration that all is 
well, then, O blazing lord of might and glory, all the 
Maruts, vibrant powers of nature and humanity in the 
world, together with their heart and soul join and exalt 
your greatness and the magnanimity of your majesty of 
mind and soul. 


जज्ञान एव व्य॑बाधत स्पृधः प्राप॑श्यद्ीरो अभि पौस्यं रणम्‌। 
अवुंश्चदद्विमव॑ं सस्यदः सृजदस्त॑भ्नात्नाकं स्वपस्यया 
पृथुम्‌॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Jajnana eva vyabadhata sprdhah prapasyadviro 
abhi paumsyam ranam. Avrscadadrimava sasya- 
dah srjadastabhnannakam svapasyaya prthum. 


1002 RGVEDA 


From the very rise and manifestation, repelling, 
expelling and removing conflicts and confrontations of 
jealous forces, watching, assessing and affirming his 
fighting forces, breaking down clouds of pent up waters 
and mountainous hoards of resources and releasing all 
stagnant potentials, and sustaining the mighty vast world 
of light and joy by his will, wisdom and active power, 
Indra rules and reigns in glory. 


आदिन्द्रः सत्रा तविषीरपत्यत वरीयो द्यावापृथिवी अबाधत | 
stature धृषितो वच्र॑मायसं शोवं पित्राय॒ वरुणाय 
दाशुषे ।॥ ५॥ 


om Adindrah satra tavisirapatyata variyo dyava- 
prthivi abadhata. Avabharaddhrsito vajramaya- 
sam Sevam mitraya varunaya dasuse. 


Indra keeps, rules and controls all the dynamic 
forces of the world together in order, separates, holds, 
energises and moves heaven and earth and maintains 
the order of separate identity and togetherness in 
balance, and, undaunted and invincible, he wields the 
thunderbolt of justice and punishment as well as the 
golden sceptre of peace and law for people of love, 
justice, free choice and generosity. 


इन्द्रस्यात्र तविषीभ्यो विरण्ठिनं ऋघायतो अरंहयन्त ware | 
वृत्रं यदुग्रो व्यवृंश्चदोजंसापो बिभ्र॑तं तम॑सा परींवृतम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Indrasyatra tavistbhyo virapSina rghayato aram- 
hayanta manyave. Vrtram yadugro vyavrscado- 
jasapo bibhratam tamasa parivrtam. 


When the blazing Indra with his might breaks 
the demonic cloud hoarding the waters of life covered 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 113 1003 


in darkness, then in honour of the brave hero of 
shattering thunder and his brilliant forces, poets sing 
songs of adoration. 


या वीर्यीणि प्रथमानि कत्वी महित्वेधिर्यतंमानौ समीयतुः । 
ध्वान्तं तमोऽ वं दध्वसे हत इन्द्रो! महवा पूर्वहूतावपत्यत ॥। ७॥ 


7. Ya viryani prathamani kartva mahitvebhiryata- 
manau samiyatuh. Dhvantam tamo’va dadhvase 
hata indro mahna purvahutava-patyata. 


When two warriors, Indra and Vrtra, meet in 
battle doing mighty acts of the first order of valour with 
their respective valour and power, then, when the 
covering darkness is destroyed, Indra with his might 
rules the scene and dominates over the first invocation 
and institution of yajna. 


fasd देवासो अध वृष्ण्यानि as वर्धयन्त्सोम॑वत्या 
वचस्यया । र न्दं वृत्रमहिमिन्द्रस्य हन्म॑नाथिर्नं जम्भैस्तुष्वन्न 
मावयत्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Visve devaso adha vrsnyani te’vardhayantsoma- 
vatya vacasyayd. Raddham vrtramahimindrasya 
hanmanagnirna jambhaistrsvannamavayat. 


And then all saints and holy men of the world 
celebrate and exalt your mighty deeds with voices full 
of sweetness, love and adoration. And when Vrtra is 
destroyed by the fatal blow of Indra and darkness is 
dispelled, Indra like the sun waxes in glory as fire rises 
in flames, having consumed fuel food with its jaws and 
crackling tongues. 


1004 RGVEDA 


भूरि दक्षेभिर्वचनेथिऋक्व॑भिः सख्येभिः सख्यानि प्र 
वोचत । इन्द्रो oF a चुमुरिं च द॒म्भय॑ञ्छ्ृब्दामनस्या शणुते 
दभीतये ॥ ९॥ 


9. Bhuri daksebhirvacanebhirrkvabhih sakhyebhih 
sakhyani pra vocata. Indro dhunim ca cumurim 
ca mambhayanchraddhamanasya srnute dabhi- 
taye. 


O celebrants of Indra dedicated to yajnic union 
and cooperation, celebrate your kinship with Indra 
enthusiastically and proclaim with words of power, 
praise, love and friendship: Indra listens with faith, 
understanding and sympathy at heart to invocation and 
prayer for relief of the oppressed and subdues the 
vociferous ogres and terrorising destroyers of life and 
values of good living. (Such a person is worthy of being 
the ruler, Indra of the human nation.) 


त्वं पुरूण्या भ॑रा raven येभिर्मसिं निवचनानि शंस॑न्‌ । 
सुगेभिर्विश्वा दुरिता त॑रेम विदो षु. ण॑ उर्विया गाध- 
मद्य ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Tvam purunya bhara svasvya yebhirmamsai 
nivacanani samsan. Sugebhirvisva durita tarema 
vido su na urviya gadhamadya. 


Indra, omnipotent ruler of the world, bear and 
bring us abundant wealth, honour and excellence 
flowing in from all sides so that I may be able to think 
and meditate with words of prayer, praise and 
thankfulness: O lord, let us get over all difficulties, evils 
and undesirables of the world by simple, natural and 
navigable paths of progress, and you now, today itself, 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 114 1005 


firmly seat and settle yourself over the wide world and 
receive our homage and admiration as tribute of love at 
heart in faith. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 114 


Vishvedevah Devatah, Sadhri Vairupa or Gharma 
Tapasa Rshi 


घर्मां सम॑न्ता त्रिवृतं व्यापतुस्तयोरजुष्टि' मातरिश्वा जगाम | 
दिवस्पयो दिधिषाणा अवेषन्विदुर्देवाः सहसामान- 
म्कम्‌।॥ ९॥ 


1. Gharma samanta trivrtam vyapatustayornustim 
matarisva jagama. Divaspayo didhisana avesan 
vidurdevah sahasamanamarkam. 


Bright heat and light in conjunction pervade the 
threefold universe of heaven, earth and the middle 
regions. Matarishva, basic cosmic energy and pranic 
vitality, joins these two in friendly alliance for love and 
service. From the heaven of light and divine awareness 
flow vibrations bearing the milk of life and the divine 
message of knowledge for human awareness, and divine 
souls receive the light of eternal illumination, the Vedic 
message with the music of Samans in ecstasy. 


frat देष्राय निऋतीरुपासते दीर्घश्रुतो वि fe जानन्ति 
ada: । तासां नि चिक्युः कवयो निदानं परेषु या गृह्येषु 
व्रतेषु uu त 

2 Tisro destraya nirrtirupasatedirghasruto vi hi 
jananti vahnayah. Tasam ni cikyuh kavayo 
nidanam paresu ya guhyesu vratesu. 


Sages who have heard the divine message for 


1006 RGVEDA 


long through discipline carry it on to pass it on to others. 
They know, closely watch, internalise and worship the 
trinity of eternal reality and its existential dynamics: 
Brahma, Prakrti, and Jiva, three modes of Prakrti: sattva, 
rajas and tamas, three phases of temporal existence: 
creation, continuance and completion, three aspects of 
the good life: knowledge, karma and worship, three 
aspects of worship: adoration, prayer and meditation in 
the triple world of earth, skies and heaven. Poetic vision 
arises and creative souls know the original cause of all 
these orders of existence and knowledge which operate 
in all other open and covert, lowest and highest facts, 
activities and disciplines of life. That cause is One, 
Supreme, Unique. 


चतुष्कपदां यु वतिः सुपेशा घृतप्र॑तीका वयुनानि वस्ते । 
तस्यां सुपणां वृष॑णा नि षेदतुर्यत्र देवा द॑धिरे भाग- 
धेय॑म्‌।॥ ३ ॥ 


3; Catuskaparda yuvatth supesa ghrtapratika vayu- 
nani vaste. Tasyam suparna vrsana ni sedatur- 
yatra deva dadhire bhagadheyam. 


Fourfold is that reality of existence, knowledge 
and the language of knowledge: Prakrti, jiva, immanent 
ordainer and the transcendent; matter, energy, 
intelligence and avyakta Prakrti; Rks, Samans, Yajus 
and Chhandas; Para, pashyanti, madhyama and vaikhari, 
in other words, nama, akhyata, upasarga and nipata. The 
vedi of existence in which it abides is ever young, 
beyond age and death, eternal. It is beautiful and 
exciting, golden gracious, which covers all the rules 
and laws of existence. In that abide two generous, 
creative beautiful birds on the tree of life: the one that 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 114 1007 


watches is the Supreme Spirit of the cosmos, and the 
other that eats the fruit and tastes the sweet and the bitter 
of it is the individual human soul. In that existence, that 
knowledge and that Word of knowledge, noble souls 
find, live and experience their share of existence and 
the divine essence. 


एकः सुपर्णः स ays विवेश स इदं विश्वं भुव॑नं वि 
ade तं पाकेन मन॑सापश्यमन्तितस्तं माता ties a डं 
Wes मातरम्‌ ॥ ४॥ 


4. Ekah suparnah sa samudrama vivesa sa idam 
visvam bhuvanam vi caste. Tam pakena manasa- 
pasyamantitastam mata relhi sa u relhi mataram. 


One and One only is the cosmic spirit which 
pervades and manifests in the boundless ocean of space- 
and-time. It watches, illuminates and inspires this entire 
universe. I see it with pure and transparent mind 
manifesting at the closest. Prakrti which is the mother 
medium of its manifestation embraces it in love, and it 
too loves and embraces the mother medium. So also, 
divine Speech which is the mother medium of its 
expression embraces it in love, and it too loves and 
embraces the mother medium. 


सु पर्ण विप्राः कवयो वचोभिरेकं सन्तं agen क॑ल्पयन्ति | 
छन्दांसि च दध॑तो अध्वरेषु ग्रहान्त्सोमस्य मिमते द्वाद॑श ॥ ५ ॥ 
a, Suparnam viprah kavayo vacobhirekam santam 


bahudha kalpayanti. Chandamsi ca dadhato 
adhvaresu grahantsomasya mimate dvadaSa. 


Vibrant self-realised sages and visionary poets 
visualise and express the One immutable Spirit by words 


1008 RGVEDA 


of their experiential vision. Taking on to the poetic 
compositions of Vedic mantras in yajnas and meditative 
sessions they visualise and restructure twelve cyclic 
manifestations and self-expressions of soma, the moon, 
the sun and the light beyond the sun and moon, and the 
spirit of life itself. 


षटत्रिंशांश्च॑ चतुरः कल्पय॑न्तश्छन्दांसि च दध॑त आद्वाद्‌- 
रम्‌। यज्ञं विमाय॑ कवयो मनीष ऋक्सामाभ्यां प्र रथं 
वर्तयन्ति ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sattrisamsca caturah kalpayantaschandamsi ca 
dadhata advadasam. Yajnam vimaya kavayo 
manisa rksamabhyam pra ratham vartayanti. 


Visualising and re-structuring the modes and 
manifestations of the Soma spirit through thirty-six and 
four poetic structures bearing upto the twelfth of the 
forms, having enacted the yajna with their thought and 
imagination, the sages accomplish the yajnic cycle with 
Rks and Samans. 


चतुर्दशान्ये म॑हिमानो अस्य तं धीरा वाचा प्र णयन्ति aa | 
smut तीर्थं क इह प्र वो चद्योन॑ पथा प्रपिवब॑न्ते सुतस्य ।। ७ ॥ 


ce Caturdasanye mahimano asya tam dhira vaca pra 
nayanti sapta. Apnanam tirtham ka iha pra voca- 
dyena patha prapibante sutasya. 


Fourteen are other majestic manifestations of 
this soma spirit of the universe in dynamic yajnic form 
which seven grand sages conduct with the voice divine. 
And here, in this world of limited human imagination, 
who can explain and reveal in human terms that all- 
pervasive saviour spirit in its reality and that central 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 114 1009 


path by which the sages move up to divinity and have a 
drink of the soma ecstasy of divinity distilled through 
experience? 


सहस्रधा पञ्चदशान्युक्था यावद्‌ aan gare तावदित्तत्‌। 
सहस्रधा महिमानः ase यावद्‌ ब्रह्य विष्ठितं ताव॑ती 
वाक्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sahasradha pancadasanyuktha yavad dyavapr- 
thivi tavadit tat. Sahasradha mahimanah saha- 
sram yavadbrahma visthitam tavati vak. 


Thousandfold are the Vedic hymns, fifteen of 
them the highest and best, all extended as far as the 
heaven and earth. Thousandfold are the majesties and 
glories of it, the Vedic Word and vision extending and 
abiding as far as the vision and omniscience of divinity. 


कश्छन्दसां योगमा de धीरः को धिष्ण्यां प्रति वाचं पपाद | 
कमृत्विजामष्टमं शूर॑मादुर्हरी इन्द्रस्य नि चिंकाय कः 
स्विंत्‌॥ ९॥ 


WA Kaschandasam yogama veda dhirah ko dhisnyam 
prati vacam papad. Kamrtvijam-asStamam 
surama-hurhari indrasya ni cikaya kah svit. 


Who is the constant sage that knows the 
structure, end and purpose of the hymns? Who attains 
to the centre meaning of divine reality corresponding 
to the word of divine voice? Who would say who is the 
eighth veteran of the sagely yajakas? Who knows the 
two mighty carriers of the cosmic chariot of Indra? 


भूम्या अन्तं पर्येके चरन्ति रथ॑स्य धूर्षु acral अस्थुः | 
श्रम॑स्य दायं वि भ॑जन्त्येभ्यो यदा यमो भवंति हर्म्ये 
हितः NON 


1010 RGVEDA 


10. = Bhumya antam paryeke caranti rathasya dhursu 
yuktaso asthuh. Sramasya dayam vi bhajantye- 
bhyo yada yamo bhavati harmye hitah. 


Some of the horses of Indra, master of the solar 
chariot, as rays of the sun, reach the ends of the solar 
regions while they abide yoked to the poles of the 
chariot. The divinities of nature provide them with food 
to replenish the energy spent, when the sun rests inside 
its chamber. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 115 
Agni Devata, Upastuta Varshtihavya Rshi 


चित्र इच्छिशोस्तरुणस्य वश्चथो न यो मातरावप्येति धात॑वे। 
aren यदि जीजनदधा च नु ववक्ष सद्यो महिं दृत्यं † 
चर॑न्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


1. Citra icchisostarunasya vaksatho na yo matara- 
vapyeti dhatave. Anudha yadi jijanadadha ca nu 
vavaksa sadyo mahi dutyam caran. 


Wondrous is the invigorating and sustaining 
power of the newly risen youthful Agni which never 
goes to its parental source for food and energy 
replenishment. And if you say that the udderless creator 
has given it birth, even so, going on its great 
ambassadorial mission, it carries the fragrant message 
of yajna to the divinities immediately on its birth. 


sig नाम॑ धायि दन्नपस्त॑मः सं यो वनां युवते भस्म॑ना 
दता। अभिप्रमुरा जुह्वां स्वध्वर इनो न प्रोध॑मानो यव॑से 
aati २॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 115 1011 


2. Agnirha nama dhayi dannapastamah sam yo vana 
yuvate bhasmana data. Abhipramura juhva 
svadhvara ino na prothamano yavase vrsa. 


Agni, ‘high priest’ is the name given to ‘fire’, 
fiery leader of yajna, which, heroic of action, giving 
generously, takes to the woods with blazing flames and 
crackling jaws and, noble deity of yajna as it is, with 
ladlefuls of havi joins us with gifts of life like a mighty 
roaring cloud raining on pastures and fields of corn. 


dat faa gud देवमन्धस इन्दुं प्रोथ॑नतं प्रवप॑न्तमर्णवम्‌ | 
आसा वद्धिं न शोचिषा factor aftad न सरजंन्तम- 
ध्वनः ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Tam vo vim na drusadam devamandhasa indum 
prothantam pravapantamarnavam. Asa vahnim 
na Socisa virapsinam mahivratam na sarajanta- 
madhvanah. 


O celebrants of yajna, celebrate Agni, the leader, 
watching every thing like a bird on the tree, abiding in 
every thing dynamic, brilliant and generous, profuse 
giver of food and joy, thundering as a cloud of living 
showers and deep as the sea, consumer of havi by flames 
of fire and giver of light by sun rays, mighty strong and 
exalted, grand achiever of victories and pioneer path 
maker and illuminator like the sun. 


वि यस्य॑ ते जरयसानस्याजर धक्षोर्न वाताः परि सन्त्यच्युताः | 
आ रण्वासो युयुधयो न सत्वनं चितं न॑शन्त प्र शिषन्त 
इष्टये ।। ठ ॥ 

4. Vi yasya te jrayasanasyajara dhaksorna vatah 
pari santyacyutah. A ranvaso yuyudhayo na 
stvanam tritam naSanta pra Sisanta istaye. 


1012 RGVEDA 


Agni, power unaging and dynamic, inviolable 
and imperishable are your forces like the radiations of 
dazzling light and blazing fire which, like victorious 
warriors, come to you, power indomitable and presence 
pervasive in three worlds, and exhort you for their life’s 
fulfilment. 


स इदि: कण्वतमः कण्वसखार्यः पर स्यान्त॑रस्य AST: | 
अभिः पातु गृणतो अभिः सूरीनथिर्ददातु तेषामवों नः ॥ ५॥ 
अथेकोनविंश्ो वर्गः ॥ ९९ ॥ 


19. Sa idagnih kanvatamah kanvasakharyah para- 
syantarasya tarusah. Agnih patu grnato agnih 
surinagnirdadatu tesamavo nah. 


That Agni, lord and leader of life, wisest pioneer 
and comrade of the warring wise, is the saviour giver 
of success and fulfilment to devotees far and near across 
difficulties within and outside. May Agni protect and 
promote the celebrants and the brave and give us the 
advantage of their protection and advancement. 


वाजिन्त॑माय Gade सुपित्र्य तुषु च्यर्वानो अनु जातवेदसे । 
अनुद्रे चिद्यो dua वरं ud महिन्तमाय धन्वनेद- 
विष्यते॥ & ॥ 


6. Vajintamaya sahyase supitrya trsu cyavano anu 
jatavedase. Anudre cidyo dhrsata varam sate 
mahintamaya dhanvanedavisyate. 


Resplendent fatherly presence between heaven 
and earth, I, spontaneously inspired and exalted, offer 
homage and pray for protection to the most powerful 
presence, Agni, forbearing as well as challenging, all 
pervasive and aware, ever true, highest and most 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 115 1013 


glorious protector and promoter who provides succour 
and sustenance of high order even in dry desert lands 
of no water by his indomitable power and potential. 


wand: सह सूरिभिर्वसुं sa सह॑सः सूनरो नृभिंः। 
मित्रासो न ये सुधिता ऋतायवो द्यावो न द्युम्नैरभि सन्ति 
मानुषान्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


7. Evagnirmartaih saha suribhirvasuh stave saha- 
sah sunaro nrbhih. Mitraso na ye sudhita rtayavo 
dyavo na dyumnairabhi santi manusan. 


Thus Agni, wealth, power and shelter of the 
world, inspirer of strength, ambition and enthusiasm 
for life, is adored and exalted by the brave along with 
the leading lights of vision and action, though mortals 
all, who, constantly disciplined in mind, dedicated to 
truth and yajnic action for creativity and production of 
good things for life, like friends of mankind in unison 
and united action, excel and lead ordinary humanity by 
virtue of their brilliance and shining achievements. 


ऊर्जो नपात्सहसावक्निति त्वोपस्तुतस्य॑ वन्दते वृषा वाक्‌ | 
त्वां स्तोषाम त्वया सुवीरा द्राघीय आयुं प्रतरं दर्धानाः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Urjo napat sahasavanniti vopastutasya vandate 
vrsa vak. Tvam stosama tvaya suvira draghiya 
ayuh prataram dadhanah. 


“Child of energy, creator, sustainer and master 
of strength, energy and victory, undaunted and 
inviolable wielder of courage, patience and enthusiasm 
for living”, thus does the celebrant’s profound vision 
and word describe you as he closely watches and adores 
you. We, holy, brave and grateful, praise you while we 


1014 RGVEDA 


enjoy your gift of good health, long life and the vision 
and hope of ultimate success and fulfilment. 


इतिं त्वाग्ने वृष्टिहव्य॑स्य पुत्रा ङपस्तुतास् ऋष॑योऽ वोचन्‌ । 
तांश्च पाहि गुणतश्च सूरीन्वघड़्वषच्ि्यर्ध्वासो अनश्च- 
Wa नम इत््ध्वासो! अनक्षन्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


५ Iti tvagne vrstihavyasya putra upastutasa rsayo’- 
vocan. Tamsca pahi grnatasca surin vasadva- 
slityurdhvaso anaksan namo nama ityurdhvaso 
anaksan. 


Agni, lord omniscient, leading light of existence, 
cosmic energy of nature, thus do visionary sages, close 
watchful scholars, children of yajakas pursuing, 
enacting and accomplishing yajnic acts for rain showers 
and gifts of generous nature, describe and adore you. 
Pray protect and promote them with success. Bless the 
celebrants. Advance the veteran scholars. “Here is the 
havi, pray accept the oblation”, saying this they raise 
the hand for offering and rise. “Salutations to Agni and 
honour to the generous giver for the achievement of 
showers, food and energy,” saying this with surrender 
and submission they rise and achieve their mission’s 
success and fulfilment. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 116 


Indra Devata, Agniyuta Sthaura or Agniyupa 
Sthaura Rshi 


पिबा सोमं महत Shara frat वृत्राय हन्त॑वे शविष्ठ | 

पिबं राये शव॑से हूयमानः पिब मध्व॑स्तृपदिन्द्रा वुंषस्व ।॥ ९॥ 
ls Piba somam mahata indriyaya piba vrtraya 

hantave Ssavistha. Piba raye Savase huyamanah 

piba madhvastrpadindra vrsasva. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 116 1015 


Indra, lord omnipotent, light of life, ruler of the 
world, harbinger of the showers of prosperity, drink of 
the soma of our homage, and protect and promote the 
honour of your own creation for the power and glory of 
humanity on earth. Mightiest lord, take over and rule 
the world for the elimination of evil and the promotion 
of the positive values of life. Invoked and exalted, 
inspire your own people for the sake of strength, high 
morale and prosperity, honour and excellence. Promote 
the sweetness and culture of life and, happy and 
satisfied, bring us showers of all round progress and 
prosperity. 


अस्य fda ana: प्रस्थितस्येन्द्र सोम॑स्य वरमा TA । 
स्वस्तिदा मन॑सा मादयस्वार्वाचीनो रवते सौभ॑गाय ॥२॥ 


2. Asya piba ksumatah prasthitasyendra somasya 
varama sutasya. Svastida manasa mdadayasva- 
rvacino revate saubhagaya. 


Indra, taste the best of beauty and sweetness of 
this abundant and powerful soma of the social and 
Spiritual system prepared and seasoned to purity and 
sanctity of the highest order and presented in full faith. 
O giver of good and all round welfare of life, come 
straight to our vedi for the gift of wealth, honour and 
excellence of prosperity, happy at heart, and let us all 
rejoice. 


ममत्तु त्वा दिव्यः सोम॑ इन्द्र ममत्तु यः सूयते पार्थि वेषु । 
ममत्तु येन वरिवश्चकर्थ ममत्तु येन॑ निरिणासि ra ३ ॥ 


a: Mamattu tva divyah soma indra mamattu yah 
suyate parthivesu. Mamattu yena varivascakartha 
Mamattu yena nirinasi Satrun. 


1016 RGVEDA 


Let the heavenly soma of the sun and moon 
exhilarate you. Let the soma sweetness and beauty of 
things earthly created here exhilarate you. Let the soma 
of your own grandeur by which you do wonders 
exhilarate you. And let the soma of your own valour by 
which you destroy the enemies exhilarate you. 


आ fgadt अपिनो यात्विन्द्रो वृषा हरिभ्यां परिषिक्तमन्धः । 
गव्या सुतस्य प्रभूतस्य मध्व॑ः सत्रा खेदामरुशहा वृषस्व ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. A dvibarha amino yatvindro vrsa haribhyam 
parisiktamandhah. Gavya sutasya prabhrtasya 
madhvah satra khedamarusaha vrsasva. 


May generous Indra, mighty ruler of the powers 
of heaven and earth, come with complementary powers 
of centrifugal and centripetal forces of nature and society 
and taste the sweet sustaining assets of food and energy 
created on earth. O lord breaker of clouds and destroyer 
of enemies, adversity and exhaustion, let there be 
ceaseless showers of abundant honey sweets of distilled 
and seasoned wealth, honour and excellence of life on 
earth. 


नि तिग्मानि भ्राशयन्भ्राश्यान्यवं स्थिरा त॑नुहि यातुजूनाम्‌ | 
उग्राय ते सहो बलं ददामि प्रतीत्या शत्रंन्विगदेषुं वश्च i ५ ॥ 


2: Ni tigmani bhrasayan bhrasyanyava sthira tanuhi 
yatujunam. Ugraya te saho balam dadami prati- 
tyd Satrun vigadesu vrsca. 


Indra, lord of solar power, sharpening your 
catalysis and shining your blazing radiations, reduce 
and destroy the strong persistent life destroying forces 
from nature and society. I offer you power and persistent 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 116 1017 


forces of resistance to cooperate with your blazing fight 
against the anti-life elements. Face the enemies and 
uproot them in our battle for health and the good life. 


aia इन्द्र तनुहि श्रवांस्योज॑ः स्थिरेव धन्व॑नोऽ भिर्मातीः। 
अस्मद्रयग्वावृधानः सहोधिरनिंभृष्टस्तन्वं वावृधस्व ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Vyarya indra tanuhi Sravamsyojah sthireva 
dhanvano’bhimatih. Asmadyragvavrdhanah 
sahobhiranibhrstastanvam vavrdhasva. 


Indra, lord of life and human society, expand 
the resources of food, energy and sustenance, heighten 
the power and prestige of life and extend the spatial 
knowledge and power as on a permanent basis. 
Unresisted and inviolable by virtue of your own 
patience, persistence and power, rising in strength and 
lustre of glory before us, raise the power and prestige 
of the self and the total human organisation. 


इदं हविर्म॑घवन्तुभ्यं रातं प्रति सम्राव्हणानो गृभाय । तुभ्यं 
सुतो म॑घवन्तुभ्यं पक्वो ३5 न्दं पिब॑ च प्रस्थितस्य ॥ ७॥ 


Te Idam havirmaghavan tubhyam ratam prati 
samralahrnano grbhaya. Tubhyam suto magha- 
van tubhyam pakvo ’ddhindra piba ca prasthi- 
tasya. 


Indra, lord of glory, this homage and tribute is 
offered to you. O ruler of self, humanity and all life, 
pray take it freely without inhibition or hesitation. For 
you is the soma distilled and offered, O lord of majesty. 
For you is the food prepared and seasoned. Pray accept 
it, taste of it and drink of it as it is prepared with faith 
and love without reservation. 


1018 RGVEDA 


अन्दीर्दिन्द्र प्रस्थितेमा हवींषि चनो दधिष्व पचतोत Bray । 
प्रय॑स्वन्तः प्रतिं हर्यामसि त्वा सत्याः सन्तु यज॑मानस्य 
कामाः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Addhidindra prasthitema havimsi cano dadhisva 
pacatota somam. Prayasvantah prati haryamasi 
tva satyah santu yajamanasya kamah. 


Indra, ruling lord of nature and human society, 
pray accept these offers of homage as inputs in the 
natural and human system of evolution and progress. 
Take the food prepared and the soma distilled as our 
share of contribution and generate and bring the divine 
gifts of food and natural energy for health and joy. 
Bearing food and tribute of homage we love and honour 
you and pray may the cherished desires of the yajamana 
be fulfilled. 


प्रन्द्रायिभ्यां सुवचस्यामियर्मि सिन्धाविव प्रेर॑यं नावमः 1 
अ्याइव्‌ परि चरन्ति देवा ये अस्मभ्यं धनदा उद्धि- 
दश्च ॥ ९॥ 


 / Prendragnibhyam suvacasyamiyarmi sindhaviva 
prerayam navamarkaih. Aya iva pari caranti deva 
ye asmabhyam dhanada udbhidasca. 


I send up this song of adoration to Indra, lord of 
power, and to Agni, lord of light. It is infused with the 
inspiration of mantras and [ launch these prayers like a 
boat on the sea. Devas range around and move like 
harbingers of good fortune, they are abundant givers of 
wealth and they destroy misfortune and uproot evil. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 117 1019 


Mandala 10/Sukta 117 
Dana-stuti or Indra Devata, Bhikshu Angirasa Rshi 


न वा उ देवाः aefge द॑दुरुता्शितमुप॑ गच्छन्ति 
मृत्यवः । उतो रयिः Gord नोप॑ दस्यत्युताप्ंणन्म्डितारं 
न विन्दते॥ ९॥ 


iP Na va u devah ksudhamidvadham daduruta- 
Sitamupa gacchanti mrtyavah. Uto rayih prnato 
nopa dasyatyutaprnan marditaram na vindate. 


The devas have ordained death for mortals, but 
not for reasons of hunger alone, because death overtakes 
the rich and well provided too. The wealth of the 
generous giver of charity does not diminish while the 
uncharitable finds no grace, none to comfort him. 


य आध्राय semua पित्वोऽ न्न॑वान्त्सत्रंफितायोपजग्मुषे | 
स्थिरं मन॑: कृणुते सेव॑ते पुरोतो चित्स मर्डितारं न 
विन्दते॥ २॥ 


2. Ya adhraya cakamanaya pitvo’nnavantsan 
raphitayopajagmuse. sthiram manah krnute 
sevate puroto cit sa marditaram na vindate. 


The man of means in plenty who does not give 
in charity to the poor, needy, hunger afflicted supplicant 
that comes to his door but hardens his heart and, further, 
himself enjoys the fruits of his riches in his very 
presence, finds no grace, no comfort, none to console 
him. 


USHIT यो गृहवे ददात्यन्नकामाय चरं ते Pre | 
sna भवति agar उतापरीषु कृणुते सर्वायम्‌॥ ३॥ 


1020 RGVEDA 


Bi Sa idbhojo yo grhave dadatyannakamaya carate 
krsaya. Aramasmai bhavati yamahiuta utapa-risu 
krnute sakhayam. 


Bounteous blest is he who gives to the needy 
seeker desirous of food and to the wanderer in search, 
gone feeble. Amplitude comes to him at his call for his 
purpose, and he creates friendly alliances even among 
those who once opposed him. 


नससखा यो न ददति सख्ये सचाभुवे सच॑मानाय पित्वः। 
अर्पास्मात्प्रेयान्न तदोको अस्ति पृणन्त॑मन्यमरंणं चिदि- 
SINS 


4. Na sa sakha yo na dadati sakhye sacabhuve 
sacamanaya pitvah. Apasmat preyanna tadoko 
asti prnantamanyamaranam cidicchet. 


No friend is he who gives no help and 
sustenance to the friend, the assistant and the associate. 
Denied, the friend goes away from him. No home is 
this house of the miser mean, if the friend in need has 
to knock at another door, the house of a generous helpful 
person. 


पृणीयादिन्नाध॑मानाय तव्यान्द्राघींयां समनु पश्येत पन्थाम्‌ | 
ओ हि वर्तन्ते रथ्येव चक्रान्यम॑न्यमुप॑ तिष्ठन्त राय॑: ॥ ५॥ 


5. Prniyadinnadhamanaya tavyan draghiyam- 
samanu pasyeta pantham. O hi vartante rathyeva 
cakranyamanyamupa tisthanta rayah. 


The rich man should give for the poor seeker, 
he should see the paths of life in the long run. Riches 
move like wheels of the chariot: Now they are at one 
place, now they move to another. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 117 1021 


मोघमन्नं विन्दते अप्र॑चेताः सत्यं ब्र॑वीमि वध इत्स तस्य॑ । 
नार्यमणं पुष्य॑ति नो सखायं केव॑लाघो भवति केव- 
त्मादी॥ & ॥ 


6. Moghamannam 1771441८ apracetah satyam 
bravimi vadha it sa tasya. Naryamanam pusyati 
no sakhayam kevalagho bhavati kevaladi. 


The man of no knowledge and short vision gets 
food in vain and prosperity for nothing. Verity I say 
that prosperity is his ruin, his very death in life. He 
prospers not who helps neither the friend nor the wise, 
eating all by himself he eats nothing but sin. 


कूषन्नित्फाल आशितं कृणोति यन्नध्वानमपं वृद्धे चरित्रः | 
वर्द॑न्ब्रह्मावंदतो वनीं सान्पूणन्नापिरपुंणन्तमभि ष्यात्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


ve Krsannit phala asitam krnoti yannadhvan-amapa 
vrnkte caritraith. Vadan brahmavadato vaniyan 
prnannapiraprnantamabhi syat. 


The ploughman ploughing the land produces 
food for the hungry, the traveller while moving crosses 
the path to destination, the vocal sage is better than the 
silent, and the giving friend and brother is better than 
the non-giving. 

एकपाद्धूयों द्विपदो वि च॑क्रमे द्विपात्तरिपाद॑मभ्येति पश्चात्‌। 
चतुष्पादेति द्विपदामभिस्वरे संपश्य॑न्पद्धीरुपतिष्टमानः ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Ekapadbhiuyo dvipado vi cakrame dvipat tripa- 


damabhyeti pascat. Catuspadeti dvipada-mabhi- 
svare sampasyan panktirupatisthamanah. 


In the process of evolution and mutual 
exhortation, the man of the first order of wealth looks 


1022 RGVEDA 


up to the man of double order of wealth and, if he be 
active and generous, may even surpass the doubly rich 
person. Similarly, the man of double order of wealth 
looks up to the man of triple wealth and may even 
surpass him. Later, the man of triple wealth looks up to 
the man of fourfold wealth and may overtake and even 
surpass him. Thus in evolution, competition, 
cooperation and mutual exhortation, the generous man 
of initiative goes on and on, watching and abiding in 
the line of the progressive evolution of humanity. 


समो चिब्दस्तौ न समं विविष्टः संमातरा चिन्न समं दुंहाते। 
यमयोण्चिन्न समा वीर्याणि ज्ञाती चित्सन्तौ न समं 
पुंणीतः॥ ९॥ 

9. Samau ciddhastau na samam vivistah sammatara 


cinna samam duhdate. YamayoScin-na sama 
viryani jnati cit santau na samam prnitah. 


The two hands, howsoever alike, do not perform 
equally well, two mother cows, alike and equal 
otherwise, do not yield the same quality and quantity of 
milk, the power and performance of even twins is not 
equal and the same, and two persons may be closely 
related, still they are not equal and exactly alike in 
charity. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 118 
Agni Rakshoha Devata, Urukshaya Amahiyava Rshi 
अग्ने हंसि न्यत्रिणं दीद्यन्मर्त्येष्वा । स्वे क्षये शुचिव्रत ॥ ९॥ 


i, Agne hamsi nyatrinam didyanmartyesva. 
Sve ksaye Sucivrata. 


Agni, fire divine, you destroy the consumptive 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 118 1023 


forces which damage life and, shining and blazing 
immortal among mortals, wherever you abide in your 
own form and place, you go on dedicated to your 
Dharma of purification and sanctification. 


उत्तिष्ठसि स्वाहुतो घुतानि प्रति मोदसे । 
यत्त्वा Sat: समस्थिरन्‌॥ २॥ 
Zi Uttistai svahuto ghrtani prati modase. 


Yat tva srucah samasthiran. 


You rise in flames of glory and respond with 
fragrant joy to the oblations of ghrta when ladlefuls are 
brought close to the vedi and poured into the fire. 


स आहुतो fa रोचतेऽ fite-at गिरा । 
स्तुचा प्रतीकमज्यते ॥ ३ ॥ 
Sa ahuto vi rocate’gnirilenyo gira. 
Sruca pratikamajyate. 
Venerable Agni, when it is invoked and adored 
with Vedic mantras, rises and shines when it is served 


and exalted with ladlefuls of ghrta as the prime power 
of yajna. 


घृतेनाभिः सम॑ज्यते मधुप्रतीक आहुतः | 
रोच॑मानो विभावसुः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Ghrtenagnih samajyate madhupratika ahutah. 
Rocamano vibhavasuh. 


Agni, honoured and adored with ghrta, served 
and adorned with honey sweets, invoked and exalted 
with Vedic hymns, shines and illuminates us as the sun. 


1024 RGVEDA 


जर॑माणः समिध्यसे देवेभ्यो हव्यवाहन | 
तं त्वा हवन्त म्यी: ॥ ५॥ 

=f Jaramanah samidhyase devebhyo havyavahana. 
Tam tva havanta martyah. 


Invoked, celebrated and exalted, you rise and 
shine, harbinger of fragrances for the divinities of nature 
and noble humanity, and as such the mortals invoke and 
adore you in their yajnic celebrations. 


तं मर्ता अमर्त्य geri सपर्यत | अर्दाभ्यं गृहप॑तिम्‌ i & ॥ 

6. Tam marta amartyam ghrtenagnim saparyata. 
Adabhyam grhapatim. 

That immortal Agni, the mortals serve with 


ghrta, Agni that is the redoubtable master protector of 
the home and family. 


अदाभ्येन शोचिषाग्ने रश्चस्त्वं द॑ह। 
गोपा ऋतस्य दीदिहि॥ ७ ॥ 

Adabhyena Socisagne raksastvam daha. 
Gopa rtasya didihi. 


Agni, with your inviolable and irresistible light 
and heat, burn the negative forces that damage life, and 
shine and blaze as protector and promoter of the yajna 
of life’s progress. 


स aan प्रतीकेन प्रत्योष यातुधान्य॑ः। 
उरुक्षयेषु दीद्य॑त्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sa tvamagne pratikena pratyosa yatudhanyah. 
Uruksayesu didyat. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 119 1025 


Agni, with your heat and light rays burn and 
destroy all forces of germs, viruses, insects and 
impurities that damage life, shine as you do in vast vedis 
of scientific programmes of yajna. 
तं cat गीर्भिरुरुकश्चयां हव्यवाहं समीधिरे | 
यजिष्ठं मानुषे जने॥ ९ ॥ 

a, Tam tva girbhiruruksaya havyavaham samidhire. 
Yajistham manuse jane. 

Agni, carrier and harbinger of fragrant havis to 
divinities and humanity, most adorable in human 


communities, men of dignity and grand mansions invoke 
and light you in vast vedis with holy songs of the Veda. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 119 
Atma Devata, Laba Aindra Rshi 


इति वा इतिं मे मनो गामश्वं सनुयामिति । 
कुवित्सोमस्यापामिति॥ ९॥ 


lL. Iti va iti me mano gamasvam sanuyamiti. 
Kuvit somasyapamiti. 


This and this alone is what I am at heart: Let me 
win over the cow and the horse, wealth of the earth and 
all possible progress onward, and wholly control my 
senses and dynamics of the mind, for I have drunk the 
soma of the divine spirit. 


प्र aratsa दोध॑त उन्मा पीता अंयंसत। 
कुवित्सोमस्यापामिति॥ २॥ 


2. Pra vata iva dodhata unma pita ayamsata. 
Kuvit somasyapamiti. 


1026 RGVEDA 


Like impetuous winds have the exhilarations of 
the draughts of soma raised me to the state of ecstasy, 
as I have drunk the soma of the divine spirit. 


उन्मा पीता अयंसत रथमश्व।इवारशवंः। 
कुवित्सोमस्यापामिति॥ ३ ॥ 


Unma pita ayamsata rathamasva ivasavah. 
Kuvit somasyapamiti. 


The draughts of divine soma have raised me up 
in ecstasy of body, mind and spirit like swift horses 
carrying the chariot and the master, for I have drunk of 
the soma of the divine spirit. 


उप॑ मा मतिरस्थित वाश्रा पुत्रमिव प्रियम्‌। 
कुवित्सोमस्यापामिति॥। ४ ॥ 


4. Upa ma matirasthita vasra putramiva priyam. 
Kuvit somasyapamiti. 


My heart, mind and intelligence is stable and 
has stabilised me in the object of my divine love like 
the loving mother cow having reached its darling calf, 
for I have drunk of the soma of the divine spirit. 


अहं तष्टै व वन्धुरं पर्यचामि हृदा मतिम्‌। 
कुवित्सोमस्यापामिति॥ ५ ॥ 


5: Aham tasteva bandhuram paryacami hrda matim. 
Kuvit somasyapamiti. 


Just as the maker makes and controls the well- 
structured chariot so do I control my mind and intellect 
at heart by soul, since I have drunk of the soma of the 
divine spirit. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 119 1027 


नहि a अश्चिपच्यनाच्छान्त्सुः पञ्च॑ कृष्ट य॑: | 
कुवित्सोमस्यापामिति॥। ६ ॥ 

6. Nahi me aksipaccanacchantsuh panca krstayah. 
Kuvit somasyapamiti. 
Nor can all the five communities elude or blur 
the vision of my eye and what I see, for I have drunk of 
the soma of the divine spirit. 
नहि मे रोद॑सी उभे अन्यं पश्चं चन प्रतिं। 
कुवित्सोमस्यापामिति॥ ७॥ 

a Nahi me rodasi ubhe anyam paksam cana prati. 
Kuvit somasyapamiti. 
Nor can the physical earth and heaven both be 
the other and opposite side of my divine personality, 
for I have drunk of the soma of the divine spirit. 
अभि द्यां dient भुवमभीमां पुंथिवीं war 
कुवित्सोमस्यापामिति॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Abhi dyam mahina bhuvamabhimam prthivim 
mahim. Kuvit somasyapamiti. 


By the grandeur of my divine experience I 
realise the greatness of the solar regions and the 
greatness of this great earth, for I have drunk of the 
soma of the divine spirit. 


हन्ताहं पंथिवीमिमां नि darite वेह at 
कुवित्सोमस्यापामिति॥ ९ ॥ 


५8 Hantaham prthivimimam ni dadhantha veha va. 
Kuvit somasyapamiti. 


1028 RGVEDA 


And may be I shall hold the beauty and 
generosity of this earthly existence here or, later, there, 
for I have drunk of the soma of the spirit divine. 
ओषमित्पुंथिवीमहं जङ्कनानीह वेह वा । 
कुवित्सोमस्यापामिति॥ ९०॥ 

10. Osamit prthivinaham janghananiha veha va. 
Kuvit somasyapamiti. 
And I can heat up this earthly body to light and 
take it here, there, anywhere, for I have drunk of the 
soma of the spirit divine. 
दिवि में अन्यः पक्षो ३ऽधो अन्यम॑चीकृषम्‌। 
कुवित्सोमस्यापामिति॥ ९९॥ 

11. Divime anyah pakso’dho anyamacikrsam. 
Kuvit somasyapamiti. 


I realise one mode of my existence high up in 
heaven and the other down here on earth, for I have 
drunk of the soma of the spirit divine. 


अहमस्मि महामहोऽ भिनभ्यमुदीषितः। 
कुवित्सोमस्यापामिति॥ ९२॥ 

12. Ahamasmi mahamaho’bhinabhyamudisitah. 
Kuvit somasyapamiti. 

I am greatest of the greats, shining bright, 
radiating upwards to the skies and spaces, for I have 
drunk of the soma of the spirit divine. 

गृहो याम्यरंकृतो देवेभ्यो हव्यवाहनः | 
कुवित्सोमस्यापामिति॥ ९३॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 120 1029 


13. (1/1 yamyaramkrto devebhyo havyavahanah. 
Kuvit somasyapamiti. 


Receiving the light and ecstasy of divinity, 
beatified by grace, I have become the fire that carries 
the fragrances of love and faith to the divinities and the 
highest Divine, for Ihave drunk of the soma of the spirit 
divine and I have become the divine ecstasy itself. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 120 
Indra Devata, Brhaddiva Atharvana Rshi 


तदिदास भुव॑नेषु ज्येष्ठं यतों जज्ञ उग्रस्त्वेषनुम्णः। 
सद्यो Sart नि रिणाति शत्रूननु यं विश्वे मदन्त्यूमाः ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Tadidasa bhuvanesu jyestham yato jajna ugra- 
stvesanrmnah. Sadyo jajnano ni rinati Satrunanu 
yam visve madantyumah. 


That Indra, Brahma, is the first and highest 
among all the worlds in existence, of which, as the 
original cause, is born the blazing, refulgent potent sun 
which, always rising every moment, destroys the 
negativities which damage life and by which all positive 
and protective powers and people of the world rejoice 
and celebrate life. 


वावृधानः शव॑सा भूर्योजाः शतरंदसिायं भियसं दधाति। 
अव्य॑नच्च व्यनच्य सस्नि सं ते नवन्त wala मदेषु ॥ २॥ 

2. Vavrdhanah savasa bhuryojah satrurdasaya 
bhiyasam dadhati. Avyanacca vyanacca sasti 
sam te navanta prabhrta madesu. 


Growing mighty in strength, immensely 
lustrous, destroyer of negativities, it strikes fear into 


1030 RGVEDA 


the heart of forces causing damage to life and the 
environment. Bountiful purifier and sustainer of the 
breathing and non-breathing world, all the people and 
powers which receive sustenance from you join to do 
honour to you in their joy and celebration of life. 


त्वे क्रतुमपि वृञ्जन्ति fava द्वि्यदिते त्रिर्भवन्त्यूमाः | स्वादोः 
स्वादीयः स्वादुना सजा समदः सु मधु मधुनाभि योधीः ॥ ३॥ 


3 Tve kratumapi vrnjanti visve dviryadete trirbha- 
vantyumah. Svadoh svadiyah svaduna srja 
samadah su madhu madhunabhi yodhih. 


And they all, celebrants of divinity, surrender 
all actions and prayers to you when they join in couples 
and grow to three in the family. O lord sweeter than 
sweetness itself, join the sweets of life with honey and 
with divine sweetness and bliss create life overflowing 
with love and ecstasy. 


sid चिद्दि त्वा धना जय॑न्तं मदेमदे अनुमदन्ति विप्राः | 
ओजीयो धृष्णो स्थिरमा त॑नुष्व मा त्वां दभन्यातुधाना 
दुरेवाः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Iti ciddhi tva dhana jayantam mademade 
anumadanti viprah. Ojiyo dhrstno sthirama 
tanusva ma tva dabhan yatudhana durevah. 


Thus with joy on every happy occasion of life, 
grateful people and vibrant sages celebrate you, winner, 
creator and giver of wealth and excellence. Illustrious 
lord of shattering power, expand the commonwealth of 
permanent values. Let not the crooked and fiendish 
forces on the prowl suppress the creative gifts of divine 
generosity. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 120 1031 


त्वया वयं शाशदाहे रणेषु प्रपश्य॑न्तो युधेन्यानि भूरिं । 
meal a आयुधा वचोभिः सं त शिशापि ब्रह्मणा 
वयांसि ॥ ५॥ 


>. Tvaya vayam sasadmahe ranesu prapasyanto 
yudhenyani bhuri. Codayami ta ayudha vacobhih 
sam te sisami brahmana vayamsi. 

With your divine inspiration, well knowing the 
weapons of war, we fight out the enemies of life in the 
battles of humanity. I strengthen and calibrate the arms 
and ammunitions for battle by your divine words, and 
by the same divine formula I sharpen the target efficacy 
of the arrows and missiles of defence and offence. 


wast पुरु वर्प॑स मरभ्वमिनत॑ंममाप्त्यमाप्त्यानाम्‌ | 
आ दर्षते शव॑सा सस दानूनप्र साक्षते प्रतिमानानि भूरिं ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Stuseyyam puruvarpasamrbhvaminatamama- 
ptyamaptyanam. A darsate Savasa sapta danun 
pra saksate pratimanai bhiuri. 

We love and celebrate Indra in song, lord 
adorable infinite in form, all pervasive, most glorious 
and wisest of the self-realised wise. With his might he 
breaks seven types of clouds and seven orders of sin 
and evil, and he challenges and subdues the many 
adversaries that arise in the world of nature and 
humanity. 


नि तद॑धिषेऽ at परं च यस्यिन्नाविथाव॑सा दुरोणे | आ मातरां 
स्थापयसे जिगत्नू अतं इनोषि कर्वरा पुरूणि ॥ ७॥ 

a Ni taddadhise’varam param ca yasminnavitha- 
vasa durone. A matara sthapayase jigatnu ata 
inosi karvara puruni. 


1032 RGVEDA 


You sustain this visible world of physical reality 
and the other invisible world of meta-physical and 
spiritual reality in which you maintain and protect 
everything with your might in their very home. And 
you hold and stabilise the revolving motherly earth and 
heaven, inspire many great actions therein and see them 
accomplished. 


इमा ब्रह्मं बृहदहिंवो विवक्तीन्द्राय शुषमगरियः स्वर्षाः । महो 
Thal क्षयति स्वराजो दुरश्च favat अवृणोदप स्वाः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ima brahma brhaddivo vivaktindraya susama- 
griyah svarsah. Maho gotrasya ksayati svarajo 
durasca visva avrnodapa svah. 


The poet of boundless heavenly light speaks 
these divine verses in honour of Indra for his own 
spiritual peace and pleasure. First and foremost among 
eminent poets, self-illuminant, self-refulgent and self- 
controlled, he masters the mighty treasure of Vedic 
wisdom and he opens the flood gates of his own vision 
of universal light and wisdom. 


एवा महान्बृहददिंवो अथर्वावो+चत्स्वां तन्वमिन्द्रमेव | 
स्वसारो मातरिभ्व॑रीररिप्रा हिन्वन्ति च शव॑सा वर्धय॑न्ति 
च।॥९॥ 


१ Eva mahan brhaddivo atharvavocat svam tanva- 
mindrameva. Svasaro mataribhvariraripra 
hinvanti ca Savasa vardhayanti ca. 


Thus does the sage of boundless light and vision 
of wisdom with settled mind address his song of 
adoration to Indra only, and the pure immaculate fluent 
streams of speech like motherly creations inspire the 


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 121 1033 


world and exalt humanity with strength and enthusiasm. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 121 
Kah (Prajapati) Devata, Hiranyagarbha Prajapatya Rshi 


हिरण्यगर्भः समवर्तताग्र भूतस्य॑ जातः पतिरेकं आसीत्‌ । 
स दाधार पृथिवीं द्यामुतेमां कस्मै care हविषां विधेम ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Hiranyagarbhah samavartatagre bhitasya jatah 
patireka asit. Sa dadhara prthivim dyamutemam 
kasmai devaya havisa vidhema. 


Hiranyagarbha, the golden Seed, one lord of 
light and the sole creator of lights such as the sun, existed 
before creation (as he ever exists). He alone was and is 
the lord and sustainer of all forms of created being. He 
holds and sustains the earth and heaven and supports 
this whole universe. We worship the same one lord and 
offer him homage with oblations of fragrant materials. 


य strat dover यस्य faved उपासंते प्रशिषं यस्य॑ देवाः | 
यस्य॑ छायामृतं यस्य॑ मृत्युः कस्मै care हविषां विधेम ॥ २ ॥ 


2: Ya atmada balada yasya visva upasate prasisam 
yasya devah. Yasya cayamrtam yasya mrtyuh 
kasmai devaya havisa vidhema. 


The lord who is the giver of birth to the soul 
with its power and potential in body, whose glory all 
the divinities of the world celebrate in song, whose shade 
of protection is immortality and falling off is death, to 
him we offer our homage and worship in hymns with 
havi. 


यः प्राणतो निमिषतो म॑हित्वैक इद्राजा जग॑तो बभूव॑। य 
ईशे अस्य द्विपदश्चतुष्पदः कस्यै देवाय हविषां विधेम ॥ ३ ॥ 


1034 RGVEDA 


छः Yah pranato nimisato mahitvaika idraja jagato 
babhiva. Ya tse asya dvipadascatuspadah kasmai 
devaya havisa vidhema. 


The sole one lord who, with his own might, 
creates and rules over the world of those who breathe 
and see, the lord who rules over both men and animals, 
to that sovereign lord of bliss and majesty we offer 
homage and worship with our heart and soul. 


यस्येमे हिमवन्तो महित्वा यस्य॑ समुद्रं र सय सहाहुः | 
यस्येमाः प्रदिशो यस्य॑ बाहू कस्मै देवाय हविषां विधेम ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Yasyeme himavanto mahitva yasya samudram 
rasaya sahahuh. Yasyemah pradiso yasya bahu 
kasmai devaya havisa vidhema. 


Whose majesty these snow covered mountains 
proclaim, whose depth and grandeur the ocean with 
rivers declares, whose arms these quarters of space 
extend to infinity, that lord of light and sublimity let us 
worship with offers of homage in havis. 


येन द्यौरुग्रा पूंथिवी च॑ goer येन ta: स्तथितं येन नाकः | 
यो अन्तरिश्च रज॑सो विमानः weal cara हविषां विधेम ॥ ५ ॥ 


2: Yena dyaurugra prthivi ca drlha yena svah stabhi- 
tam yena nakah. Yo antarikse rajaso vimanah 
kasmai devaya havisa vidhema. 


By him the suns blaze, by him the earth is firm, 
by him the heaven of bliss is sustained, by him the 
ecstasy of Moksha is constant, and he is the creator of 
the worlds of space. Let us worship the lord refulgent 
and omnipotent with offers of homage in havis. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 121 1035 


यं क्रन्द॑सी अव॑सा तस्तभाने अभ्यैक्षेतां मन॑सा रेज॑माने । 
यत्राधि सूर उदितो विभाति कस्मै care हविषां विधेम ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yam krandasi avasa tastabhane abhyaiksetam 
mansa rejamane. Yatradhi sura udito vibhdati 
kasmai devaya havisa vidhema. 


Whom eloquent heaven and earth sustained in 
balance by divine power, shining in splendour and 
inspired at heart, manifest in glory and celebrate in song, 
under whose law the sun rises, shines and illuminates 
the world, that self-refulgent lord let us worship with 
offers of havis. 


srl ह यद्‌ बुं हतीर्विश्वमायन्गर्थं दधाना जनय॑न्तीरयिम्‌। 
ततो देवानां सम॑वर्ततासुरेकः कस्मै care हविषां विधेम 11 ७॥ 


4६ Apo ha yadbrhatirvisvamayan garbham dadhana 
Janayantiragnim. Tato devanam samavartata- 
surekah kasmai devaya havisa vidhema. 


When the boundless ocean of charged particles 
of Vayu energy comes into existence bearing the implicit 
blue print of the cosmos in seed form, creating the heat 
mode of existence, then the one supreme of the 
divinities, living breathing life itself, emerges in advance 
of all cosmic forms, and that One all-comprehensive 
divine lord let us worship with oblations of havi, who 
else? That is Hiranyagarbha. 


यश्चिदापो महिना पर्यप॑रुयदश्चं दधाना जनयंन्तीर्यज्ञम्‌ । 
यो देवेष्वधि देव एक आसीत्कस्मै care हविषां विधेम ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Yascidapo mahina paryapasyad daksam dadhana 
jJanayantiryajnam. Yo devesvadhi deva eka asit- 
kasmai devaya havisa vidhema. 


1036 RGVEDA 


The one who with his might pervades, watches 
and overall controls the ocean of charged particles of 
Vayu energy bearing the heat mode producing the yajnic 
process of life’s evolution, who is on top of all the 
divinities of existence, that One supreme lord let us 
worship with havis. 


मा नो हिंसीज्जनिता यः पंथिव्या at ar दिवं सत्यधर्मा 
जजान । यश्चापश्चन्द्रा बुं हतीर्जजान कस्यै care हविषां 
विधेम ॥ ९॥ 


9. Ma no himsijanita yah prthivya yo va divam 
satyadharma jajana. Yascapascandra brhatirja- 
jana kasmai devaya havisa vidhema. 


May the one lord supreme never hurt us, the 
lord that is creator of the earth, who also creates the 
heavens and who also creates the vast oceans of energies 
and waters, all beauteous, soothing and blissful, the 
master, controller and ordainer of all the laws of 
existence in operation in truth. Let us worship that one 
lord supreme with offers of faith and havis. 


प्रजापते न त्वदेतान्यन्यो विश्वां जातानि परि ता ब॑भूव । 
यत्कामास्ते जुहुमस्तन्नो अस्तु वयं स्याम पत॑यो रयी- 
णाम्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. Prajapate na tvadetanyanyo visva jatani pari ta 
babhuva. Yat kamaste juhumastanno astu vayam 
syama patayo rayinam. 


Prajapati, lord of life and your children, there is 
none other than you who rules over life forms and 
materials in existence, for yours are the laws of 
existence, none else’s. Whatever our desires, whatever 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 122 1037 


you wish we should desire, all that we pray for, may all 
that be fulfilled in life for us. May we be masters in 
control of the wealths, honours and excellences of the 
world within your laws of life. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 122 
Agni Devata, Chitramaha Vasishtha Rshi 


ad न चित्रमहसं गृणीषे वामं शेवमतिंथिमद्धिषेण्यम्‌। स 
रासते शुरुधो विश्वधायसोऽ भिर्ोता गृहपतिः सुवीर्यम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


ll; Vasum na citramahasam grnise vamam Seva- 
matithidvisenyam. Sa rasate Surudho visvadha- 
yaso’gnirhota grhapatih suviryam. 


I adore Agni like my life’s parental home, 
wondrous generous and refulgent, lovely, comfortable, 
welcome as a noble guest, all love free from jealousy. 
Master protector of the home, yajamana as well as high 
priest of life’s yajna, he blesses us with all protective, 
universally nourishing and positive heroic powers and 
creative energies of life. 


जुषाणो अग्ने प्रतिं हर्य मे वचो विश्वानि विद्वान्वयुनानि 
सुक्रतो । घृत॑निणिग्ब्रह्मणे गातुमेरय तव॑ देवा अंजनयन्ननु 
व्रतम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Jusano agne prati harya me vaco visvani vidvan 
vayunani sukrato. Ghrtanirnigbrahmane gatu- 
meraya tava deva ajanayannanu vratam. 


Loving and adorable Agni, universal knower of 
the laws and ways of life, presiding power of all holy 
works, pray listen to my words and accept my prayer : 
Rising and refulgent with ghrta, inspire the sage and 


1038 RGVEDA 


open up the paths of progress for him. Divinities and 
noble souls raising you in yajna adore you, join you 
and raise themselves in pursuance of your laws of life. 


we धामानि ukaadea दाशंदाशुषे सुकृते मामहस्व | 
सुवीरेण cons स्वाभुवा यस्त आन॑ट्‌ समिधा तं 
जुषस्व ॥ २॥ 


ai Sapta dhamani pariyannamartyo dasaddasuse 
sukrate mamahasva. Suvirena rayinagne sva- 
bhuva yasta anat samidha tam jusasva. 


Immortal Agni, pervading seven regions of the 
universe, bhu, bhuva, sva, maha, jana, tapa and satyam, 
advance and exalt the noble and generous yajamana of 
holy action. Whoever brings and offers holy fuel and 
fragrant havi to you, pray accept and bless him with 
noble progeny and abundant wealth of life. 


यन्ञस्य॑ कतुं tert पुरोहितं हविष्म॑न्त gad सस्र वालिनम्‌ | 
sued घृतपृष्ठमुक्चषणं पृणन्तं देवं Porat सुवीर्यम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Yajnasya ketum prathamam purohitam havisma- 
nta tlate sapta vajinam. Srnvantamagnirn ghrta- 
prsthamuksanam prnantam devam prnate 
suviryam. 


Seven priests with seven pranas and seven 
faculties of sense and mind offer havi and adore Agni, 
first and original performer of creation yajna who bears 
on the banner of creative yajna to its victorious 
completion, and they go on serving the seven-rayed light 
of life, listening, fed on and rising by ghrta, generous 
lord refulgent who blesses the dedicated celebrant with 
noble strength and happy progeny. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 122 1039 


त्वं दूतः dant वरेण्यः स gaat अमृताय मत्स्व । त्वां 
म॑र्जयन्मरुतो दाशुषो गृहे त्वां स्तोमेभिर्भग॑वो वि रुरुचुः ॥ ५॥ 


oF Tvam dutah prathamo varenyah sa huyamano 
amrtaya matsva. Tvam marjayan maruto dasuso 
grhe tvam stomebhirbhrgavo vi rurucuh. 


Agni, you are the messenger and harbinger of 
the breeze of fresh life. You are the first divinity of our 
love and choice. As such, invoked and adored for the 
sake of immortality, pray rejoice at yajna and let us 
rejoice too. Vibrant celebrants and veteran sages, shining 
and raising you in the house of generous yajamana, 
honour and exalt you with holy songs of adoration. 


इषं दुहन्त्सुदुघां विश्वधायसं यज्ञप्रिये यज॑मानाय सुक्रतो | 
अगन घुतस्तुस्तरि ऋतानि delgttda प॑रियन्त्सुक्रतूयसे ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Isam duhantsudugham visvadhayasam yajnapriye 
yajamanaya sukrato. Agne ghrtasnustrirrtani 
didyadvartiryajnam pariyantsukratuyase. 


Agni, light and presiding power of yajnic action, 
bringing plenty of food, energy, prosperity and the milk 
of human generosity by the mother spirit of the universe 
for the noble yajamana dedicated to yajna in love and 
faith, rising in flames of glory by oblations of ghrta, 
pervading the three dynamic regions of heaven, earth 
and the skies with light and splendour, and suffusing 
the yajnic home in life’s fragrance, you carry on the 
divine purpose in the world of nature and humanity. 


त्वामिदस्या उषसो व्युष्टिषु दूतं कण्वाना अयजन्त ATT: | 
त्वां देवा म॑हयास्यांय वावृधुराज्य॑मग्ने निमृजन्तो अध्वरे ॥। ७॥ 


1040 RGVEDA 


in Tvamidasya usaso vyustisu dutam krnvana 
ayajanta manusah. Tvam deva mahayayyaya 
vavrdhurajyamagne nimrjanto adhvare. 


Agni, light of life, in the rising lights of this 
morning’s dawn, thoughtful people adore you in yajna 
as the harbinger of nature’s bounties and carrier of their 
love and faith with fragrance to the divinities. Nobilities 
adore you and divinities exalt you, great as you are, and 
pray for their own rise in merit while they suffuse you 
in ghrta in the yajna vedi. 


नि त्वा वसिं्ठा अहन्त वाजिनं गृणन्तो अग्ने विदथेषु 
वेधसः । रायस्पोषं यज॑मानेषु धारय यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः 
सदां नः॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ni tva vasistha ahvanta vajinam grnanto agne 
vidathesu vedhasah. Rayasposam yajamanesu 
dharaya yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Agni, men of light and vision established in 
divine consciousness invoke and adore you, light and 
spirit of cosmic power, and they celebrate your divine 
supremacy over nature and humanity. O victorious lord 
of universal knowledge, power and prosperity, pray bear 
and bring us the wealth of life’s health and excellence 
for the yajamanas. O sages and scholars of divinity and 
science of yajna, pray protect and promote us always 
with all round well being of life on earth. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 123 
Vena Devata, Vena Bhargava Rshi 


अयं वेनश्चोदयत्पृिनंगर्भां ज्योतिर्जरायू रज॑सो विमाने | 
इममपां संगमे सूर्यस्य शिशुं न विप्रा मतिभीं रिहन्ति ui ९ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 123 1041 


im Ayam venascodayat prsnigarbha jyotirjarayu 
rajaso vimane. Imamapam samgame suryasya 
sisum na vipra matibhi rihanti. 

This loving and lovely light, glorious sun, womb 
of light, shines in varied light and beauty in the ocean 
of particles of mist in middle space, moves and energises 
the clouds of vapour, and in the meeting of the sun rays 
and the vapours sages celebrate and adore the sun with 
songs of prayer and love with gratitude as a child of 
divinity. 

समुद्रादूर्मिंमुदियर्तिं वेनो न॑भोजाः gs geet दशि । तस्य 
सानावधि विष्टपि भ्राट्‌ स॑मानं योनिमभ्यनूषत त्राः ॥ २॥ 


2. Samudradurmimudiyarti veno nabhojah prstham 
haryatasya darsi. Rtasya sanavadhi vistapi bhrat 
samanam yonimabhyaniusata vrah. 


Rising from the skies, the sun radiates its waves 
of light, draws waves of mist from the ocean, energises 
clouds of mist from the ocean of space, the vault of 
glorious heaven across the skies is seen, the glory shines 
on top of the high heaven of nature’s yajna, and the 
sages celebrate both dawn and the vault of heaven 
together. 


समानं पूर्वीरिभि वावशानास्ति्ठन्वत्सस्यं मातरः: सनींव्ाः। 
ऋतस्य सानावधि चक्रमाणा रिहन्ति मध्वो अमत॑स्य 
वाणीः ॥ ३॥ 

Samanam purvirabhi vavasanastisthan vatsasya 


matarah sanilah. Rtasya sanavadhi cakramana 
rihanti madhvo amrtasya vanth. 


Equal and abundant, shining and thundering 


1042 RGVEDA 


currents of natural energy, mother generators of clouds 
of rain, abiding together with vapours and sun rays in 
the skies, also active on top of nature’s dynamics, inspire 
the honey sweets of sage’s immortal songs of divine 
celebration. 


जानन्तो रूपमंकृपन्त विप्रां मृगस्य घोषं महिषस्य हि ग्मन्‌ । 
ऋतेन यन्तो अधि सिन्धुमस्थुर्विदद्रन्धरवों अमृतानि 
नामं॥ su 


4. Jananto rupamakrpanta vipra mrgasya ghosam 
mahisasya hi gman. Rtena yanto adhi sindhuma- 
sthurvidadgandharvo amrtani nama. 


The sages, knowing the form, structure and 
functioning of the cloud and the roaring thunder, 
celebrate it and realise it in practice. Going by laws of 
natural truth, waters, evaporation and cloud formation 
and catalysis in the depth of spatial ocean, they realise 
that it is really the sun which holds the earth and controls 
the immortal waters for sure. 


अप्सरा जारमुंपसिष्पियाणा योषा विभर्ति परमे व्योमन्‌। 
चर॑त्प्रियस्य योनिषु प्रियः सन्त्सीद॑त्पश्चे हिरण्यये स 
वेनः ॥ ५॥ 


5. Apsara jaramupasismiyana yosa bibharti parame 
vyoman. Carat priyasya yonisu priyah santsidat 
pakse hiranyaye sa venah. 


Like a youthful belle holding on to her lover, 
the lightning with a brilliant smile holds on to and 
sustains with the cloud in the highest skies, and the cloud 
too, dear and lovely, moving about in the spatial home 
of his lovely light and lightning, stays by the side of the 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 123 1043 


golden beloved. 


नाके सुपर्णमुप यत्पत॑न्तं हृदा वेन॑न्तो अभ्यचक्षत त्वा । 
दिरंण्यपक्चं वरुणस्य दूतं यमस्य योनौ शकुनं भुरण्युम्‌ ॥ & ॥ 


6. Nake suparnamupa yat panantam hrda venanto 
abhyacaksata tva. Hiranyapaksam varunasya 
dutam yamasya yonau sakunam bhuranyum. 


O Sun, wrapped in wondrous rays flying around 
in the highest heaven, loving sages with their heart and 
soul see and realise you at the closest as a messenger of 
the supreme lord of love and justice and as a mighty 
bird blazing and flying with golden wings in the vast 
space of the lord ordainer of the universe. 


ऊर्ध्वो गन्धर्वो अधि नाके अस्थात्प्रत्यङ्‌ चित्रा बिभ्र दस्या- 
युं धानि। वसानो अत्कं सुरभिं दशे कं स्वर्णं नाम॑ जनत 
प्रियाणि ॥ ७॥ 


ve Urdhvo gandharvo adhi nake asthat pratyan citra 
bibhradasyayudhani. Vasano atkam surabhim 
drse kam svarna nama janata priyani. 


High up over there abides the sun in the region 
of heavenly light. It bears wondrous weapons of divinity 
such as thunder and lightning. It wears a beautiful, 
fragrant form soothing for people to see, and like the 
light and bliss of heaven creates divine waters and many 
other dear divine gifts for life. 


द्रप्सः Wyse यल्िगाति पश्यन्गृक्च॑स्य aera 
विध्मन्‌। भानुः शुक्रेण शोचिष। चकानस्तृतीये चक्रे 
रज॑सि प्रियाणि ॥ ८ ॥ 


1044 RGVEDA 


8. Drapsah samudramabhi yajjigati pasyan 
grdhrasya caksasa vidharman. Bhanuh sukrena 
Socisa cakanastrtiye cakre rajasi priyani. 


When the sun in the third, highest, heaven, 
shining on the oceans and vapours in the skies with the 
light of its fervent rays reaches the clouds of vapour, 
then the blazing heat with pure and powerful energy 
catalyses the clouds and condenses the vapours into dear 
valuable drops that shower in rain upon the earth. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 124 
Devata: Agni (1), Agni’s Atma (2-4), Varuna (5, 7-8), 
Soma (6), Indra (9); Rshi: Agni, Varuna, Soma (1, 5-9), 
Agni (2-4) 


sual अग्र sd यज्ञमेहि पञ्च॑यामं त्रिवृतं सप्तत॑न्तुम्‌। stat 
हव्यवाद्छुत न॑ः पुरोगा ज्योगेव दीर्घ तम आशयिष्ठाः ॥ ९॥ 


hs Imam no agna upa yajnamehi pancayamam trivr- 
tam saptatantum. Aso havyavaluta nah puroga 
Jyogeva dirgham tama aSsayisthah. 


Agni, yajnic light of life, come to this life yajna 
of ours: which has five divisions, i1.e., Brahma-yajna, 
Deva-yajna, Pitr-yajna, Atithi-yajna, and Balivaishva- 
deva-yajna; conducted by five people, 1.6, four socio- 
economic classes of Brahmans, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas 
and Shudras and others like chance visitors from other 
groups there might be; which is threefold, i.e., paka 
yajna, haviryajna and somayajna; and which has seven 
extensions, 1.e., Agnishtoma, Atyagnishtoma, Ukthya, 
Shodashi, Vajapeya, Atiratra and Aptoyami. You are our 
leader and pioneer, Agni, and you are the carrier of our 
yajna to the divinities as well as harbinger of the fruits 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 124 1045 


of yajna to us. Pray come and be our all time dispeller 
of the cavern of deep darkness from life. 


(Yajna is a creative process of development 
in life from the individual to the social, national, global 
and environmental level of life. The explanation above 
is related to the social level. Swami Brahmamuni 
explains the yajna at the individual level, and that is 
also suggested in Rgveda 10, 7, 6: “Svayam yajasva’, 
and yajurveda 4, 13: “Iyam te yajniya tanu”, which 
means: Develop yourself by yajna according to the 
seasons of your growth, and remember your life in body, 
mind and soul is worthy of yajnic service for your 
personal development, your body being the first 
instrument of your wider yajna of life. This personal 
yajna is fivefold, for the elemental balance of earth, 
water, heat, air and ether; threefold for the balance of 
vata, pitta and kaf, and also for balanced growth of body, 
mind and soul; sevenfold for the growth of rasa, rakta, 
mansa, meda, asthi, majja and virya. Thus yajna is the 
process of growth beginning with the individual, 
accomplished at the cosmic level.) 


अदे वाद्ेवः प्रचता गुहा यन्प्रपश्य॑मानो अमृतत्वमेमि । शिवं 
यत्सन्तम्शिंवो जहामि स्वात्सख्यादरंणीं नाभिंमेमि॥ २॥ 


2. Adevaddevah pracata guha yan prapasyamano 
amrtatvamemi. Sivam yat santamasivo jahami 
svat sakhyadaranim nabhimemi. 


When I, the soul, transcending the mere 
physical, non-divine, form, take on to the light of 
divinity within the heart cave of the soul, I see the light 
of divinity within and attain to it. Thus when I relinquish 
my dark side of personality, attaining to the light and 


1046 RGVEDA 


peace of divinity, then by reason of my essential affinity 
with divinity, I reach the life divine, sole centre of 
existence, just like fire existing at peace in the arani 
wood, its natural abode, rising into heat and light at 
yajna. 


पश्य्॑नन्यस्या अतिथिं वयाया ऋतस्य धाम वि FHA पुरूणि | 
शंसामि पित्रे असुराय शेव॑मयज्ञियाद्यज्ियं भागमेमि ॥ ३ ॥ 


Bs Pasyannanyasya atithim vayaya rtasya dhama vi 
mime puruni. Samsami pitre asuraya Seva- 
mayajniyadyajniyam bhagamemi. 

Watching the traveller of another path of life 
other than the physical, the bird on another branch of 
the tree, and seeing the original home of the cosmic 
yajna, I enact many vedis to follow the yajnic paths of 
living. I sing songs of homage in honour of the 
omnipotent father giver of life and take to my share of 
yajnic living, away from the selfish ways of existence. 


welt: wat अकरमन्तर॑स्मिचिन्द्रं वृणानः पितरं जहामि । 
अगिः सोमो वरुणस्ते च्य॑वन्ते पयविद्रष्टितद॑वाम्यायन्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Bahvih sama akaramantarasminnindram vrnanah 
pitaram jahami. Agnih somo varunaste cyavante 
paryavardrastram tadavamyayan. 


Having lived in this body, vedi of living yajna, 
and choosing Indra, omnipotent father, for worship, I 
give up the vedi. Agni, vital heat, Varuna, mind and 
senses and the water element, and Soma, living vitality, 
depart, and moving ahead I come to the freedom of 
existence which I cherish and protect for further life. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 124 1047 


निमौया उ त्ये असुरा अभूवन्त्वं च॑ मा वरूण काम्यांसं। 
ऋतेन॑ राजन्न्‌ तं विविञ्चन्ममं राष्टस्याधिंपत्यमेहिं i ५ ॥ 


oF Nirmaya u tye asura abhuvan tvam ca ma varuna 
kamayase. Rtena rajannanrtam vivincan mama 
rastrasyadhipatyamehi. 


When I get the freedom of my state of being, let 
the demonic forces be void of their powers, and O 
Varuna, lord of love, justice and fulfilment, pray bless 
me with love and protection. O ruling lord of existence, 
eliminating untruth by the rule of truth and divine law, 
come and take over the ultimate sovereignty of my free 
state. 


इदं स्व॑रिदमिदास वाममयं प्र॑क्ाश उर्वयैन्तरिश्षम्‌। 
हनाव aa निरेहि सोम हविष्ट्रा सन्तं हविषां यजाम ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Idam svaridamidasa vamamayam prakasa 
urvantariksam. Hanava vrtram nirehi soma 
havistva santam havisa yajama. 


O Soma, spirit of life in the state of freedom, 
this is the state of bliss, this is beauty, this is the light of 
life, this is the expansive space to sojourn at will. Come 
up out of all sense of bondage. We two shall eliminate 
darkness and nescience. You are the havi and you the 
object of love and adoration too. We powers of divine 
law and truth of existence serve and bless you, our 
darling, with your real self and blessings of total 
fulfilment. 


कविः कवित्वा दिवि रूपमासंजदगप्र॑भूती वरुणो निरपः 
सुंजत्‌। क्षेमं कृण्वाना जन॑यो न सिन्ध॑वस्ता अस्य auf 
शुच॑यो भरिभ्रति ॥ ७॥ 


1048 RGVEDA 


fin Kavih kavitva divi rupamajsajadaprahuti varuno 
nirapah srjat. Ksemam krnvana janayo na sindha- 
vasta asya varnam sSucayo bharibhrati. 


The sovereign creator with his divine vision and 
power created the light and placed it as the sun in 
heaven. Varuna, the same lord omnipotent of the element 
of waters, created and released the rivers aflow which, 
pure and creative mothers, harbingers of peace and joy, 
bear and manifest the generosity and majesty of the lord. 


ता sea ज्येष्ठ॑मिन्द्ियं स॑चन्ते ता ईमा श्चेति स्वधया 
मद॑न्तीः । ता ई विशो न राजानं वृणाना बीभत्सुवो अप॑ 
वृत्राद॑तिष्ठन्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ta asya jyesthamindriyam sacante ta ima kseti 
svadhaya madantih. Ta im 1750 na rajanam 
vranana bibhatsuvo apa vrtradatisthan. 


Those streams of living waters share and bear 
the highest power and beneficence of this lord Varuna, 
and the lord rules and abides in these streams which 
sparkle and flow, enjoying the fragrance of oblations 
offered in yajna. They, also, like people choosing and 
abiding by the ruler, free from fear and keeping off from 
darkness and evil, flow free from fear and obstruction. 


बीभत्सूनां सयुजं हंसमाहुरपां दिव्यानां सख्ये चर॑न्तम्‌। 
अनुष्टुभमनु चर्चूर्यमाणमिन्द्रं नि चिक्युः कवयो मनीषा ॥ ९॥ 
9. Bibhatsunam sayujam hamsamahurapam 
divyanam sakhye canantam. Anustubhamanu 
carcumanamindram ni cikyuh kavayo manisa. 


The sun, companion of the free and fearless 
clouds, which sojourns in space as a comrade of the 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 125 1049 


holy waters, the poets call the ‘celestial bird’, and the 
wind and electric energy blowing and radiating in 
response to yajna with anushtup verses, they know with 
their vision and imagination, and this they call ‘Indra’. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 125 
Atma Devata, Vagambhrni Rshi 


अहं रुद्रेथिर्वसुभिश्चराम्यहर्मादित्यैरुत favada: | 
अहं मित्रावरुणोभा बिभर्म्यहमिन्द्रामी अहमण्विनोभा ॥ ९॥ 


il. Aham rudrebhirvasubhiscaramyahamadityair- 
uta visvadevaih. Aham mitravarunobha bibha- 
mryahamindragni ahamasvinobha. 


I am Vak-ambhrni, voice of omniscience, 
Universal Speech all bearing, all borne, co-existent with 
eleven Rudras, pranic energies and the soul, eight Vasus, 
earth, water, fire, air, space, moon, sun and stars, all 
abodes and supports of life, twelve Adityas, year’s 
twelve phases of the sun, and all the Vishvedevas, 
divinities of nature and humanity. I pervade and support 
both Mitra and Varuna, day and night, I pervade and 
support Indra and Agni, wind and fire, and I bear and 
support both the Ashvins, all complementarities of 
nature and humanity such as positive and negative 
currents of energy and science and technology. 


(Language, Vak or Word, is a system 
corresponding to and co-existent with existence as a 
system and the awareness or knowledge of existence. 
Hence language at the level of divine awareness is co- 
existent and co-extensive with existence itself. In other 
words, at the level of omniscience, existence is language 
and language is existence. In our life, our language is 


1050 RGVEDA 


the seat of correspondence between our awareness and 
knowledge of existence and its articulation in 
experience, expression and communication.) 


अहं Gres बिभर्म्यहं त्वष्टारमुत पूषणं भग॑म्‌। अहं 
द॑धामि द्रविणं हविष्मते सुप्राव्ये यज॑मानाय सुन्वते ॥ २॥ 


0.0 Aham somamahanasam bibharmyaham tvastara- 
muta pusanam bhagam. Aham dadhami dravinam 
havismate supravye yajamanaya sunvate. 


I bear the reception and expression of experience 
in communication and the soma joy of corporate 
existence. I bear the formative evolution, nourishment 
and growth, and the power and glory of life and its 
progress. I bear the wealth and prosperity of life for the 
yajamana who creates beauty and sweetness for life and 
bears liberal havis of corporate yajna for the common 
welfare of humanity and indeed all life. (In other words, 
the content of Language is Existence and the awareness 
of Existence.) 


अहं wel संगम॑नी वसूनां चिकितुषीं प्रथमा ara 
तां मां देवा व्य॑दधुः पुरुत्रा भूरिस्थात्रां भूय वेशय॑न्तीम्‌॥ ३ ॥ 


Aham rastim samgamani vasunam cikitust 
prathama yajniyanam. Tam ma deva vyadadhuh 
purutra bhuristhatram bhuryavesayantim. 


I am the spirit and organisation of the social 
system. I am the pioneer and harbinger of the wealth, 
honours and excellences of the corporate system with 
the people. I am the thought, awareness and determined 
organisation of the basics of human life and its values. 
Sages and scholars establish me in many socio-political 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 125 1051 


forms with many permanent stabilities and many 
evolving powers and possibilities of progress in various 
directions. 


मया सो stata यो विपश्यति a: प्राणिति य ई श्रुणो- 
त्युक्तम्‌। अ मन्तवो मां त उप॑ क्षियन्ति श्रुधि श्रुत श्रद्धिवं 
ते वदामि।॥ ॥ 


4. Maya so annamatti yo vipasyati yah praniti ya 
im Srnotyuktam. Amantavo mam ta upa ksiyanti 
Srudhi $ruta Sraddhivam te vadami. 


O listener, listen, what I say to you is worth 
listening and doing in faith: Whoever sees whatever he 
sees, whoever breathes whatever he breathes, whoever 
hears what is said, he receives the food of life by me. 
Those who do not listen, do not care, do not believe 
what I say and neglect me, they waste away, they come 
to ruin. 


(We may realise here that Vagambhrni is not only 
the voice of divinity, it is also the voice of the people 
who think and speak truly, positively and jointly 
whenever and wherever they happen to do so, whether 
it be in parliaments or assemblies or in the press or in 
the universities. And this voice must be invariably true 
and authentic.) 


अहमेव स्वयपिदं व॑दापि जुष्टं देवेभिरुत arate: 1 यं 
कामये dda कृणोमि तं ब्रह्माणं तमृषिं तं सुं मेधाम्‌ IG 
a, Ahameva svayamidam vadami justam devebhi- 


ruta manusebhih. Yam kamaye tam tamugram 
krnomi tam brahmanam tamrsim tam sumedham. 


And all this that is loved, adored and spoken by 


1052 RGVEDA 


the sages and veteran scholars and even by average 
mortals of honest mind, take it that I, voice of divinity, 
speak it myself. Whosoever I love by virtue of his or 
her merit of nature, character and performance, I raise 
to brilliance, to piety worthy of a yajnic Brahma, to the 
vision of a poetic sage and high intelligence of an 
exceptional thinker. 


अहं रुद्राय धनुरा त॑नोमि ब्रहयद्धिषे शर॑वे हन्तवा ड 1 
अहं जनाय समदं कृणोम्यहं द्यावापृथिवी आ विवशा ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Aham rudraya dhanuratanimi brahmadvise 
Sarave hantava u. Aham janaya samadam krno- 
myaham dyavaprthivi ठ vivesa. 


I draw the bow for Rudra, powers of justice and 
punishment, to eliminate the forces of hate and violence 
against lovers and observers of piety and divinity. I fight 
for the people and create felicity and joy for them, and 
I reach and pervade the heaven and earth. 


अहं सुवे पितरमस्य मूर्धन्मम योनि प्स्व१न्तः स॑मुद्रे। ततो 
वि तिदे भुवनानु विश्वो ताम्‌ं at वर्ष्मणोप स्पृशामि ॥ ७॥ 


7. Aham suve pitaramasya murdhan mama yonira- 
psvantah samudre. Tato vi tisthe bhuvananu 
visvotamum dyam varsmanopa sprsami. 


I create the parental protector on top of this 
human nation and this world in the form of the ruler 
and the sun. My place is in the depth of waters and the 
sea and in the particles of space. That same way I abide 
in all worlds of the universe, and I reach that heaven of 
light and touch the very top of it with my light and 
grandeur. 


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 126 1053 


अहमेव ardga प्र वाम्यारभमाणा भुव॑नानि विश्वां | 
परो दिवा पर एना पुथिव्यैताव॑ती महिना सं ब॑भूव ॥ ८ ॥ 


i Ahameva vata iva pra vamyarabhamana bhu- 
vanani visva. Paro diva para ena prthivyaitavati 
mahina sam babhiuva. 


Loving, embracing and pervading all regions 
of the universe, I flow forward like the wind that blows 
across the spaces. Beyond the heaven, beyond this world 
I am, so much is my power and potential, immanent 
and transcendent my presence. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 126 


Vishvedevah Devata, Kulmala Barhisha Shailusha or 
Ahomuk Vamadevya Rshi 


न तमंहो न दुरितं देवासो अष्ट wet 
स॒जोष॑सो यमर्यमा मित्रो नय॑न्ति वरुणो अति fea: eu 


i. Na tamamho na duritam devaso asta martyam. 
Sajosaso yamaryama mitro nayanti varuno ati 
dvisah. 


O devas, divinities of nature, noble scholars and 
sages, neither sin nor suffering, nor anything vicious 
can touch the mortal whom Aryama, spirit of enlightened 
guidance, Mitra, spirit of love and friendship, and 
Varuna, spirit of judgement and justice, all together with 
love and care without relent, lead across hate, jealousy 
and enmity. 


तद्दि वयं चुणीमहे वरुण मित्रार्यमन्‌ । 
येना निरंह॑सो यूयं पाथ नेथा च मर्त्यमति द्विष॑ः ॥ २॥ 


1054 RGVEDA 


2: Taddhi vayam vrnimahe varuna mitraryaman. 
Yena niramhaso yuyam patha netha ca martya- 
mati dvisah. 


O Mitra, Varuna and Aryama, divinities of love, 
justice and rectitude within and without in society, nature 
and beyond, that protection and guidance of yours we 
seek of you, yourself all beyond sin and evil. Save the 
mortals from sins and lead them to success and 
fulfilment across and beyond hate, jealousy, enmity and 
all negativity. 


ते नूनं नोऽ यमूतये वरूणो मित्रो अर्यमा । 
afar उ नो नेषणि पर्षिष्ठा उ नः पर्षण्यति द्विष॑ः ॥ ३॥ 


a Te nunam no’yamuteye varuno mitro aryama. 
Nayistha u no nesani parsistha u nah parsnyati 
dvisah. 


This Varuna, this Mitra, this Aryama, surely they 
are for our protection, guidance and success. O 
protective and guiding divinities of rectitude, take us 
and guide us on the path we ought to take, lead us to the 
goal we ought to reach, take us across and beyond the 
hate, jealousy and enmity we ought to avoid. 


यूयं विश्वं परि पाथ वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा | 
युष्माकं शर्म॑णि प्रिये स्याम॑ सुप्रणीतयोऽ ति द्विष॑ः ॥  ॥ 


4. Yuyam visvam pari patha varuno mitro aryama. 
Yusmakam sarmani priye syama supranitayo ti 
dvisah. 


Mitra, Varuna and Aryama, you protect, guide 
and lead the world to their goal of success and fulfilment. 
We pray, under the loving care, security and felicity of 


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 126 1055 


your law and order, let us advance to our cherished goal, 
pursuing noble ethics and policies beyond the wicked. 


आदित्यासो अति feet वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा। 
उग्रं मरुद्धीं es हं वेमेन्द्रमयिं स्वस्तयेऽ ति द्विष॑ः ॥ ५ ॥ 


>. Adityaso ati sridho varuno mitro aryama. Ugram 
marudbhi rudram huvemendramagnim svastaye’- 
ti dvisah. 


May the Adityas, brilliant scholars of the Aditya 
order of forty eight years discipline, Varuna, Mitra and 
Aryama, powers of justice, love and rectitude, protect 
us and guide us across violence and enmity and lead us 
to success. We invoke the blazing commander with his 
tempestuous commandos, Rudra, determined destroyer 
of evil and suffering, Indra, mighty ruler, and Agni, 
brilliant teacher and scholar, for all round protection 
and well being so that we may overcome the forces of 
hate, jealousy and enmity and reach our goals. 


नेतार ऊ षु णस्तिरो वरुणो पित्रो अर्यमा। 

अति विश्वानि दुरिता रा्जानश्चर्षणीनामति द्विष॑ः ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Netara u su nastiro varuno mitro aryama. 

Ati visvani durita rajanascarsaninamati dvisah. 


May Varuna, Mitra and Aryama, leaders and 
brilliant rulers of the people, judicious, loving and nobly 
motivated, safely pilot us across all sin and evil of the 
world and all forces of hate, jealousy and enmity of 
society. 


Berar वरुणो मित्रो stafar 
शर्म यच्छन्तु स॒प्रथ॑ आदित्यासो यदीम॑हे अति द्विष॑ः ॥ ७॥ 


1056 RGVEDA 


ध Sunamasmabhyamiitaye varuno mitro aryama. 
Sarma yacchantu sapratha adityaso yadimahe ati 
dvisah. 


May Varuna, Mitra and Aryama, powers of 
justice, and noble choice, love and friendship, and noble 
ethics and policy, bring us peace and progress for our 
protection and advancement. May the Adityas, brilliant 
scholars, teachers and researchers give us lasting 
comfort and well being of wide variety which we seek 
and pray for, and may all these divine nobilities lead us 
beyond the reach of the forces of hate and enmity. 


gat ह त्यद्वसवो गौर्य' चित्पदि षिताममुञ्चता यजत्राः । 
एवो ष्वस्मन्मुञ्चता व्यंहः प्र ताये प्रतरं न आयुः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yatha ha tyadvasavo gauryam cit padi sitama- 
muncata yajatrah. Evo svasmanmujicata vyam- 
hah pra taryagne prataram na ayuh. 


O Vasus, world powers of peace and settlement, 
scholars of the Vasu order, all loving and adorable in 
yajnic association, just as you set a noble but fettered 
cow at freedom to roam around at peace with joy, so 
pray release us from the bonds of sin and evil. O Agni, 
lord of light, give us a life of enlightenment, a long life 
of good health and light of wisdom. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 127 


Ratri Devata, Kushika Saubhara or Ratri 
Bharadvaji Rshi 


रात्री व्य॑ख्यदायती पुरुत्रा cers क्षभिंः। 
विश्वा अधि शियोऽ धित ॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 127 1057 
I Ratri vyakhyadayati purutra devyaksabhih. 
Visva adhi Sriyo’ dhita. 
Look, there comes the night divine with many 


many starry eyes, embracing the wide world, wearing 
all her finery of the beauty and grandeur of the skies. 


ओर्वप्रा sider निवतो देव्युप द्वत॑ः। 
ज्योतिषा बाधते तम॑ः ॥ २॥ 


2. Orvapra amartya nivato devyudvatah. 
Jyotisa badhate tamah. 


The immortal night divine comes filling vast 
spaces high and low and arrests the darkness with the 
light of her stars. 


निरु स्वसारमस्कृतोषसं देव्यायती | 
अपेदु हासते तम॑: ॥ ३ ॥ 

a Niru svasaramaskrtosasam devyayati. 
Apedu hasate tamah. 


Coming and advancing, the night divine 
prepares the way for its sister dawn which then dispels 
the dark. 


सानो अद्य यस्या वयं नि ते यामन्नविक्ष्महि | 
वृक्षे न व॑सतिं aa: ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Sano adya yasya vayamni te yamannaviksmahi. 
Vrkse na vasatim vayah. 
That night divine, on whose arrival we rest in 


the home like birds asleep in their nest, may, we pray, 
be restful and auspicious for us now. 


1058 


नि ग्रामासो अविक्षत नि पट्न्तो नि aferct: 1 
नि श्येनासंज्चिदर्थिनंः ॥ ५ ॥ 
= Ni gramaso aviksata ni padvanto ni paksinah. 


Ni SyenasaSscidarthinah. 


People come back home and rest in sleep. So 
do animals, so do birds, eagles too. They need rest and 
sleep after the day’s toil. 
यावया वृक्यं वृकं यवय स्तेनमूर्म्ये । 
अर्थां नः सुतरां भव ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Yavaya vrkyam vrkam yavaya stenamurmye. 
Atha nah sutara bhava. 
O peaceful night, keep away the wolf and the 
wolfish deeds. Keep away the thief. Fold them in sleep. 
Be peaceable, soothing and refreshing for us. 
उप॑ मा पेपिंशत्तम॑ः कृष्णं व्य॑क्तमस्थित। 
उषं ऋणेव यातय ॥ ७॥ 

a, Upa ma pepisat tamah krsnam vyaktamasthita. 
Usa rneva yataya. 
Enveloping darkness in all its intensity has come 
and smothered me. O dawn, take it off and give me relief 
like freedom from a heavy debt. 
sd a गाडइवाकरं वृणीष्व दुहितर्दिवः | 
रात्रि स्तोमं न जिग्युषे ne ॥ 

8. Upa te ga ivakaram krnisva duhitardivah. 
Ratri stomam na jigyuse. 


O night, daughter of heaven, I present this song 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 128 1059 


of adoration like a gift of milch cows. Pray accept it as 
homage for the sake of the supplicant who is keen for 
victory of rest and light over the wolf and the darkness 
of life. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 128 
Vishvedeva Devata, Vihavya Angirasa Rshi 


ममाग्रे वर्चो विहवेष्वस्तु वयं त्वेन्धानास्तन्वं पुषेम । 
मह्यं नमन्तां प्रदिश्श्चतस््रस्त्वयाध्य्षेण पृत॑ना जयेम ॥ ९॥ 


if Mamagne varco vihavesvastu vayam tvendha- 
nastanvam pusema. Mahyam namantam pradisa- 
Scatasra-stvayadhyaksena prtana jayema. 


Agni, light of life, leader and pioneer of men, 
let there be vigour and lustre in me in the battles of life. 
Let us shine and rise in body, mind and soul while we 
kindle you in the yajnic development of human society. 
Let the four directions of life and the people there be 
favourable to me in love and faith, and let us win the 
battles of life under your leadership and presiding power. 


ua देवा विहवे स॑न्तु सर्वं इन्द्र॑वन्तो मरुतो free AT: | 
ममान्तरिक्षमुरुल्ोकमस्तु मह्यं वातं: पवतां कामे 
अस्मिन्‌ 2 


2. Mama deva vihave santu sarva indravanto maruto 
visnuragnih. Mamantariksamurulokam-astu 
mahyam vatah pavatam kame asmin. 


In the battle of life when the clarion call is given, 
let all the Devas, divinities of nature and nobilities of 
humanity be for me. Let the Maruts, Vishnu and Agni, 
all with Indra, stormy troops, all pervasive people power, 


1060 RGVEDA 


and the leading lights of humanity, all inspired with 
passion and energy, all wielding weapons of fire, wind 
and electric power, be with me. Let the sky and space 
be the vast world for me. And let the winds blow for me 
in this beautiful world for the fulfilment of this yajnic 
ambition for personal and collective expansion. 


afd देवा द्रविंणामा य॑जन्तां मय्याशीरस्तु मयि देवहूतिः | 
दैव्या होतारो वनुषन्त Vas RST: स्याम तन्वा सुवीराः ॥ ३ ॥ 


3 Mayi deva dravinama yajantam mayyasirastu 
mayi devahutih. Daivya hotaro vanusanta purve- 
’ristah syama tanva suvirah. 


May the Devas bless me with power, wealth and 
excellence. Let there be all good wishes, benediction 
and self fulfilment for me at yajna. May the invocation 
and homage to Devas bring me success. May veteran 
and divine yajakas in nature and humanity join me in 
our yajna for the general good. May we be blest with 
health of body, mind and spirit, be inviolable and blest 
with noble progeny. 


मह्यं यजन्तु मप at हव्याकूतिः सत्या मन॑सो मे अस्तु । 
एनो मा नि गां कतमच्यनाहं विश्वे देवासो अधि। वोचता 
नः US ॥ 

4. Mahyam yajantu mama yani havyakutih satya 
manaso me astu. Eno ma ni gam katamaccanaham 
visve devaso adhi vocata nah. 


May my havis that I offer in yajna bring me the 
success I plan. May the thoughts and intentions of my 
mind be true and fruitful. May I never take to sin or evil 
whatsoever. O divinities of the world, bless us and say: 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 128 1061 
May all be well with you! 


देवीः षद्टुर्वीरुरु न॑: कृणोत विश्वे देवास इह वीरयध्वम्‌ | 
मा हास्महि प्रजया मा तनूभिर्मा र॑धाम द्विषते सोम राजन्‌॥। & ॥ 


9 Devih salurviruru nah krnota visve devasa tha 
virayadhvam. Ma hasmahi prajaya ma tanubhi- 
rma radhama dvisate soma rajan. 


May six divinities, heaven and earth, day and 
night, fire and water, through the six seasons of the year 
do us great favour so that we may rise and progress in 
power and achievement. O divinities of the world, be 
brave and great and help us rise to bravery and grandeur. 
Never deplete us either by loss of health and virility or 
by loss of progeny. O ruling Soma, lord of peace, light 
and glory, let us never fall a prey to the forces of hate, 
jealousy and enmity. 


ad मन्युं प्रतिनुदन्परषामरद॑ब्धो गोपाः परि पाहि नस्त्वम्‌ | 
प्रत्यञ्चो यन्तु निगुतः पुनस्ते डमैषां चित्तं प्रबुधां वि 
नेशत्‌ ६ ॥ 


6. Agne manyum pratinudan paresamadabdho 
gopah pari pahi nastvam. Pratyanco yantu 
nigutah punastemaisam cittam prabhudham vi 
nesat. 


O Agni, sovereign ruling lord of light and fire, 
ever awake and protective, warding off the anger and 
attack of foreign and negative powers, defend, protect 
and promote us without relent. Let our enemies 
withdraw and go back, repulsed, frustrated and routed. 
Howsoever clever, intelligent tacticians they think they 
are, destroy their mind, morale and intelligence 


1062 RGVEDA 
altogether. 


धाता धातृणां भुव॑नस्य यस्पतिंर्दवं त्रातारंमभिमातिषा- 
हम्‌। इमं यज्ञमश्विनोभा geet dar: पान्तु यज॑मानं 
न्यर्थांत्‌॥ ७॥ 


de Dhata dhatranam bhuvanasya yaspatirdevam 
trataramabhimatisaham. Imam yajnamasvin- 
obha brhaspatirdevah pantu yajamanam 
nyarthdt. 


The one lord sustainer of all sustainers of the 
world such as sun and earth, the one that is the supreme 
lord creator, ruler and protector of the universe, the one 
that subdues the proudest of the enemies of life and 
humanity, the one that saves and gives fulfilment, that 
One I worship and adore. May the Ashvins, twin divine 
complementarities of nature and humanity, Brhaspati, 
lord of Infinity and the sage dedicated to Infinity, and 
the infinite divine voice and all other divinities of the 
world, we pray, promote this yajna and save this 
yajamana from sin and evil. 


उरुव्यचा नो महिषः शर्म यंसदस्मिन्हवें पुरुहूतः deat: | 
स न॑ः प्रजायै हर्यश्व मृव्टयेन्द्र मा नो रीरिषो मा परां दाः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Uruvyaca no mahisah Sarma yamsadasmin have 
puruhiutah puruksuh. Sa nah prajayai haryasva 
mrlayendra ma no ririso ma para dah. 


Indra, all pervasive lord of the expansive 
universe, infinitely potent, universally invoked and 
adored, infinitely opulent and generous, may, we pray, 
give us peace and fulfilment in this great war-like yajna 
of life. O lord of the dynamics of existence, Indra, we 


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 129 1063 


pray give us the joy of fulfilment for our people and for 
our future generations, pray never hurt us, never forsake 
us. 


ये न॑: सपल्ना अप ते भ॑वन्त्विन्द्रायिभ्यामवं बाधामहे तान्‌ | 
वस॑वो eat आदित्या उपरिस्पृशं मोग्रं चेत्तारमधिराज- 
म॑क्रन्‌॥ ९॥ 


0. Ye nah sapanta apa te bhavantvindragnibhya- 
mava badhamahe tan. Vasavo rudra aditya upari- 
sprsam mogram cettaramadhirajamakran. 


Those who are our adversaries, enemies and 
hostile rivals, let them be off ! We keep them off, we 
throw them out in conflict by Indra and Agni, divine air 
and fire power. May the Vasus, shelter and support givers 
of life and the general order of educated people, Rudras, 
powers of justice and order and the middle order of 
intellectuals, and Adityas, powers of light and the 
highest order of scholars and sages raise me high, inspire 
me with the brilliance of fire, enlighten me and anoint 
me as the highest ruling authority. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 129 
Bhavavrttam Devata, Prajapati Parameshthi Rshi 
weer सदासीत्तदानीं नासीद्रजो नो व्योमा प॒रो 
यत्‌। किमावरीवः कुहु कस्य शर्म॑न्नम्थः किमासीद्रहनं 
गभीरम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 
il. Nasadasinno sadasit tadanim nasidrajo no vyoma 


paro yat. Kimavarivah kuha kasya sarmanna- 
mbhah kimasidgahanam gabhiram. 


It was neither a-sat nor sat, neither non-existence 


1064 RGVEDA 


nor positive existence, then, nothing tangible, neither 
particles nor sky nor space nor anything beyond. What 
form? What content? None. Where? What purpose, for 
whom? What mist? What deep darkness? None, nothing, 
and yet not nothing. 


(It was the zero state of existence after the 
completion of one cycle and before the beginning of 
the next cycle, like the zero hour between two dates. It 
is a state intangible and inexplicable because thought 
and language too terminate into the intangible and 
inexplicable silence at the completion of the cycle. The 
zero hour exists and yet it does not, it doesn’t exist and 
yet it does, that’s the mystery of it. The state under 
meditation in this sukta is the hour of Infinity in the 
womb of Infinity self-brooding on the zero; the One 
upon the zero.) 


न मृत्युरासीदमृतं न तर्हिं न राच्या अहं आसीत्प्रकेतः। 
आनीदवातं स्वधया तदेकं तस्माब्दान्यन्न परः किं 
चनासं॥ २॥ 


2: Na mrtyurasidamyrtam na tarhi na ratrya ahna 
asit praketah. Anidavatam svadhaya tadekam 
tasmaddhanyanna parah kim canasa. 


There is, then, neither death nor deathlessness 
of immortality, neither night nor day as we know the 
night and day. There is only That, the One self-existent 
Brahma, breathing without breath, the sole One, one 
with its potential. Any other apart or beyond That there 
was none whatsoever. 


तमं आसीत्तम॑सा Words प्रकेतं dies सर्वमा इदम्‌ | 
तुच्छ्येनाभ्वपिंहितं यदासी त्तप॑सस्तन्मंहिनाजायतेक॑म्‌ ॥। ३ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 129 1065 


a Tama asit tamasa gulhamagre’praketam salilam 
sarvama idam. Tucchyenabhvapihitam yadasit- 
tapasastanmahinajayataikam. 


There is only dark, darker and deeper than 
darkness itself before the world of existence comes into 
being, something misty beyond knowledge and 
experience, this all that now is. That living mystery, 
which then exists, covered in something more 
mysterious than mystery itself, self-manifests by the 
exercise of Its own grandeur of power and potential 
solely by Itself. 


कामस्तदग्रे सम॑वर्तताधि मन॑सो रेत॑ः प्रथमं यदासीत्‌। सतो 
बन्धुमसति निरविन्दन्हृदि प्रतीष्या कवयो मनीषा ux ॥ 


4. Kamastadagre samavartatadhi manaso retah 
prathamam yadasit. Sato bandhumasati niravin- 
dan hrdi pratisya kavayo manisa. 


There is love and desire before the creation at 
the heart of Brahma which is the first, original and 
ultimate seed of the world of existence that comes into 
being. Sages blest with vision, by divine inspiration and 
mind in meditation, realise the world of existence from 
the tangible upto the intangible state implicit in the seed 
state of Prakrti subsisting in the divine mind. 


तिरश्चीनो वित॑तो र॒श्मिरेषापधः स्विंदासीरदुपरिं 
स्विदासीत्‌ रेतोधा आसन्महिमान आसन्त्स्वधा अवस्ता- 
त्प्रय॑तिः परस्तात्‌ & ॥ 

Tirascino vitato rasmiresamadhah svidasidupari 
svidasit. Retodha asan mahimana asantsvadha 
avastat prayatih parastat. 


1066 RGVEDA 


The waves and vibrations of these causal 
potentials of divine Prakrti extend in time and space all 
round, up, down and transverse. There are the individual 
souls also, seedlings great and yearning for emergence 
into life. In all this process of creation and evolution, 
the divine will is supreme, and the divine potential, 
Prakrti, the seeding souls, and potential evolutions, are 
all subservient and subordinate to the divine will. 


को अब्दा da क इह प्र वोचत्कुत आजाता ad इयं 
feats: | अर्वाग्देवा अस्य विसर्जनेनाथा को aa यतं 
आबभूव ।। ६ ॥ 


6. Ko addha veda ka iha pra vocat kuta ajata kuta 
iyam visrstih. Arvagdeva asya visarjanena- 
tha ko veda yata ababhuva. 


Who for certain knows, who here would declare 
whence this universe has come, whence this variety has 
emerged? The visionary sages all come after the creation 
and diversity of it. Who of them would then know 
whence and why all this has come into existence? Only 
He, the creator, would know, only He can reveal and 
declare. 


इयं विसृष्टिर्यत आबभूव यदि वा दधे af ar a1 at 
अस्याध्यक्षः परमे व्योमन्त्सो अङ्क वेद्‌ यदि वा न वेद॑ ॥। ७॥ 


7. Iyam visrstiryata ababhuva yadi va dadhe yadi 
va na. Yo asyadhyaksah parame vyomantso anga 
veda yadi va na veda. 


O dear seeker, whence this multitudinous variety 
of existence arises, who holds and sustains it, or whether 
He doesn’t hold and sustain it while He terminates it, 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 130 1067 


only He knows who is the presiding power of it at the 
highest heavenly level of mystery. Only He knows and 
pervades it, and He only knows when he doesn’t pervade 
it while it subsists in Him as in the state of Pralaya. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 130 
Bhavavrttam Devata, Yajna Prajapatya Rshi 


यो यज्ञो विश्वतस्तन्तुभिस्तत एक॑शतं देवकर्मोभिराय॑तः। 
इमे व॑यन्ति पितरो य आययुः प्र वयाप वयेत्यासते तते ॥ ९॥ 


1. Yo yajno visvatastantubhistata ekasSatam deva- 
karemebhirayatah. Ime vayanti pitaro ya ayayuh 
pra vayapa vayetyasate tate. 


The yajnic cosmos, the web of existence, which 
is extended and expands all round by vibrations, 
radiations, currents, flames, streams, fibres and filaments 
spun out and woven by a hundred plus one divine actions 
(by eight Vasus, twelve Adityas, eleven Rudras, eleven 
Vishvedevas, fortynine Maruts and ten Vishvasrj 
creative processes) all this web of yajna, these divinities 
universally prevailing weave up and down all round, 
and all these divinities, actions and processes abide 
therein, in the yajna itself. 


Gal एनं तनुत उत्कुणत्ति पुमान्वि da अधि नाके अस्मिन्‌। 
इमे मयूखा sd सेदुरू सदः सामानि चक्ुस्तसंराण्यो- 
त॑वे॥ २॥ 


2, Pumam enam tanuta ut krnatti puman vi tatne 
adhi nake asmin. Ime mayukha upa seduru sadah 
samani cakrustasaranyotave. 


The supreme cosmic Purusha weaves this web 


1068 RGVEDA 


of existence and the same Purusha winds it up on time. 
He alone in this cosmos and beyond the heaven of time 
and space extends it. These radiations, vibrations, 
threads, filaments and creative processes abide and act 
in this vast yajna of the cosmos, and they structure the 
holy formulas and they spin the threads of the warp and 
woof of this web. 


कासीत्प्रमा प्र॑तिमा किं निदानमाज्यं किमासीत्परिधिः क 
site छन्दः किमांसीत्प्रड॑गं किमुक्थं यदेवा देवमय॑जन्त 
विश्वे ॥ ३॥ ति 

ध Kasit prama pratima kim nidanamdjyam kimasit 
paridhih ka asit. Chandah kimasit pra-ugam 
kimuktham yaddeva devamayajanta viSve. 


What is the central vision and comprehensive 
blueprint of the design of cosmic yajna? What is the 
measure of the progressive stages of the yajna upto 
accomplishment? What is the basic cause and ultimate 
purpose? What is the ghrta input of the yajna? What is 
the ultimate bound? What is the chhanda, joyous 
formula, from the inception and conception to 
completion? What is the beginning, middle and the 
hymnal close of the divine yajna? When the divinities 
join the Supreme Divinity in the yajna of cosmic 
creation, what are these constituents of the creative 
process? 


अग्नेगीयत्र्य॑भवत्सयुग्वोष्णिहंया सविता सं ब॑भूव | अनुष्टुभा 
सोम॑ उक्थर्महंस्वान्ब॒हस्पतेर्बह॒ती वाच॑मावत्‌॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Agnergayatryabhavat sayugvosnihaya savita sam 


babhuva. Anustubha soma ukthairmahasvan 
brhaspaterbrhati vacamavat. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 130 1069 


Gayatri is the companion of Agni, Savita 
manifests with ushnik, Soma with anushtup, the sun 
manifests with uktha hymns of celebration, and brhati 
comes to express the voice of Brhaspati. (That is, the 
mantras associated with these deities are composed in 
these verse forms.) 


विराण्यित्रावरुणयोरथिश्रीरिन्द्र॑स्य च्रिष्टुविह भागो ad: । 
विश््वान्देवाञ्जगत्या feast तेन॑ चाक्लृप्र ऋष॑यो 
मनुष्याः ॥ ५॥ 


=f Viranmitravarunayorabhisririndrasya tristubiha 
bhago ahnah. Visvan devanjagatya vivesa tena 
caklrpra rsayo manusyah. 


Virat is associated with Mitra and Varuna 
together, trishtup is associated with Indra as share of 
the mid-day session, jagati joins with the Vishvedevas 
and by that the sages and ordinary people are joined 
and receive their strength of being. (The Chhandas, 
metres, of the Vedas, thus, are part of the process of 
creation.) 


ASN तेन ऋष॑यो मनुष्यां यज्ञे जाते पितरों नः पुराणे | 
पश्य॑न्मन्ये मन॑सा चक्ष॑सा तान्य इमं यज्ञमय॑जन्त पूर्वे ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Caklrpre tena rsayo manusya yajne jate pitaro 
nah purane. Pasyan manye manasa caksasa tan 
ya imam yajnamayajanta purve. 


When the creation yajna of all time is 
accomplished, thereby our ancient forefathers, seers and 
ordinary mortals receive their being and strength of 
identity, and, visualising them with the eye of the mind 
and imagination, I honour and adore those who in times 


1070 RGVEDA 
of yore enact this yajna of creation. 


सहस्तोमाः सहछन्दस stad: सदप्र॑मा ऋष॑यः wa 
दैव्याः । पूर्वेषां पन्थामनुदश्य धीरा अन्वालेभिरे रथ्यो 
न रश्मीन्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


0 Sahastomah sahachandasa avrtah sahaprama 
rsayah sapta daivyah. Purvesam panthamanu- 
drsya dhira anvalebhire rathyo na rasmin. 


Well versed in Vedic hymns of yajna and the 
cosmic process of evolution, the verse forms of 
Chhandas associated with divinities, and the 
evolutionary stages of the cosmos, seven divine sages 
of vision and wisdom, self-established in peace of mind 
and soul, having realised the holy path of the ancients 
and following in their footsteps, realise the cosmic 
process of divine evolution and live their life to 
perfection like the driver holding reins of his chariot 
and controlling his horses in the right direction. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 131 
Devata: Indra (1-3, 6, 7), Ashvins (4-5), Rshi: Sukirti 
Kakshivata 

अप ure इन्द्र विश्वां अपित्रानपार्पाचो अभिभूते नुदस्व | 
अपोदीचो अपं शूराधराच उरौ यथा तव शर्मन्मदेम ।॥ ९॥ 

1. Apa praca indra visvam amitranapapaco abhu- 
bhute nudasya. Apodico apa suradharaca urau 
yatha tava Sarman madema. 


Indra, all powerful ruler of the world, subduer 
of all enemies of the world, drive off all enemies that 
stand in front, who attack from behind, who arise from 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 131 1011 


below, and all those who descend from above so that 
we may live in peace with joy without fear in your vast 
territory. 


lacs यव॑मन्तो यवं चिद्यथा दान्त्यनुपूर्वं faga । इहेहैषां 
कृणुहि भोज॑नानि ये बर्हिषो नमोवृक्तिं न जग्मुः ॥ २॥ 


2. Kuvidanga yavamanto yavam cidyatha dantya- 
nupurvam viyuya. [Thehaisam krnuhi bhojanani ye 
barhiso namovrktim na jagmuh. 


Well then, just as master farmers of grain harvest 
the crop in order and separate the grain from the chaff, 
so, dear lord, here, there, everywhere, in order create 
and provide food and sustenance for those who never 
neglect yajnic offerings but bear the holy grass and bring 
homage to the vedi. 


नहि स्थूरं तुथा यातमस्ति नोत श्रवो विविदे STA । गव्यन्त 
इन्द्रं सख्याय विप्रा अश्वायन्तो वृष॑णं वाजयन्तः ॥ ३ ॥ 


a. Nahi sthuryrtutha yatamasti nota Sravo vivide 
samgamesu. Gavyanta indram sakhydya vipra 
asvayanto vrsanam vajayantah. 


A one horse cart never reaches the destination 
on time according to season and purpose, nor, in battle, 
supplies are received on time without the favour of 
Indra. Therefore nobles and sages well desirous of cows 
and horses, seeking success and victory, pray for the 
favour and friendship of the generous and virile Indra. 


युवं सुराममश्विना नमुचावासुरे wat । 
विपिपाना शुभस्पती इन्द्रं कर्मस्वावतम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Yuvam suramamasvinad namucavasure saca. 
Vipipana subhaspati indram karmasvavatam. 


1072 RGVEDA 


O Ashvins, complementary powers of humanity, 
men and women, scholars and teachers, masters and 
protectors of the good, valuable and auspicious, well 
enjoying the soma taste of life together, help and assist 
Indra, ruler of life in the world, in the struggles of life 
and society against the demonic forces of want, violence 
and meanness. 


पुत्रमिव पितरावण्विनोभेन्द्रावथुः काव्यैर्दसनांभिः । यत्सुरामं 
व्यपिबः शचीभिः सर॑स्वती त्वा मघवन्नभिष्णक्‌ ।॥ ५ ॥ 


5: Putramiva pitaravasvinobhendravathuh kavyair- 
damsanabhih. Yat suramam vyapibah sacibhih 
sarasvati tva maghavannabhisnak. 


As parents support the child with all their power 
and potential, so O lord of power and glory, Indra, let 
the Ashvins, complementary powers of nature and 
society, men and women, scholars and scientists, leaders 
and followers, all support you with words of adoration 
and actions of profuse generosity when you defend the 
nation with bold actions and enjoy the peace, prosperity 
and power of the order, and may Sarasvati, divine 
intelligence, support and guide you. 


SR: सुत्रामा taal अवोभिः सुमूव्ठीको भ॑वतु विश्ववेदाः | 
बाधतां द्वेषो अभ॑यं कृणोतु सुवीर्यस्य पत॑यः स्याम ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Indrah sutrama svavam avobhih sumrliko bhavatu 
visvavedah. Badhatam dveso abhyam krnotu 
suviryasya patayah syama. 

May Indra, self-potent, saviour protector and 


promoter, master of all wealth, power and glory of the 
world, be gracious to us by his support and protection 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 132 1073 


for peace and security. May he ward off and drive away 
hate and enmity, grant freedom from fear, so that we 
too may be masters and protectors of noble strength 
and heroic splendour. 


तस्य॑ वयं सुमतौ यज्ञियस्यापि भद्रे सौमनसे et स 
सुत्रामा स्ववां इन्द्रो अस्मे आराच्िद्‌ द्वेष॑ः सनुतर्युयोतु ॥ ७॥ 


a Tasya vayam sumatau yajniyasyapi bhadre 
saumanase syama. Sa sutrama svavam indro asme 
araccid dvesah sanutaryuyotu. 


We pray may we ever abide in the good will 
and loving kindness of adorable Indra. May he, self- 
refulgent, self-potent, saviour protector, keep off and 
drive away for all time elements of hate and enmity far 
and near, all. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 132 


Mitra- Varuna (2-7) and others (1) Devata, Shakaputa 
Narmedha Rshi 


ईजानमिद्‌ द्यौरगूर्ताव॑सुरीजानं भूमिर भि प्र॑भूषणि।। 
ईजानं देवावश्विनावभि सुम्नैर॑वर्धताम्‌ neu 


ii Tjanamid dyaurgurtavasurtjanam bhumirabhi 
prabhusani. Ijanam devavasvinavabhi sumnai- 
ravardhatam. 


May the Heaven of welcome treasures of 
abundance bless and promote the man of love, non- 
violence and yajna with peace, plenty and joy. May the 
earth of abundant riches and beauty bless the man of 
love, charity and yajna with plenty, progress and joy. 
May the Ashvins, twin divines of nature and humanity, 


1074 


by their systemic complementarities bless and promote 
the man of dynamic creativity and yajna with personal 
success, social prestige and divine fulfilment. 


ता वां मित्रावरुणा धार्‌ सत्ती सुषुम्नेषिंतत्वतां यजामसि | 
युवोः ऋणायं सख्यैरभि ष्याम रक्षसं: ॥ २॥ 


0.0 Ta vam mitravaruna dharayatksiti susumne- 
sitatvata yajamasi. Yuvoh kranaya sakhyairabhi 
syama raksasah. 


O Mitra and Varuna, lord of light and love, and 
lord of sovereign judgement and freedom, you are both 
sustainers of the earth and givers of peace and comfort 
to mankind. We serve and worship you with love for 
the sake of cherished fulfilment. We pray, let us, with 
your favour and friendship, win over the forces of evil 
and negativity for the advancement of the lover and 
performer of yajna and deeds of charity. 


अधां चिन्नु यदिधिंषामहे वामभि प्रियं रेक्णः aetart: | 
दद्रा वा यत्पुष्य॑ति रेक्णः सम्वार न्नरकिरस्य wer ३ ॥ 


3. Adha cinnu yaddidhisamahe vamabhi priyam 
reknah patyamanah. Dadvam va yat pusyati 
reknah samvaran nakirasya maghani. 


And when we bear and bring liberal gifts of 
homage to you, ourselves being masters of our favourite 
wealth and property, or when the generous giver of gifts 
and homage augments his wealth, then the wealth, power 
and glory of such a person never diminishes, never 
exhausts, in fact it increases manifold. 


असावन्यो star सूयत द्यौस्त्वं विश्वेषां वरुणासि राजां । 
मूर्धा रथ॑स्य चाकन्चैतावतैन॑सान्तक्‌श्चुक्‌ ॥ ॐ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 132 1075 


20. Asavanyo asura suyata dyaustvam visvesam varu- 
nasi raja. Murdha rathasya cakan naitavataina- 
santakadhruk . 


O Mitra, sun, life giving light and pranic energy, 
that other, mother Infinity, has given you birth. O 
Varuna, breath of life and cosmic air, you are the ruler 
and life giver of the world. You, Mitra- Varuna, are the 
head of the chariot of life, the cosmic yajna. You are the 
antidote of death. Let not our yajna be vitiated even by 
a remote touch of sin. 


अस्मिन्त्स्वे ३ तच्छकपूत wal हिते पित्रे निग॑तान्हन्ति 
वीरान्‌। अवोर्वां यब्ात्तनूष्वव॑ः प्रियासु यज्ञियास्ववीं ॥ ५ ॥ 


Di Asmintsvetacchakaputa eno hite mitre nigatan 
hanti viran. Avorva yaddhat tanusvavah priyasu 
yajniyasvarva. 

In this yajna instituted by the yajamana, who is 
otherwise competent in his own right of strength, one 
sin of omission would vitiate the performance if Mitra, 
the sun, alone is invoked for oblations. The omission 
vitiates the inner strength and others in the family unless 
the other protector, Varuna, too is invoked. When this 
other protector is invoked and served, no want or short 
coming remains in the cherished body health of the 
yajna, the yajaka and the yajaka’s family. 


युवोर्हि मातादिंतिर्विचेतसा ait भूमिः पय॑सा पुपूतनिं । 
अवं प्रिया दिदिष्टन सूरो निनिक्त रण्मिभिंः॥ ६॥ 
6. Yuvorhi mataditirvicetasa dyaurna bhumih 


payasa puputani. Ava priya didistana suro ninikta 
rasmibhih. 


1076 RGVEDA 


Mitra and Varuna, givers of light and 
intelligence, known with special effort of the mind, your 
mother power is eternal Nature, the giver of knowledge 
about you is eternal Veda which washes the cover of 
ignorance as heaven and earth wash away the evils of 
darkness and want. The sun illuminates with rays of 
light, the earth gives cherished wealth of food. 


युवं ह्य॑प्रराजावसीं दतं तिष्ठ द्रथं न eid वनर्षद॑म्‌। ता नः 
कणूकयन्तीनुमिधंस्तत्रे अंह॑सः सुमेध॑स्तत्रे अंहसः ॥ ७॥ 


ae Yuvam hyapnarajavasidatam tisthadratham na 
dhursadam vanarsadam. Ta nah kanukayantirnr- 
medhastatre amhasah sumedhastatre amhasah. 


O Mitra and Varuna, givers of light and life 
energy for positive action, be seated on the vedi of 
cosmic yajna. Ascend the chariot strongly structured 
and balanced, worthy of universal movement to fight 
out those vociferous forces of the enemy poised against 
us. You save the yajaka dedicated to the progress of 
united humanity from sin. You save the yajamana of 
intelligential and scientific yajna from going astray on 
the path of evil and destructivity. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 133 
Indra Devata, Sudah Paijavana Rshi 


प्रो wat पुरोरथमिन्द्राय शूषमर्चत । अभीके fag 
लोककृत्संगे समत्सु वृत्रहास्माकं बोधि चोदिता नभ॑न्ता- 
मन्यकेषां ज्याका अधि धन्व॑सु ।॥ ९॥ 

1. Pro svasmai purorathamindraya susamarcata. 
Abhike cidu lokakrt sange samatsu vrtrahasma- 


kam bodhi codita nabhantamanayakesam jyaka 
adhi dhanvasu. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 133 1077 


Offer a song of abundant praise in honour of 
this ruling lord Indra for his mighty force and front rank 
chariot. He, destroyer of darkness and evil, inspires us 
in our battles of life at the closest and enlightens us in 
our struggle for universal freedom. Let the strings of 
the alien enemy bows be snapped by the strike of the 
forces of Indra. 


त्वं सिन्धूरवासृजोऽधराचो अहन्नहिंम्‌। अशत्रुरिन्द्र जज्ञिषे 
विश्वं पुष्यसि वार्य तं त्वा परि ष्वजामहे नभन्तामन्यकेषां 
ज्याका अधि धन्व॑सु ॥२॥ 


2: Tvam sindhumravasrjo’dharaco ahannahim. 
Asatrurindra jajnise visvam pusyasi varyam tam 
tva pari svajamahe nabhantamanayakesam jyaka 
adhi dhanvasu. 


Indra, you release the floods of rivers to flow 
down on the earth. You destroy the demon of darkness, 
evil, want and ignorance. You are born without an equal, 
adversary and enemy, and you promote the choicest 
wealth and excellence of the world. Such as you are we 
love and embrace you as our closest loving friend and 
companion. Let the alien strings of the enemy bows snap 
upon their bows. 


वि षु विश्वा अरातयोऽर्यो न॑शन्त नो fer: 1 अस्तासि 
शत्र॑वे वधं यो न॑ इन्द्र जिघांसति या ते रातिर्ददिर्वसु नभंन्ता- 
मन्यकेषां ज्याका अधि धन्व॑सु ।॥ ३॥ 

3: Vi su viSsva aratayo ’ryo nasanta no dhiyah. 
Astasi Satrave vadham yo na indra jighamsati ya 


te ratirdadirvasu nabhantamanayakesam jyaka 
adhi dhanvasu. 


1078 RGVEDA 


Indra, may the facts and forces of enmity, 
adversity and ungenerosity be eliminated from life and 
the world. May all our thoughts and actions be inspired 
by love and generosity. You strike the thunderbolt of 
justice and punishment upon the enemy who wants to 
destroy us or frustrate our love and generosity. May your 
grace and generosity bring us wealth, honour and 
excellence of life. Let the strings of enemy bows snap 
by the tension of their own negativities. 


यो न॑ इन्द्राभितो wal वृकायुरादिदेशति। अधस्पदं तमी! 
कृथि विबाधो असि सासहिर्नभ॑न्तामन्यकेषां ज्याका अधि 
धन्व॑सु ॥ ४॥ 


4. Yo na indrabhito jano vrkayurdadidesati. Adhaspa- 
dam tamim krdhi vibadho asi sasahirnabhanta- 
manayakesam jyaka adhi dhanvasu. 


And the thief and the man wolf that designs 
against us all round all time, pray crush down to naught. 
You are the protector, Indra, the power to resist and 
overthrow the danger. Let the strings of enemy bows 
snap under their own fear and frustration. 


यो न॑ s=sifuerafa सनाभिर्यश्च Pred: | अव तस्य ललं 
तिर महीव diet त्मना नभन्तामन्यकेषां ज्याका अधि 
धन्व॑सु ॥ ५॥ 

>: Yo na indrabhidasati sanabhiryasca nistyah. Ava 


tasya balam tira mahiva dauradha tmana 
nabhantamanayakesam jyaka adhi dhanvasu. 


Indra, whoever the man or power equal or lower 
in rank, or strength that tries to suppress and enslave 
us, overcome his force and crush him by your own 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 133 1079 


strength and power which is great as the blazing sun. 
Let the bow strings of the enemies snap under the heat 
of your blaze. 


वयमिन्द्र त्वायव॑ः सखित्वमा र॑भामहे। ऋतस्य॑ नः पथा 
नयाति विश्वानि दुरिता नभन्तामन्यकेषां ज्याका अधि 
धन्व॑सु ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Vayamindra tvayavah sakhitvama rabhamahe. 
Rtasya nah patha nayati visvani durita nabhanta- 
manayakesam jyaka adhi dhanvasu. 


Indra, we are yours, we love you and cherish 
your friendship. Lead us forward by the path of truth 
and rectitude across all sins and evils of the world. Save 
us and let the alien strings and force of the bows of sin 
and evil snap under their own tension. 


अस्मभ्यं सु त्वमिन्द्र तां शिंश्च या दोहं ते प्रति वरं जरित्रे । 
अच्छिद्रोध्नी पीपयद्यथा नः सहस्रधारा पय॑सा मही 
गोः WON 


a Asmabhyam su tvamindra tam siksa ya dohate 
prati varam jaritre. Acchidrodhni pipayadyatha 
nah sahasradhara payasa mahi gauh. 


Indra, lord of splendour, pray bless us with that 
perennial cow, that speech, knowledge and vision which 
gives the cherished milk of life for the celebrant so that 
this great earth, this light of divinity, an infinite ocean 
of living vitality, may shower us with abundance in a 
thousand streams. 


1080 RGVEDA 


Mandala 10/Sukta 134 


Indra Devata, Mandhata Yauvanashva (1-6 first line), 
Godha (6 second line -7) Rshi 


उभे यदिन्द्र रोद॑सी आपप्राथोषाइ॑व। महान्तं त्वा महीनां 
सम्राजं चर्षणीनां देवी जनिंत्यजीजनद्धद्रा जनिंत्यजीज- 
नत्‌॥ ९॥ 


il; Ubhe yadindra rodasi apaprathosa iva. Maha- 
ntam tva mahinam samrajam carsanijam devi 
Janitryajijanadbhadra janitryajijanat. 


Indra, lord of light and glory, ruler of the world, 
when you fill the earth and the environment with 
splendour like the dawn, the divine Mother Nature raises 
you and manifests you as the great ruler of the great 
people of the world. The gracious mother elevates you 
in refulgence and majesty as the mighty Indra. (Indra at 
the cosmic level is the Lord Almighty; at the human 
level, the world ruler; and at the individual level, Indra 
is the soul, ruler of the body, senses, mind and 
intelligence.) 


अव॑ स्म दुर्हणायतो मर्त॑स्य तनुहि स्थिरम्‌। अधस्पदं तमीं 
कृधि यो अस्मो आदिदेशति देवी जनिंतर्यजीजनद्धद्रा 
जनित्र्यजीजनत्‌ ॥ २॥ 


0. Ava sma durhanayato martasya tanuhi sthiram. 
Adhaspadam tamim krdhi yo asmam ddideSati 
Devi janitryajijanadbhadra janitryajijanat. 


Strike down the adamantine stubbornness of the 
mortal enemy who wickedly injures the law and order 
of the system. Crush him down to naught who 
suppresses us and enslaves us. The divine mother create 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 134 1081 


you, the gracious mother elevates you in glory as the 
great ruler. 


अव त्या बुं हृतीरिषों विश्वश्चन्द्रा अमित्रहन्‌। शचीभिः 
शक्र धूनुहीन्द्र विश्वाभिरूतिभिव्देवी ज्निन्यजीजन द्धद्रा 
जनित्र्यजीजनत्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


६ Ava tya brhatiriso visvascandra amitrahan. 
Sacibhih sakra dhunuhindra visvabhirutibhir-devi 
Janitryajiyanadbhadra janitryajijanat. 


O mighty ruler, grand achiever, destroyer of 
adversities, negativities and enmities, bring here those 
vast, magnificent wealths, energies and excellences of 
the world to the earth from the light of heaven by your 
grand actions and victorious exploits. Shake up and 
discover the resources of nature and humanity by 
positive, protective and regenerative techniques possible 
across the world. The divine mother creates you, the 
gracious mother elevates you to eminence. 


अव यत्त्वं शतक्रतविन्द्र विश्वानि धूनुषे । रयिं न सुन्वते 
wal सहस्िणींभिरूतिभिरर्दवी जनिंत्यजीजनद्धद्रा जनिंत्य- 
जीजनत्‌ ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Ava yat tvam Satakratavindra visvani dhunuse. 
Rayim na sunvate saca sahasrinibhirutibhirdevi 
Janitryajijanadbhadra janitryajijanat. 


Indra, lord of a hundred powers, actions and 
achievements, when you move and exploit the resources 
of the world’s possibilities by thousands of protective 
and regenerative techniques and grant the benefits of 
wealth to the creative partners in the developmental 
yajna, then the divine mother elevates you to honour, 


1082 RGVEDA 
the gracious mother exalts you to glory. 


अव स्वेदाइवाभितो विष्व॑क्पतन्तु fee: । दूर्वीयाइव 
तन्त॑वो व्य स्मदेतु ea fade जनिंत्यजीजनद्धद्रा जनित्य- 
जीजनत्‌ ॥ UI 


a: Ava sveda ivabhito visvak patantu didyavah. 
Durvaya iva tantavo vyasmadetu durmatirdevi 
janitryajiyjanadbhadra janitryajijanat. 


Let the blazing warriors of the enemies and their 
shining weapons fall down all round like particles of 
mist. Let all hate, enmity and all malignant forces droop 
and fall like blades of grass. The divine mother exhorts 
you, the gracious mother exalts you. 


दीर्घ ह्यङ्कुशं य॑था शक्तिं विभर्षि मन्तुमः। पूर्वेण 
मघवन्पदाजो वयां यथा यमो दवी जनिंत्यजीजनद्धद्रा 
जनित्र्यजीजनत्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Dirdham hyankusam yatha saktim bibharsi 
mantumah. Purvena maghavan padajo vayam 
yatha yamo devi janitryajijanadbhadra janitrya- 
Jyanat. 


Lord of intelligence, imagination and foresight, 
as an elephant driver wields the hook to control the 
strength and direction of the elephant, so you wield your 
power of far-reaching potential to control the world 
order, its forces and direction, and as the eternal ruler 
and controller holds the reins of time, so do you, O lord 
of might and magnanimity, hold the reins of the social 
order steps ahead of possibility long before actuality. 
The divine mother enlightens you, the gracious mother 
exalts you. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 135 1083 


नकिर्देवा मिनीमसि नकिरा योपयामसि मन्त्रश्रुत्यं चरामसि । 
पश्रेभिरपिकश्चेथिरत्राभि सं र॑भामहे॥ ७॥ 


a Nakirdeva minimasi nakira yopayamasi mantra- 
srutyam caramasi. Paksebhirapikaksebhiratrabhi 
sam rabhamahe. 


O devas, divinities of nature and nobilities of 
humanity, we never transgress the law, never frustrate 
any plan, never violate the order, never act surrep- 
titiously. (We are an open minded people), we follow 
the law, and act according to the divine mantra, tradition 
and mantric declaration of the principles and policies 
of the order. In matters of the social order we love and 
cooperate with all parties of our view as well as with 
others whether they are rivals or people on the periphery. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 135 
Yama Devata, Kumara Yamayana Rshi 


यस्मिन्वृक्षे quent देवैः संपिब॑ते यमः। 
stat नो विरुपतिंः पिता पुराणो अनुं वेनति ॥ ९॥ 


i, Yasmin vrkse supalase devaih sampibate yamah. 
Atra no vispatih pita puranam anu venati. 


On the leafy silken tree on which yama, the 
human soul in control of its senses and mind, sits and 
tastes the fruits of its own performance, on the same 
tree, our father, ruler and controller of the universe, sits, 
lives, loves, and watches the eternal human souls in 
accordance with their performance. 


पुराणां अनुवेन॑न्तं चरन्तं पापयामुया । 
असूयन्नभ्य॑चाकशं तस्मा अस्यृहयं पुन॑ः ॥ २ ॥ 


1084 RGVEDA 


2: Puranam anuvenantam carantam papayamuya. 
Asuyannabhyacakasam tasma asrprhayam 
punah. 


I see the father loving and watching the eternal 
human souls. I see the human soul discontented, 
displeased, protesting and still living with that same 
sinful conduct. I see all this and yet I wish I would love 
to live the same again. 


यं कुमार नवं रथ॑मचक्रं मनसाकुणोः। 
एकैषं विश्वतः प्राञ्चमपंश्यतन्नरधिं तिष्ठसि ॥ ३॥ 


a Yam kumara navam rathamacakram manasa- 
krnoh. Ekesam visvatah prancamapasyannadhi 
tisthasi. 


O soul, dear child, without seeing, without 
knowing, you ride a new chariot, of the body, which 
you have yourself caused to have been created, by your 
own mind. It goes round and round all round in various 
forms of life and states of existence without wheels and 
by only one pole of desire and energy. 


यं कुमार प्राव॑र्तयो रथं विप्रभ्यस्परिं। 
तं सामानु प्राव॑र्तत समितो नाव्यार्हितम्‌॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Yam kumara pravartayo ratham viprebhyaspari. 
Tam samanu pravartata samito navyahitam. 


O soul, that body which you move like a chariot 
away from the sages, the wise man settled at peace in 
the heart moves the same chariot all secure as if it is 
safely placed in a boat to cross the seas. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 135 1085 


कः कुमारम॑जनयद्रथं को Prada 
कः स्वित्तदद्य नो बरूयादनुदेयी यथाभ॑वत्‌ ॥ ५५ ॥ 


a Kah kumaramajanayadratham ko niravatrayat. 
Kah svat tadadya no briuyadanudeyt yathabhavat. 


Dear soul, who creates this chariot for the spirit? 
Who completes and who dismantles it? Who at all would 
speak of this to us now so that we could have a vision 
of the future and knowledge of restitution? The Lord 
alone can say. 


यथाभवदनुदेयी ततो अग्र॑मजायत | 
पुरस्ताद्‌ बुध्न आत॑तः पश्चाश्चिरय॑णं कृतम्‌ & ॥ 


6. Yathabhavadanudeyt tato agramajayata. 
Purastadbudhna atatah pascannirayanam krtam. 


As this body, this other than the soul, is created, 
similarly before this, mind and thought is created. Before 
that Prakrti is all pervasive and expansive, and from 
that all forms emerge and evolve. 


इदं यमस्य साद॑नं देवमानं यदुच्यते | 
इयमस्य धम्यते नानव्टीरयं गीर्भिः परिष्कृतः ॥ ७॥ 


(५ Idam yamasya sadanam devamanam yaducyate. 
Iyamasya dhamyate nalirayam girbhih pari- 
skrtah. 


This body is the abode of the spirit, it is also the 
abode of death. It is said to be made of devas, divine 
evolutes of nature such as earth, water and others. This 
pulse of the body system beats, and as long as it beats 
the soul and body is celebrated and exalted with songs 
of adoration. 


1086 RGVEDA 


Mandala 10/Sukta 136 
Keshina (Agni, Surya, Vayu) Devata, Vatarashanah 
Munayah Rshis. The Rshis’ details are: Juti (1), Vatajuti 
(2), Viprajuti (3), Vrshanaka (4), Karikrata (5), Etasha 
(6), Rshyashrnga (7) 


केश्य थि कशी विषं कशी विभर्ति रोद॑सी । 
केशी विश्वं स्वदे केशीदं ज्योतिरुच्यते ॥ ९॥ 


iF Kesyagnim kesi visam kest bibhrti rodasi. 
KeSi visvam svardrse kesidam jyotirucyate. 


Keshi, the sun of radiant rays, holds and sustains 
the fire, the water, the heaven and earth and, indeed, 
the world, and it is called the light that reveals the world, 
illuminating it, so that we may see and enjoy the beauty 
and bliss of it. 


(This mantra as others too may also be 
interpreted at the microcosmic level. In that case Keshi 
is the soul which sustains the pranic energy and the 
elements, processes and subsystems of the body system. 
The soul is the inner light which itself is further 
illuminated by the cosmic spirit precisely in the way 
the sun itself is illuminated by the cosmic light of 
existence.) 


मुनयो वात॑रशनाः fastest वसते vert 
वातस्यानु ध्राजिं यन्ति यैवासौ अविक्षत ॥ २॥ 

2. Munayo vatarasanah pisanga vasate mala. 
Vatasyanu dhrajim yanti yaddevaso aviksata. 


Self-energised objects of space controlled by 
cosmic energy wear a dull yellow vestment and they 
follow the currents of cosmic energy when rays of the 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 136 1087 
sun touch and affect their behaviour. 


(Sages harmoniously self-controlled in tune with 
the currents of cosmic energy wear a soothing vestment 
of yellow hue, and when their senses become totally 
internalised, they identify their being with the cosmic 
energy of divinity.) 


उन्मदिता मौनयेन arat आ dere वयम्‌। 
शरीरेदस्माकं यूयं मतौसो अभि प॑श्यथ ।॥३॥ 


Unmadita mauneyena vatam a tasthima vayam. 
Sriredasmakam yuyam martaso abhi pasyatha. 


Inspired by the sun we, space objects, abide in 
orbital stability by the cosmic currents of universal 
energy. O mortals, you may see our body on the surface, 
but nothing inside. 


(Pranic energies of the sage inspired by spiritual 
energy, we abide in balance with the psychic currents 
of the soul. O mortals, you can visualise and observe 
our physical movements, but the inner reality, you can’t.) 


अन्तरिंश्षेण पतति विश्वां रूपावचाकशात्‌। 
मुनिर्दवस्य॑देवस्य सौकत्याय सखा हितः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Antariksena patati visva rupavacakasat. 
Munirdevasyadevasya saukrtyaya sakha hitah. 


The sun which is an object of meditative 
realisation flies through space, illuminating and 
watching the forms of heavenly bodies in the solar 
system. It itself is placed in orbit by the divine spiritual 
energy of the cosmos for the sake of harmony among 
the heavenly objects of the cosmic system. 


1088 RGVEDA 


(So does the soul vibrate in the microcosmic 
system illuminating, the intelligence and energising the 
mind and senses and the pranas to achieve the 
individual’s harmony with himself and the totality of 
existence. ) 


वातस्यार्वो वायोः सखाथो देवेषितो मुनिः । 
उभौ संमुद्रावा क्षेति यश्च पूर्व उतापरः Wk 


2. Vatasyasvo vayoh sakhatho devesito munih. 
Ubhau samudrava kseti yasca purva utaparah. 


The sun moves in orbit by the dynamics of 
cosmic energy. It is a cooperative friend of cosmic 
energy, inspired and energised by the supreme Divinity. 
An object of realisation in meditation, it illuminates both 
sides of its cosmic movement in space, the former and 
the latter both in the cosmic orbit. 


(The soul in meditation can illuminate both sides 
of its orbit in time and space, the past and the future 
both as revealed by the sage Patanjali in accordance 
with the Veda.) 


अप्सरसां गन्धर्वाणां मृगाणां चर॑णो चर॑न्‌ । 
केशी केत॑स्य विद्वान्त्सखां स्वादुर्मदिन्त॑मः॥ ६॥ 


6. Apsarasam gandharvanam mrganam carane 
caran. Kei ketasya vidvantsakha svadur-madin- 
tamah. 


Pervasive and radiating in the course of light 
rays in the sky, over the earth and in the solar region 
itself, the sun, treasure source of radiation, concomitant 
with fire, warmth of life and light, is the highest inspirer 
of joy, most soothing source of the sweetness of 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 137 1089 
existence. 


(The soul itself is the reservoir of eternal joy in 
the microcosmic existence of the human individual in 
its spiritual journey on earth, in the sky, in the solar 
region, in short, all over in its state of existence all time 
all over space.) 


aren उपामन्थत्यिनष्ठिं स्मा कुनन्नमा । 
केशी विषस्य पात्रेण यद्ु द्रेणापिंबत्सह ॥ ७ ॥ 


re Vayurasma upamanthat pinasti sma kunannama. 
KeSt visasya patrena yadrudrenapibat saha. 


When the sun drinks the soma fragrance of yajna 
and the vapours of water arising from the earthly vedi 
by the spatial cup along with the fire of the vedi, then 
the wind churns the wealth of nature’s bounties and the 
inviolable thunder grinds the grosser gifts of nature to 
the refined particles of rain for the earth and the moral 
and spiritual yajnic values for the soul of humanity. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 137 
Vishvedevah Devatah, Saptarshis Bharadvaja, Kashyapa, 
Gotama, Atri, Vishvamitra, Jamadagni, Vasishtha Rshis 
उत देवा अवहितं देवा उन्नयथा aa: 1 
उतागश्चक्रुषं देवा देवां जीवयथा पुन॑ः ॥ ९ ॥ 
i Uta deva avahitam deva unnayatha punah. 
Utagascakrusam deva deva jivayatha punah. 


O Devas, sages and noble scholars, raise the 
frustrated and the fallen. O divinities, save the despaired 
and raise him again. O saints, redeem the man committed 
to sin. O divines, give him the life again. Let the lost 


1090 RGVEDA 


live once again. 


द्वाविमौ वातौ ara आ सिन्धोरा प॑रावतंः। 
दक्षं ते अन्य आ वातु परान्यो वातु aad: २॥ 


2: Dvavimau vatau vata a sindhora paravatah. 
Daksam te anya a vatu paranyo vatu yadrapah. 


Here are two winds of life that blow: one from 
and upto the sea, the other beyond. May the one bring 
you strength and vigour of freshness, let the other blow 
out sin, evil and pollution far away. 


आ ata वाहि भेषजं वि ata वाहि aad: । 
त्वं हि विशुवभेषजो देवानां दूत ईय॑से॥ ३॥ 


a. A vata vahi bhesajam vi vata vahi yadrapah. 
Tvam hi visvabhesajo devanam dita tyase. 


O breeze of fresh life, bring in the healing balm, 
blow out whatever is sinful and polluted. You blow as 
the divine breath of life and freshness, and you alone 
bring in the universal sanative. 


आ त्वागमं sratfafaren अरिष्टतातिभिः। 
दक्षं ते भद्रमाभार्षं परा यक्ष्मं सुवामि ते॥४॥ 


4. A tvagamam Santatibhiratho aristatatibhih. 
Daksam te bhadramabharsam para yaksmam 
suvami te. 


I am come with all palliatives and protectives 
for peace and tranquillity. I bring you auspicious, 
resistant and regenerative vitality and root out all 
debility. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 137 1091 


त्राय॑न्तायिह tareataat मरुतां गणः। 
त्रायन्तां विर्वा भूतानि यथायम॑रपा अस॑त्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


Trayantamiha devastrayatam marutam ganah. 
Trayantam visva bhutani yathayamarapa asat. 


May the divinities save us here in body and 
mind. May the forces of Maruts, air, breeze, wind and 
even storm protect us. May all forms of nature and living 
beings protect and promote us so that this body system 
may be fine, free and immaculate. 


आप get ॐ भेषजीरापो अमीवचातंनीः। 
आपः सर्वस्य भेषजीस्तास्ते कृण्वन्तु भेषजम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Apa idva u bhesajirapo amivacatanih. 
Apah sarvasya bhesajistaste krnvantu bhesajam. 


All waters and other liquid energies are 
sanatives. Waters are cleansers and destroyers of disease 
and sickness. Waters are medicaments for all living 
beings. O man, O sufferer, let the waters cure and wash 
you clean as natural medicine. 


हस्ताभ्यां दशशाखाभ्यां fret वाचः पुरोगवी । 
अनामयिलुभ्यां त्वा ताभ्यां त्वोप॑ स्पृशामसि ॥ ७॥ 

(५ Hastabhyam dasasakhabhyam jihva vacah 
purogavi. Anamayitnubhyam tva tabhyam tvopa 
sprsamasi. 


The tongue is the leading articulator of the 
physician’s speech. The two hands and ten fingers are 
the physician’s magical touch. The soothing speech and 
soft sympathetic touch of both hands and ten fingers, 
with these two inspiring curatives, O suffering man, we 


1092 RGVEDA 


touch and retouch you and caress you back to health 
and self-assurance. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 138 
Indra Devata, Anga Aurava Rshi 


तव त्य इन्द्र सख्येषु aga ऋतं म॑न्वाना व्य॑दर्विरुर्वलम्‌। 
यत्रा दशस्यन्नुषसो! रिणन्नपः कुत्साय मन्मंत्नह्य॑श्च 
daa: ॥ ९॥ 


1. Tava tya indra sakhyesu vahnaya rtam manvana 
vyadardirurvalam. Yatra daSasyannusaso rina- 
nnapah kutsaya manmannahyasca damsayah. 


O lord of cosmic energy, Indra, in consonance 
with your will and law, these flames of fire carrying 
yajnic fragrance, and these currents of wind bearing 
electrical energy, break the vaporous force of the mighty 
cloud, and when the mantras are chanted and you radiate 
the lights of the dawn, catalytic power is initiated and 
showers of rain are released in response to the wishes 
of the yajakas. 


अवासृजः urd: श्वञ्चयों गिरीनुदाज ser अपिबो मधु 
प्रियम्‌। अवर्धयो वनिनो अस्य दंसंसा शुशोच सूर्य ऋत- 
जातया गिरा॥ २॥ 

2: Avasrjah prasvah svancayo girinudaja usra apibo 
madhu priyam. Avardhayo vanino asya damsasa 
Susoca surya rtajataya gira. 

Indra, lord of cosmic winds and energy, creates 
the vapours, breaks the clouds, initiates radiations of 


light and energy, absorbs the honey sweets of fragrances, 
augments the oceans of water in space, and by the order 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 138 1093 


and power of its liberal potential, will and voice, the 
winds blow and the sun shines in heaven. 


वि सूर्यो मध्ये अपुचद्रथं दिवो विदद्ासायं प्रतिमानमार्य': 1 
goes पिप्रोरसुरस्य मायिन इन्द्रो व्यास्यच्यकृवांँ ऋजि- 
SATUS 


3 Vi suryo madhye amucadratham divo vida- 
ddasaya pratimanamaryah. Drlhani piprora- 
surasya mayina indro vyasyaccakrvam rjisvana. 


The sun in the midst of the regions of light 
releases the energy flood of its rays, creating thereby a 
complementary adversary for the mighty cloud which 
holds the wealth of vapours. Thus does Indra, 
omnipotent performer, controller of cosmic dynamics, 
break the formidable concentrations of the wondrous 
mighty collector’s hoard of living showers by the strike 
of the catalytic operation of its natural law. 


smash श्रृषितो व्यास्यन्निधीरदे वां अमरणदयास्य॑ः। 
mea सूर्यो वसु yaar द॑दे गृणानः श्रँरश्ृणाद्धि- 
Vata ४॥ 


4. Anadhrstani dhrsito vyasyannidhiradevam 
amrnadayasyah. Maseva suryo vasu puryama 
dade grnanah Sstrumrasrnadvirukmata. 


Dauntless and valiant Indra, ruler of the world, 
breaks down the formidable unimpaired selfish hoarders 
of wealth and power and, just as the sun by seasonal 
heat of its rays takes up the waters, so does he take out 
the concealed wealth and power of the antisocial 
elements, and, adored and celebrated, destroys the 
enemies of humanity by the lustre of his justice and 


1094 RGVEDA 
power. 


अयुद्धसेनो विभ्वां विभिन्दता ate वृत्रहा qt तेजते | 
इन्द्रस्य वच्रादबिभेदधिश्नथः प्राक्रामच्छु न्ध्यूरजंहादुषा 
अन॑ः ॥ ५ ॥ 


a: Ayuddhaseno vibhya vibhindata dasadvrtraha 
tujyani tejate. Indrasya vajradabhedabhisnathah 
prakramacchundhyurajahadusa anah. 


Indra, heroic commander of irresistible force, 
omnipresent and boundless, destroyer of evil and 
darkness by his inviolable potential, is generous, reduces 
the hurtful and promotes the progressive. The evil and 
wicked fear the shattering thunderbolt of Indra who is 
ever moving forward, illuminating and purifying, and 
every day the morning moves his chariot for anew dawn 
of light and progress for humanity. 


एता त्या ते श्रुत्यानि aor यदेक एकमकुणोरयन्ञम्‌। 
मासां विधान॑मदधा अधि दयवि त्वया विभिन्नं भरति प्रधिं 
पिता॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Eta tya te srutyani kevala yadeka ekamakrno- 
rayajnam. Masam vidhanamadadha adhi dyavi 
tvaya vibhinnam bharati pradhim pita. 


Indra, these are the celebrated deeds of yours, 
lord absolute, who alone by yourself fix every selfish 
uncreative power. You hold and sustain the sun in 
heaven, and the sun, inspirer and promoter of life on 
earth, regulates the months and seasons of the year and 
abides by the path carved out by you in space. 


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 139 1095 


Mandala 10/Sukta 139 


Savita (1-3) Vishvavasu Atma (4-6) Devata, Vishvavasu 
Devagandharva Rshi 


सूर्यरश्मिर्हसकिशः पुरस्तात्सविता ज्योतिरुदं याँ अज॑स्रम्‌ । 
तस्य॑ पूषा dae याति विद्वान्त्सम्पश्यन्विश्वा भुव॑नानि 
गोपाः॥ ९॥ 


1. Suryarasmirharidesah purastat savita jyotiru- 
dayam ajasram. Tasya pusa prasave yati vidvant- 
sampasyan visva bhuvanani gopah. 


Savita, eternal light of life, wearing the rays of 
the sun, golden haired, is risen there from the east. On 
his rise in the world of his creation, Pusha, living energy 
of divinity for life forms on earth, rises, seeing, blessing 
and promoting all regions of the world as protector of 
life and its activity. 


नृचक्षा एष दिवो मध्य॑ आस्त आपप्रिवात्रोद॑सी अन्तरिक्षम्‌ | 
स विश्वाचीरभि चष्टे घुताचीरन्तरा पूर्वमप॑रं च केतुम्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Nrcaksa esa divo madhya asta apaprivan rodasi 
antariksam. Sa visvactrabhi caste ghrtacirantara 
purvamaparam ca ketum. 


Watching and enlightening humanity, this light 
divine of life abides in the midst of heaven, filling 
heaven, earth and the middle region with its light and 
glory. It illuminates all quarters of space with universal 
light and bliss before and after and everywhere in 
between over the planets and the node. 


रायो बुध्नः संगम॑नो वसनां विश्वां रूपाभि SB grey: | 
देवडइव सविता सत्यधर्मेन्द्रो न त॑स्थौ समरे धनानाम्‌ 3 ॥ 


1096 RGVEDA 


छ Rayo budhnah samgamano vasunam visva 
rupabhi caste Sacitbhih. Deva iva savita satya- 
dharmendro na tasthau samare dhananam. 


The very root and foundation of wealth, power 
and excellence, giver of health, peace, comfort and 
security of life, Savita watches, illuminates and inspires 
every thing of life with its forms and powers of action. 
Like omnificent divinity itself, the very essence and 
spirit of truth and Dharma, Savita abides by us in our 
battles for life’s wealth, beauty and excellence. 


विश्वावसुं सोम trecural ददुशुषीस्तदूतेना व्यायन्‌ । 
तदन्ववैदिन्द्रो रारहाण आसां परि सूर्यस्य परिधीर- 
पश्यत्‌ ४ ॥ 


4. Visvavasum soma gandharvamapo dadrsusista- 
drtena vyayan. Tadanvavaidindro rarahana asam 
pari suryasya paridhimrapasyat. 


O Soma, blessed seeker, just as vapours of water 
rise up by the heat of yajna and reach the sun, sustainer 
of the earth and life giver of the world, similarly self- 
realising souls by meditative yajna rise to the cosmic 
soul, and just as dynamic wind energy moves in 
consonance with the sun to the vaporous halo round 
the sun, similarly self-realising souls watch the cosmic 
halo round divinity, and the exceptional soul, having 
stayed existential complexities, reaches the divine 
presence at the centre of the halo. 


विश्वावसुरभि तन्नो गृणातु दिव्यो गन्धर्वो रज॑सो faa: 1 
यद्वा घा सत्यमुत यन्न विद्धा धियो! हिन्वानो धिय gat 
अव्याः WG 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 139 1097 


a Visvavasurabhi tanno grnatu divyo gandharvo 
rajaso vimanah. Yadva gha satyamuta yanna 
vidma dhiyo hinvano dhiya inno avyah. 


May the spirit of the universe, shelter home of 
the world and world’s wealth and knowledge, divine 
sustainer of the universe and universal wisdom, maker 
and measurer of the universe in space and time, 
enlighten us of what is the truth of existence, what we 
do not know. May he inspire our vision and intelligence, 
and protect and promote our intelligence, will and 
actions. 


सस्तिंमविन्दच्यर॑णे नदीनामर्पावृणोदहुरो अश्मव्रजानाम्‌ । 
प्रासां गन्धर्वो अमृतानि वोचदिन्द्रो दक्षं oR जानाद्‌- 
हीनाम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sasnimavindaccarane nadinamapavrnodduro 
asmavrajanam. Prasam gandharvo amrtani voca- 
dindro daksam pari janadahinam. 


May Gandharva, eternal lord sustainer of the 
universe, knowledge and speech, abiding deep at the 
centre and on the circumference of the fluent streams 
and rolling oceans of speech and knowledge, open up 
for us the doors of knowledge locked in adamantine 
mystery and release the nectar streams of these mysteries 
in speech and vision. Indra, lord omnipotent and 
omniscient, alone knows in full the depth and far 
outreach of these mysteries. 


1098 RGVEDA 


Mandala 10/Sukta 140 
Agni Devata, Agni Pavaka Rshi 


अग्ने तव्‌ श्रवो वयो महिं भ्राजन्ते अर्चयो विभावसो | 
वुरह॑द्धानो शव॑सा वाजमुक्थ्यं ९ दधासि दाशुषे कवे ॥ ९॥ 


ly Agne tava 57410 vayo mahi bhrajante arcayo 
vibhavaso. Brhadbhano savasa vajamukthyam 
dadhasi dasase kave. 


Agni, leading light of life, great is your vigour, 
power and felicity, shining, inspiring and incessantly 
flowing. O refulgent lord, your flames rise high and 
blaze fiercely. Light and fire of Infinity, omniscient poet 
and creator, by your power, potential and abundance, 
you bear and bring admirable food, energy and 
fulfilment with the sense of victory for the generous 
giver and selfless yajaka. 


पावकवर्चाः शुक्रव॑चां sree उदियर्षि भानुना । 
पुत्रो मातरा विचर ्ुपावसि पृणश्चि रोदसी उभे॥ २॥ 
De Pavakavarcah sukravarca anunavarca udiyarsi 


bhanuna. Putro matara vicarannupavasi prnaksi 
rodast ubhe. 


Lord of flames of purity, master of immaculate 
light and power absolutely free from want and weakness, 
you rise with self-refulgence and, just as the son closely 
abides by the parents, serves and protects them, so do 
you pervade, sustain and protect the heaven and earth. 


ऊर्जो नपाजजातवेदः सुशस्तिथिर्मन्द॑स्व धीतिभिर्हितः। 
त्वे इषः सं द॑धुभूरिवर्पसश्चित्रोत॑यो वामजाताः ॥ ३ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 140 1099 


Urjo napajjatavedah susastibhirmandasva dhiti- 
bhirhitah. Tve isam sam dadhurbhurivarpasa- 
Scitrotayo vamajatah. 


O divine light and fire of life, child as well as 
protector and sustainer of energy pervasive in the entire 
world of existence, rise and rejoice as well as exhilarate 
us, with hymns and noble thoughts and actions as you 
are invoked and kindled in the vedi and in the heart and 
soul. Faithful celebrants bring you food in homage, and 
in you they vest their desires and aspirations of various 
forms and wondrous efficacy arisen from love of the 
heart and soul. 


इरज्यन्नग्ने प्रथयस्व जन्तुभिरस्मे wel sre । 
स द॑रशंतस्य वपुषो वि राजसि पृणक्षि सानसिं क्रतुम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Trajyannagne prathayasva jntubhirasme_ rayo 
amartya. Sa darsatasya vapuso vi rajasi prnaksi 
sanasim kratum. 


Immortal Agni, waxing and exalting with all 
living beings, develop and expand the wealth and 
excellence of life for us. Of noble and gracious form as 
you are and shine and rule as you do, join us with yajnic 
action and bless us with abundant fruit of success and 
victory. 


इष्क तरिमध्वरस्य प्रचेतसं aad राध॑सो AE: | 
रातिं वामस्य सुभगां महीमिषं दधासि सानसिं रयिम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


9, Iskartaramadhvarasya pracetasam ksayantam 
radhaso mahah. Ratim vamasya subhagam mahi- 
misam dadhasi sanasim rayim. 


Agni, lord, spirit, and power of the light and 


1100 RGVEDA 


fire of life, we celebrate and adore you, inspirer, impeller 
and promoter of holy yajna of love and non-violence, 
omniscient treasure giver and controller of the great 
world’s wealth, who bear and bring us abundant gifts 
of beauty and splendour and the good fortune of life, 
high energy and food, plenty and prosperity, indeed all 
wealth, honour and excellence of life. 


ऋतार्वानं महिषं favadstaahi सुम्नाय॑ दधिरे पुरो sat: । 
श्रुत्कर्ण सप्रथ॑स्तमं त्वा गिरा दैव्यं मानुषा युगा ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Rtavanam mahisam visvadarsatamagnim 
sumnaya dadhire puro janah. Srutkarnam sapra- 
thastamam tva gira daivyam manusa yuga. 


Men, first of all since earliest times, worship, 
adore and inculcate you, Agni, omniscient lord of life, 
yajna and the law of life, great and glorious, most 
gracious presence of the world, for the sake of peace, 
pleasure and prosperity for the good life. O lord of life 
and grace, mortals singly and in couples and family with 
holy words celebrate and exalt you, divine, kind listener, 
infinite presence. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 141 
Vishvedeva Devata, Agni Tapasa Rshi 
अग्ने अच्छा वदेह a: प्रत्यङ्‌ न॑: सुमना भव । 
प्र नो यच्छ विशस्पते धनदा असि नस्त्वम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


1. Agne accha vadeha nah pratyan nah sumana 
bhava. Pra no yaccha visaspate dhanado asi na- 
stvam. 


Agni, lord of light, knowledge and speech, speak 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 141 1101 


to us here of the knowledge of science and divinity, be 
good and gracious to us here and now, direct. O Vishpati, 
protector and promoter of the people, you are the giver 
of life’s wealth, knowledge and enlightenment, pray give 
us the wealth, knowledge and enlightenment about life 
and the art of living. 


प्र नो यच्छत्वर्यमा प्र भगः प्र agente: | 
प्र देवाः प्रोत सूनृतां रायो देवी द॑दातु नः॥ २॥ 


१.0 Pra no yacchatvaryama pra bhagah pra brha- 
spatih. Pra devah prota sunrta rayo devi dadatu 
nah. 


May Aryama, lord of justice and rectitude, 
Bhaga, lord giver of wealth, power and glory, Brhaspati, 
lord of expansive space, universal vision and speech, 
Devas, all divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity, 
and divine Sunrta, Vedic voice of truth and law of 
existence, give us wealth, honour and prosperity of life, 
wisdom and enlightenment. 


सोमं राजानमव॑सेऽ fi गीर्भि्हवामहे। 
आदित्यान्विष्णुं सूर्य" ब्रह्माणं च बृहस्पतिम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Somam rajanamavase’gnim girbhirhavamahe. 
Adityan visnum suryam brahmaSnam ca brha- 
spatim. 


We invoke brilliant Soma, exhilarating spirit of 
peace for protection and progress, Agni, spirit of light 
and warmth of life, with holy words and songs of 
devotion. We invoke and adore the Adityas, brilliant 
powers of enlightenment, Vishnu, lord omniscient and 
omnipresent awareness, Surya, self-refulgent divine 


1102 RGVEDA 


source of light, Brahma, the sage of divinity, and 
Brhaspati, the scholar visionary of divinity. 


इन्द्रवायू बृहस्पतिं सुहवेह ह॑वामहे | 
यथा नः सर्वं इज्जनः संग॑त्यां सुमना अस॑त्‌ ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Indravayu brhaspatim suhaveha havamahe. 
Yatha nah sarva ijjanah samgatyam sumana asat. 


We invoke, adore and pray for the cosmic energy 
of omnipotent Indra, Vayu, wind energy of cosmic Vayu, 
Brhaspati, cosmic sustenance of the infinite wielder of 
the universe, all worthies of love, invocation and 
adoration so that our people, noble and happy at heart, 
be united in cooperation for the peace and progress of 
life on the earth. 


अर्यमणं ब॒हस्पतिमिन्द्रं दानाय ares | 
वातं विष्णुं सर॑स्वतीं सवितारं च वाजिनम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


Ds Aryamanam brhaspatimindram danaya codaya. 
Vatam visnum sarasvatim savitaram ca vajinam. 


For the gifts of wealth, honour and excellence 
of life, invoke, adore and inculcate Aryaman, law of 
life, Brhaspati, cosmic expansion and centrifugal energy, 
Indra, cosmic electric energy, Vata, wind energy, Vishnu, 
cosmic gravitation and centripetal energy, Sarasvati, 
cosmic knowledge and speech of divinity, and Savita, 
cosmic creative energy which is the overall and ultimate 
all winner over negativities. 


त्वं नो अग्रे sifufieat यज्ञं a वर्धय। 
त्वं at देवतातये रायो दानाय areas i 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 142 1103 


6. Tvam no agne agnibhirbrahma yajnam ca var- 
dhaya. Tvam no devatataye rayo danaya codaya. 


Agni, leading light of the world, by the gifts of 
enlightenment increase and develop our knowledge and 
corporate action, and inspire and enlighten us for the 
service of the divinities to win their gifts of wealth, 
honour and excellence. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 142 


Agni Devata, Sharngah Rshis: Jarita (1-2), Drona (3-4), 
Sarisrkva (5-6), Stambamitra (7-8) 


अयमंग्रे जरिता त्वे अभूदपि सह॑सः सूनो Ae न्यदस्त्या- 
प्य॑म्‌। भद्रं हि शर्म त्रिवरूथमस्तिं त आरे हिंसानामपं दिद्युमा 
कुधि।॥९॥ 


I. Ayamagne jarita tve abhudapi sahasah suno 
nahyanyadasytyapyam. Bhadram hi sarma 
trivaruthamasti ta are himsanamapa didyuma 
krdhi. 


O self-refulgent light of life, Agni, this celebrant 
is dedicated to you wholly in worship and service. O 
creator and inspirer of strength, patience and fortitude, 
there is none other than you worth attaining. Blissful is 
your power of body, mind and soul. Pray cast away the 
pain and sufferance caused by the burning oppression 
of violent enemies. 


Wad अग्रे जनिमा पितूयतः साचीव विश्वा भुव॑ना 
न्युंञ्जसे । प्र सप्तयः प्र संनिषन्त नो धिय॑ः पुरश्च॑रन्ति 
पशुपाडव त्मना ॥ २ ॥ 


1104 RGVEDA 


2: Pravat te agne janima pituyatah sdaciva visva 
bhuvana nyrnjase. Pra saptayah pra sanisanta 
no dhiyah purascaranti pasupa iva tmana. 


Agni, your presence radiates, desiring to take 
things into your fold like a companion power reaching 
all regions of the world. And our thoughts and songs of 
homage too, spontaneously flying vibrations of heart 
and soul, reach on to you like eager servants of the divine 
master. 


उत वा उ परि वृणक्षि बप्संद्‌ बहोरंग्र उलपस्य स्वधावः | 
उत खिल्या उर्वराणां भवन्तिमा ते हेतिं तविषीं 
चुक्कुधाम॥ ३॥ 


६ Uta va u pari vrnaksi bapsadbahoragna ulapasya 
svadhavah. Uta khilya urvaranam bhavanti ma 
te hetim tavisim cukru dham. 


Agni, self-refulgent fire and power, when you 
burn and devour heaps of grass, sometimes you spare 
patches of green and sometimes vast areas of fertile 
lands become wastelands. Let us understand this 
mystery and the way so that we do not excite the 
onslaught of your blazing power of destruction. 


aged निवतो यासि बप्सत्पृथ॑गेषि प्रगर्धिनीव सेनां । यदा 
ते वातों अनुवाति शोचिर्वस्ैव श्मश्रु वपसि प्र भूमं ॥ ४॥ 


4. Yadudvato nivato yasi bapsat prthagesi pragar- 
dhiniva sena. Yada te vato anuvati Socirvapteva 
§masru vapasi pra bhuma. 


When you rise and spread, devouring both high 
and low like a fierce army thirsting for victory, and 
specially when the wind blows favourable to your blaze, 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 142 1105 


then like a barber shaving off beard and moustache you 
lay waste vast areas of land. 


प्रत्य॑स्य श्रेणयो cast एकं नियानं बहवो verte: | 
बाहू यदग्रे अनुममजानो न्य॑ङ्ङ्त्तानामन्वेषि भूमिंम्‌॥ ५॥ 


>. Pratyasya Srenayo dadrsra ekam niyanam bahavo 
rathasah. Bahu yadagne anumarmrjano nyannu- 
ttanamanvesi bhumim. 


The flames of Agni in rising sequence are seen 
like a row of chariots following one leader as engine 
when, Agni, you raise your arms waxing and shining 
and cover hills and valleys on the land. 


उत्ते शुष्मा जिहतामुत्ते अर्चिरुत्ते अग्रे शशमानस्य वाजाः 1 
उच्छरञ्चस्व नि न॑म वर्धमान आ त्वाद्य विश्वे aaa: 
सदन्तु ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ut te Susma jihatamut te arcirut te agne Sasama- 
nasya vajah. Ucchvancasva ni nama vardhamana 
a tvadya visve vasavah sadantu. 


Agni, lord of light, illuminative and enlightening 
power, may your bright flames rise higher, may the 
radiations of your light and grandeur and your victories 
over want and darkness rise high and elevate the body, 
mind and soul of the celebrant. Yourself rising and 
expanding, raise the high higher, condescend, save and 
raise the low, and may all the soothing, sheltering powers 
and personalities of the world sit by you on the vedi 
and rehabilitate the uprooted here today and now. 


अपामिदं न्यय॑नं cased निवेशंनम्‌। 
अन्यं कुणुष्वेतः पन्थां तेन॑ याहि वशँ अनुं ।॥ ७॥ 


1106 RGVEDA 


19 Apamidam nyayanam samudrasya nivesanam. 
Anyam krnusvetah pantham tena yahi vasam anu. 

This is the vast reservoir of waters, bottomless 

bound of the sea. Agni, create some other higher path 


from these here, so you may proceed to the fulfilment 
of your heart’s desire. 


आय॑ने ते पराय॑णो gat रोहन्तु पुष्पिणीः 1 
ead पुण्डरीकाणि समुद्रस्य गृहा इमे ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Ayane te parayane durva rohantu puspinth. 
Hradasca pundarikani samudrasya grha ime. 
Agni, may flowers and holy grass grow on your 
arrival, may flowers and holy grass shower on your 


departure. Let all these homes be homes close to the 
infinite ocean, with reservoirs and flowers around. 


(The seventh and eighth verses may be 
addressed to the human soul as well as to Agni, leading 
light and creative spirit of the cosmos.) 


Mandala 10/Sukta 143 
Ashvinau Devate, Atri Sankhya Rshi 
त्यं चिदत्निमृतजुर मर्थमश्वं न यात॑वे | 
कक्षीवन्तं यदी पुना रथं न करणुथो नव॑म्‌ ॥ ९॥ 
॥ Tyam cidatrimrtajuramarthamasvam na ydatave. 


Kaksivantam yadi puna ratham na krnutho 
navam. 


Hey Ashvins, complementary energies of nature 
and complementary nobilities of humanity such as 
physician and surgeon, teacher and preacher, father and 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 143 1107 


mother, men and women, the person who observes the 
laws of nature and principles of truth and grows up in 
the yajnic way of life, whether he or she loves to enjoy 
the experience of living or has grown out of life’s 
colourfulness and temptation, such a person you 
strengthen like a strong force in harness with every side 
of personality renewed to top condition of health and 
body to reach the goal and realise the purpose and values 
of life. 


त्यं चिदश्वं न वालिन॑मरेणवो यमलर॑त। 
aoe ग्रन्थिं न वि ष्य॑तमत्रिं यविष्ठमा रज॑: ॥ २॥ 

2 Tyam cidasvam na vajinamarenavo yamatnata. 
Drlham grantim na vi syatamatrim yavisthama 
rajah. 


And the person most youthful, dynamic, ever 
in harness for winning the goal of life, but bound by the 
web of life through senses, mind and pranas, all unsoiled 
though by dust, pray release, undo the bondage like a 
gordian knot of life so that the person may live free 
from possible dust and pollution. 


नरा दंसिं्ठावत्रये शुभ्रा सिषासतं fer: 1 
अथा हि वां दिवो न॑रा पुनः स्तोमो न विशसे ।॥ ३॥ 


SF Nara damsisthavatraye subhra sisasatam dhiyah. 
Atha hi vam divo nara punah stomo na visvase. 


O leading lights, noble souls, brilliant scholars, 
pray release the worldly man in search of freedom from 
bondage, bless him with holy thoughts and intelligence, 
since the enlightened man’s song of prayer and adoration 
in order to celebrate you reaches you, harbingers of light, 


1108 RGVEDA 
again and again. 

चिते agi सुराधसा रातिः dafettsert | 

आ यन्नः सदने पृथौ सम॑ने पर्षथो AT Us 


4. Cite tadvam suradhasa ratih sumatirasvina. 
A yannah sadane prthau samane parsatho nara. 


Ashvins, harbingers of wealth, competence and 
success, that wealth of noble thoughts and intelligence, 
that generous gift of yours, is for the enlightenment of 
humanity which, O leading lights, you bring in showers 
in this vast world of life, in this hall of yajna, in this 
struggle of our life for happiness and freedom. 


युवं भुज्युं समुद्र आ रज॑सः पार Sheer! 
यातमच्छा पतत्रिथिनसिंत्या सातये कृतम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


= Yuvam bhujyum samudra 4a rajasah para rnkhi- 
tam. Yatamaccha patatribhirnasatya sataye 
krtam. 


Ashvins, bright like fire and the sun, inviolably 
committed to truth and law, pray come with faultless 
ark and oars to humanity beaten about in the depth of 
dust and rolling seas, to help us swim to the shore to 
freedom and victory. 


आ वां art: शंयूडव fest विश्व॑वेदसा | 
समस्मे vod नरोत्सं न पिप्युषीरिषः nen 

6. A vam sumnaih gamyu iva mamhistha visva- 
vedasa. Samasme bhusatam narotsam na pipyu- 
strisah. 


Leading lights of the world, greatest and most 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 144 1109 


liberal masters of universal wealth and knowledge, come 
like benevolent harbingers of peace and freshness of 
joy, bless us and refine us with your gracious favours 
of peace, freedom and happiness as abundant showers 
of rain fill the lake. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 144 


Indra Devata, Suparna Tarkshya or Urdhvakrshana 
Yamayana Rshi 


अयं हि ते sted इन्दुरत्यो न पत्य॑ ते। 
दक्षं विश्वायुर्वेधसे ॥ ९ ॥ 


| Ayam hi te amartya induratyo na patyate. 
Dakso visvayurvedhase. 


Indra, lord eternal and omnipotent, this immortal 
soma rises to you like a flying courser. Versatile, living 
vitality of the world, it rises in homage to the lord creator 
of the world. 


अयमस्मासु काव्यं east area | 
अयं बिंभत्युर्ध्वकुशनं Hen कृत्व्यं मद॑म्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


# Ayamasmasu kavya rbhurvajro dasvate. Ayam 
bibhrtyurdhvakrsanam madamrbhurna krtvyam 
madam. 


Here among us it is inspiring and adorable, 
brilliant, a very thunderbolt of protection for the 
generous, and scourge of punishment for the destructive. 
And it bears the exhilaration that elevates like rising 
flames of fire just as the wise sage bears the passion for 
creativity. 


1110 RGVEDA 


We: श्येनाय कृत्व॑न आसु स्वासु TAT: | 
अवं दीधेदहीशुवः ॥ २३ ॥ 


Ghrsuh Syenaya krtvana asu svasu vamsagah. 
Ava didhedahisuvah. 


Effulgent, agile and exhilarating for the dynamic 
creative personality, inspiring and vitalising among its 
own people, it blesses them and their progeny with high 
energy and enthusiasm. 


यं सुपर्णः प॑रावतंः श्येनस्य पुत्र आभ॑रत्‌ । 
शतचक्रं योऽ aM वर्तनिः ux 


4. Yam suparnah paravatah Syenasya putra abharat. 
Satacakram yo’hyo vartanih. 


Soma, which Vayu, cosmic energy, child of all 
pervasive space, bears and carries from far off solar 
regions, is performer of a hundred divine acts of nature 
and it is the very life of the cloud and indestructible 
vitality of life. 

यं ते श्येनश्चारुमवृकं पदाभरदरुणं मानमन्ध॑सः। 
एना वयो वि तार्यायुर्जीवस एना जागार बन्धुता ॥ ५५ ॥ 


3: Yam te Syenascarumavrkam padabharadar-unam 
manamandhasah. Ena vayo vi taryayurjivasa ena 
jJagara bandhuta. 


The essence of life’s vitality, soma, lovely and 
pleasing, unassailable and sunny bright, which nature’s 
energy brings by its own spirit and power, is the vitality 
by which health and fertility for life grows higher and 
the kinship and continuity of humanity keeps living and 
awake. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 145 1111 


एवा तदिन्द्र इन्दुना देवेषु चिद्दधारयाते महि त्यजः | 
क्रत्वा वयो वि तार्यायुः सुक्रतो ्रत्वायमस्मदा सुतः॥ ६॥ 


6. Eva tadindra induna devesu ciddharayate mahi 
tyajah. Kratva vayo vi taryayuh sukrato kratva- 
yamasmada sutah. 


Thus does Indra, life of life, through soma life 
energy, disseminate and bear the great creative vitality 
in the divine forms of nature and humanity. O lord of 
holy action, the health and age of distinct life forms is 
extended and maintained by holy acts of soma activity, 
and this vitality is created and distilled from us by us 
through the holy discipline of yajnic living with 
brahmacharya. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 145 
Sapatni-badhanam Devata, Indrani Rshi 


The subject matter of this hymn at the surface 
level is getting rid of a rival wife, and for that purpose 
the speaker takes recourse to a herb also. Thus the hymn 
reads like a spell cure and possibly with a magical herb. 
But this approach would not do justice to the deeper 
meaning of the hymn which is integration or re- 
integration of personality with a single, undivided, 
focussed interest in the pursuit of a definite goal of 
positive value. 


Split personality is a problem in modern times. 
So is schizophrenia, a devastating disease. The cure can 
be both herbal and psychological. The word ‘Upanishat’ 
helps us to read the hymn in this Vedic direction of 
practical yoga in which sanative herbs, mental 
concentration and spiritual faith all play an important 


1112 RGVEDA 

role (refer Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, 4, 1.). 
इमां ख॑नाम्योष॑धिं वीरुधं बल्+वत्तमाम्‌। 
यया सपल्नीं बाध॑ते ययां संविन्दते पतिम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 

1. Imam khanamyosadhim virudham balavattamam. 
Yaya sapatnim badhate yaya samvindate patim. 


I dig out this luxuriant and most powerful herb 
by which one can annul a rival fascination and by which 
the pursuant can recover a single, all absorbing love for 
successful attainment. 


उत्तानपर्णे सुभ॑गे देव॑जूते सह॑स्वति | 
are मे परा धम aft a केव॑लं कुरु ॥ २॥ 
ee Uttanaparne subhage devajute sahasvati. 


Sapatnim me para dhama patim me kevalam kuru. 


O soma plant growing up with luxuriant leaves 
and branches, nobly effective, divinely energised, giver 
of peace, patience and courageous vitality, transform 
me to concentrate on my one and only love. Throw off 
my evil fascination. Let me be with my master spirit of 
life. 

उत्तराहमुत्तर उत्तरेदुत्त॑राभ्यः। 
अथा स॒पली या ममाधरा साध॑राभ्यः ।॥ ३॥ 


Uttarahamuttara uttareduttarabhyah. 
Atha sapatni ya mamadhara sadharabhyah. 


O soma, you are higher, more efficacious. I also 
am higher than the fascination, greater than all others 
who are superior, generally speaking. May that which 
is my rival be lower than the lowest fascinations. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 145 1113 


नद्य॑स्या नाम॑ गृभ्णामि नो अस्मित्र॑मते जने । 
परामिव प॑रावतं are गमयामसि ॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Nahyasya nama grbhnami no asmin ramate jane. 
Parameva paravatam sapatnim gamayamasi. 


I do not even think of its name. No one entertains 
this human distraction, no one is distracted by this 
human fascination. We throw this remote fascination 
far off at the farthest. 


अहमस्मि सहमानाथ त्वम॑सि arate: | 
उभे सह॑स्वती भूत्वी सपत्नी मे सहावहे ॥ ५ ॥ 


Ahamasmi sahamanatha tvamasi sasahih. 
Ubhe sahasvati bhutvi sapatnim me sahavahai. 


I am patient, challenging and victorious. O 
soma, you too are unassailable, you and I, both 
challenging and victorious, we shall subdue the rival. 


so तेऽधां Gena त्वाधां सहीयसा । मामनु प्र ते मनों 
वत्सं गौरिव धावतु पथा वारिव धावतु।। ६ ॥ 


6. Upa te’dham sahamanamabhi tvadham sahtyasa. 
Mamanu pra te mano vatsam gauriva dhavatu 
patha variva dhavatu. 


O soma, O spirit of peace, O spiritual knowledge 
of the Upanishad, I love you at heart and hold on to you 
in faith, patient and victorious as you are. I hold on to 
you with a determined mind. May your spirit radiate 
and come to me like the mother cow hastening to the 
calf and water rushing straight down to the lake. 


1114 RGVEDA 


Mandala 10/Sukta 146 
Aranyani Devata, Devamuni Airammada Rshi 


अरण्यान्यरंण्यान्यसौ य प्रेव नश्य॑सि। 
कथा ग्रामं न पृच्छसि न त्वा भीरिव विन्दतीरें।॥ ९॥ 

ly Aranyanyaranyanyasau ya preva nasyasi. Katha 
gramam na prcchasi na tva bhiriva vindatim. 


Tarry, O spirit of the forest, who disappear like 
a phantom in no time. Why not stay for a moment by 
the village? And you don’t fear even fear itself, which 
fears to touch your presence. 


वृषारवाय ada agureafa चिच्यिकः। 
आघाटिभिरिव धावयंन्नरण्यानिर्महीयते।॥ २॥ 

2. Vrsaravaya vadate yadupavati ciccikah. 
Aghatibhiriva dhavayannaranyanirmahiyate. 

In response to howls and noises of the forest, 
birds chirp and crickets sing, all appears like temple 
bells and thereby the forest presence gets exalted. 

उत गावं इवादन्त्युत वेश्मेव दश्यते । 

उतो अरण्यानिः सायं शकटीरिव सर्जति ॥ ३॥ 
3: Uta gava ivadantyuta vesmeva drsyate. 

Uto aranyanih sayam sakatiriva sarjati. 


Forest animals graze like cows, clusters of 
flowers give a homely look, and the forest spirit appears 
to say good bye to the carts that leave for village homes. 


गामङ्धैष आ ह्यति दार्वङ्कैषो अपावधीत्‌। 
वसन्नरण्यान्यां सायमक्रुक्षदिति मन्यते ॥ ४॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 146 1115 


4. Gamangaisa a hvayati darvangaiso apavadhit. 
Vasannaranyanyam sayamakruksaditi manyate. 


Dear spirit and forest presence, someone calls 
upon his cow to come home, this one cuts the tree, and 
in the evening someone staying in the forest shrieks, 
someone howls, someone bursts in song also. 


न वा अंरण्यानिर्हन्त्यन्यश्चेन्नाभिगच्छति। 
स्वादोः फलस्य जग्ध्वाय यथाकामं नि प॑द्यते ॥ ५ ॥ 


a, Na va aranyanirhantyanyascennabhigacchati. 
Svadoh phalasya jagdhvaya yathakamam ni 
padyate. 


The forest does not hurt anyone. Whoever goes 
to the forest without the intent to damage eats the 
delicious fruit and roams around as he wishes at will. 


ses सुरभिं ब॑हन्नामकरुषीवत्ाम्‌। 
प्राहं मृगाणां मातर॑मरण्यानिमंशंसिषम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Anjanagandhim surabhim bahvannamakrsiva- 
lam. Praham mrganam mataramaranyanima- 
samsisam. 


I revere and celebrate the forest and the spirit 
of the forest not subjected to human encroachment by 
farming, abounding in wild fruit, fragrant, flowery 
beautiful, mother of wild life and sustaining friend of 
humanity. 


1116 RGVEDA 


Mandala 10/Sukta 147 
Indra Devata, Suveda Shairishi Rshi 


श्रत्ते दधामि प्रथमाय मन्यवेऽ हन्यद्‌ वृत्रं नर्य' विवेर पः। 
उभे यत्त्वा भवंतो रोदसी अनु रेज॑ते शुष्मत्पृथिवी 
चिंदद्विवः॥ ९॥ 


ip Sratte dadhami prathamaya manyave’ hanya- 
dvrtram naryam viverapah. Ubhe yattva bhavato 
rodasi anu rejate susmat prthivi cidadrivah. 


Indra, potent ruler of nature and humanity, lord 
of thunder and clouds, mover of mountains, I am all 
faith, reverence and admiration in truth of commitment 
for your first and foremost power and passion by which 
you break the clouds and release the showers of rain 
for humanity, by virtue of which both heaven and earth 
abide by your law, the power and force by which the 
firmament shakes with awe. 


त्वं मायाभिरनवद्य मायिनं श्रवस्यता मन॑सा Fads: | 
त्वामिन्नरो वृणते गविष्टिषु त्वां विश्वासु हव्यास्विष्टिंषु ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Tvam mayabhiranavadya mayinam sravasyata 
manasa vrtramardayah. Tvaminnaro vrnate gavi- 
stisu tvam visvasu havyasvaistisu. 


Irreproachable power, with your mind and desire 
to produce more food and energy, by your mighty forces 
you break open the treasure-holds of mysterious hidden 
energies of nature. Leading lights of humanity take to 
you in their search for rays of light, and in all their 
cherished programmes of common good they honour 
you as the source of success. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 147 1117 


Ue चाकन्धि पुरुहूत ake वृधासो ये म॑घवन्नानशुर्मघम्‌। 
अर्चन्ति तोके तन॑ये परिष्टिषु मेधसाता वाजिनमहये 
धने ॥। ३ ॥ 


Aisu cakandhi puruhita surisu vrdhaso ye magha- 
vannanasurmagham. Arcanti toke tanaye pari- 
stisu medhasata vajinamahraye dhane. 


O lord universally invoked and celebrated, be 
gracious and bring the light of knowledge to these noble 
leaders of humanity. O lord of power and glory, 
progressive men of wisdom who have achieved power 
and prosperity in life honour and adore you in their 
congregations as the chief power of success and victory 
for the attainment of irreproachable wealth and other 
values for themselves, their children and grand children. 


Bsa रायः सुभंतस्य चाकनन्मदं यो अस्य tal चिकेतति। 
warden मघवन्दारुव॑ध्वरो मक्षू स वाजं भरते धना 
नृभिः uw 


4. Sa innu rayah subhrtasya cakananmadam yo asya 
ramhyam ciketani. Tvavrdho maghavan dasva- 
dhvaro maksu sa vajam bharate dhana nrbhih. 


He alone values and obtains wealth worthy of 
achievement who knows and realises in life the inspiring 
power and ecstasy of Indra. O lord of power and 
prosperity, the man inspired and empowered by you, 
who is dedicated to positive giving and yajnic 
programmes with leading lights of scientific yajna, 
achieves wealth and victory at the earliest because he 
knows the secret of success. 


1118 RGVEDA 


त्वं शधीय महिना गणान उरु कुधि मघवञ्छग्धि रायः। 
त्वं नो सित्रो वरुणो न मायी पित्वो न द॑स्म दयसे 
विभक्ता ॥ ५॥ 


2; Tvam Sardhaya mahina grnana uru krdhi magha- 
vanchagdhi rayah. Tvam no mitro varuno na mayi 
pitvo na dasma dayase vibhakta. 


Indra, lord giver and creator of glory, pray let 
us rise and expand in the field of knowledge and action. 
Give us wealth and power of a high order of nobility. 
You are Mitra and Varuna for us, friend and just guide, 
giver and commander of wondrous capability, noble and 
blissful, and one with us, you give us food for body, 
mind and soul for the individual and the human 
community. 


Mandala 10/Sukta 148 
Indra Devata, Prthu Vainya Rshi 


सुष्वाणास इन्द्र cafe त्वा ससवांसश्च तुविनृम्ण 
वाजं॑म्‌। आ नो! भर सुवितं यस्य॑ चाकन्त्मना तना सनुयाम 
त्वोताः ।॥ ९॥ 


1. Susvanasa indra stumasi tva sasavamsasca 
tuvinrmna vajam. A no bhara suvitam yasya cakan 
tmana tana sanuyama tvotah. 


Indra, lord of abundant wealth and power, 
creative and expressive devotees with divine gifts of 
heavenly food and energy, we celebrate and adore you. 
Pray bless us with that wealth and well being which 
you please is for our good, so that, under your gracious 
protection, we may win the power and prosperity of 
life to live well and enjoy the beauty and goodness of 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 148 1119 


life to the fulfilment of our heart and soul. 


ऋृष्वस्त्वमिन्द्र शूर जातो दासीर्विशः सूर्येण सह्याः 1 
गुहां हितं गुह्यं गूढ्व्मप्सु बिंभृमसिं प्रस्रवणो न सोम॑म्‌॥ २॥ 


ps Rsvastvamindra Sura jato dasirvisah suryena 
sahyah. Guha hitam guhyam gulhamapsu bibhr- 
masi prasravane na somam. 


Indra, you are the mighty maker and terrible 
breaker both at the same time in the creative process of 
nature and life, great and brave at the very manifestation 
of your power, who challenge and break open the 
negative forces of dark clouds by the sun, so that, on 
showers of the divine grace of rains, we receive and 
enjoy the soma nectar hidden in the mystery held at the 
heart of the vapours and water showers. 


(In the spiritual sense, Indra is present deep in 
the self, and when by grace it breaks the darkness, we 
receive the light and the divine nectar.) 


अर्यो वा fit अभ्य॑र्च fagrratort विप्र॑ः सुमतिं च॑क्ानः। 
ते स्याम ये रणयन्त सोभरे नोत तुभ्यं Tattoos भक्षैः 1-3 


410 va giro abhyarca vidvanrsinam viprah 
sumatim cakanah. Te syama ye ranyanta somai- 
renota tubhyam ratholha bhaksaih. 


O lord of the cosmic chariot, ruler protector of 
the universe, vibrant and omniscient Indra, lover of the 
sages’ songs of adoration, pray accept and honour our 
words of prayer so that, serving and celebrating you 
with delicious homage of soma and ourselves exulting, 
we may ever abide in your gracious favour and presence. 


1120 RGVEDA 


इमा ब्रहोन्द्र तुभ्यं शंसि दा नृभ्यो नृणां MAT शव॑ः। 
तेभिर्भव सक्रतुर्येषु चाकन्चुत त्रायस्व गृणत उत स्तीन्‌ ॥। ठ ॥। 


4. Ima brahmendra tubhyam samsi da nrbhyo nrnam 
sura Savah. Tebhirbhava sakraturyesu caka-nnuta 
trayasva grnata uta stin. 


Indra, lord omnipotent, brave leader, these songs 
of adoration are offered in homage to your honour. Be 
pleased to accept these. Pray bless us with strength and 
power worthy of the brave. Bless these leading lights 
with love and sure fulfilment in their holy acts of yajna. 
Save the celebrants and upraise the fallen who depend 
on you and look up for help. 


श्रुधी cafes शूर पृथ्यां उत eae वेन्यस्यार्कैः । आ 
यस्ते योर्नि'धघुतवंन्तमस्वारूर्मिन निम्नैर्द्रवयन्त वक्वाः ॥ ५ ॥ 


चः Srudhi havaminrda Sura prthya uta stavase venya- 
syarkaih. A yaste yonim ghrtavantam-asvarur- 
mirna nimnairdravayanta vakvah. 


Indra, leading light of the world, omnipotent 
lord, brave all-presence, listen to the invocation and 
prayer of humanity at large. Adored and exalted you 
are by the celebrative songs of the wise, who sit in your 
hall of prayer round the vedi lighted and sprinkled with 
ghrta and attend to you, while the singer celebrants run 
to you like streams rushing down to sea, by paths of 
surrender. 

Mandala 10/Sukta 149 


Savita Devata, Archan Hairanyastupa Rshi 


सविता यन्त्रैः पथिवीम॑रम्णादस्कम्थने स॑विता ade | 
अश्व॑मिवाधुश्चन्दुनिमन्तरिक्चमतर्ते' बन्दर सविता संमुद्रम्‌॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 149 1121 


I Savita yantraih prthivimaramnadaskambhane 
savita dyamadrmhat. ASvamivadhuksaddhu- 
nimantariksamaturte baddham savita samudram. 


Savita, lord creator, places the earth in orbit, and 
Savita places the region of light, in columnless space 
by the forces of cosmic gravitation. Savita moves the 
thundering cloud like a horse in skies and brings the 
showers, and Savita places the middle regions and the 
vast expanse of vapours and waters bound in boundless 
space. 


यत्रा समुद्रः ead व्यौनदपां नपात्सविता तस्य॑ वेद | 
अतो ard आ उत्थितं wits तो द्यावापृथिवी अप्रथे- 
ताम्‌॥ २॥ 


2. Yatra samudrah skabhito vyainadapam napat 
savita tasya veda. Ato bhurata a utthitam rajo’to 
dyavaprthivi aprathetam. 


Where the ocean of vapours and water is 
sustained and whence it sprinkles the earth with 
showers, only Savita, eternal sustainer of waters, knows 
that mystery. Thence, from Savita, arises the earth, 
thence arises the sky and thence only the heaven and 
earth arise in mutual relation and expand. 


पश्चेदमन्यद॑भवद्यजंत्रमम्त्यस्य भुव॑नस्य Yat सुपर्णो 
अङ्क सवितुर्गरुत्मान्पूर्वो जातः स ॐ अस्यानु धर्म ॥ ३॥ 
2: Pascedamanyadabhavadyajatramamartyasya 


bhuvanasya bhina. Suparno anga saviturga- 
rutman purvo jatah sa u asyanu dharma. 


Later all this other world arises in mutual 
relationship by the omnipotence of eternal lord Savita. 


1122 RGVEDA 


Dear seeker, from Savita only first arises the grand flying 
bird of fire, the sun, in conformity with the laws of 
Savita, and then the others. 


mesa ग्रामं यूयुधिरिवाश्वान्वाश्रेवं वत्सं सुमना दुहाना | 
पतिरिव जायामभि नो न्येतु धर्ता दिवः सविता विश्व- 
ak: uw 


4. Gava iva gramam yuyudhirivasvan vasreva 
vatsam sumana duhana. Patiriva jayamabhi no 
nyetu dharta divah savita visvavarah. 


Just as cows hasten to the village, the warrior 
takes to the horse, loving mother cow anxious at heart 
runs to the calf for milk, the husband goes to the wife 
for love, so may Savita, sustainer of the heavenly world, 
love of all humanity, come and bless us as his children. 


हिरण्यस्तूपः सवितर्यथा त्वाद्धिर सो we वाजे अस्मिन्‌ । 
एवा त्वार्चन्नव॑से वन्द॑मानः सोमस्येवांशुं प्रति जाग- 
राहम्‌॥ ५॥ 


5. Hiranyastupah savitaryatha tvangiraso juhve vaje 
asmin. Eva tvarcannavase vandamanah somasye- 
vasum prati jagaraham. 

O Savita, just as Angirasa, yogi with controlled 
pranic energy, established in the golden beauty of the 
spirit, invokes you in this yajna for the essence through 
existence, so do I, dedicated to worship and prayer with 
adoration, keep awake waiting for the revelation of 
divinity as my share of soma, divine ecstasy of ultimate 
freedom. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 150 1123 


Mandala10/Sukta 150 
Agni Devata, Mrdika Vasishtha Rshi 


Utetaraters देवेभ्यो हव्यवाहन | 
आदित्यै सुद्रैर्वसुभिर्नं आ ग॑हि मृव्टीकाय॑ न आ afe ९॥ 


i, Samiddhascit samidhyase devebhyo havya- 
vahana. Adityai rudrairvasubhurna a gahi mrli- 
kaya na 4 gahi. 


Agni, fire of the vedi, heat and light of life, 
carrier of fragrance and freshness to nobilities and divine 
forces of nature, kindled, burning and ever awake, you 
are still kindled and raised to burn and shine for the 
renewal of life and life energy by yajna. Pray come to 
us with Aditya, radiations of the sun, with Rudras, 
electric catalysis of natural energy, and with Vasus, gifts 
of earth and pranic energies. Come to us for peace, 
prosperity and all round well being of life. 


इमं यज्ञमिदं वचो जुजुषाण उपागंहि। 
मतीसस्त्वा समिधान हवामहे Westenra हवामहे ॥ २॥ 

2. Imam yajnamidam vaco jujusana upagahi. 
Martasastva samidhana havamahe mrlikaya 
havamahe. 

Loving, accepting and appreciating this yajna, 
this word of prayer and divine adoration, pray come 
close to join us. Shining, burning and blazing fire divine, 
we mortals invoke you, we kindle and adore you for 
peace, prosperity and all round well being of life. 

त्वामु जातवेदसं विश्ववारं गृणे धिया | 
sm eat आ व॑ह नः प्रियत्रंतान्मृव्टीकायं प्रियत्रंतान्‌ ॥ ३॥ 


1124 RGVEDA 


Bi Tvamu jatavedasam visvavaram grne dhiya. Agne 
devam a vaha nah priyavratan mrlikaya_ priya- 
vratan. 


Agni, with sincerity of thought, word and action, 
I adore you, eternal knower of all that is born, universal 
lover and saviour of all by their own choice. O light 
and fire of universal life, bring hither the nobilities of 
humanity to join us, bring hither the divinities of nature 
to bless us, they are all lovers of the laws and discipline 
of life. Pray bring hither the lovers of law and discipline 
of life for peace, progress and all round well being of 
humanity. 


अभिर्देवो देवानामभवत्पुरोहिंतोऽ भिं म॑नुष्या ३ ऋष॑यः 
समीधिरे। sti महो धन॑ंसातावहं हुवे मृव्टीकं धन॑- 
सातये ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Agnirdevo devanamabhavat purohito’ gnim 
manusya rsayah samidhire. Agnim maho dhana- 
satavaham huve mrlikam dhanasataye. 


Agni, lord omniscient and self-refulgent, Agni, 
universal spirit of life, was and is the high priest of all 
divine forces of nature and all nobilities of humanity. 
The same Agni, leading light and life of existence, 
ordinary people and enlightened sages invoke and light 
in the heart and home. I invoke and light the great Agni 
in the soul and in the home vedi for the achievement of 
wealth, honour and excellence of life. I pray to the spirit 
of divine peace for victory over all wealth and excellence 
of life. 


STAR wets गविं्ठिरं प्राव॑न्नः कण्वं त्रसद॑स्युमाहवे | 
sit वसिष्ठो हवते पुरोहितो मूव्टीकायं पुरोहितः ॥ ५ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 151 1125 


=) Agniratrim bharadvajam gavisthiram pravannah 
kanvam trasadasyumahave. Agnim vasistho 
havate purohito mrlikaya purohitah. 


Agni, self-refulgent fire and spirit of life, 
protects Atri, winner over the weaknesses of body, mind 
and soul, Bharadvaja, harbinger of food and energy with 
enlightenment for people, Gavishthira, victor over sense 
and mind, Kanva, enlightened visionary, and 
Trasadasyu, controller of the wicked negativists, and 
indeed all of us in our battle of life for peace and 
progress. Vasishtha, brilliant high priest and leader 
settled at heart, invokes and adores Agni at yajna, the 
leader adores and prays to Agni for the achievement of 
all round well being in life. 


Mandalal10/Sukta 151 
Shraddha Devata, Shraddha Kamayani Rshi 


श्रब्दयायिः समिध्यते श्रब्दयां हूयते हविः 1 
stat भग॑स्य मूर्धनि वचसा वेदयामसि ॥ ९॥ 


I; Sraddhayagnih samidhyate sraddhaya huyate 
havih. Sraddham bhagasya murdhani vacasa 
vedayamasi. 


Agni is kindled with Shraddha, faith in truth 
pursued with commitment in thought, word and deed. 
Oblations into fire are offered with complete faith and 
commitment to truth and sincerity of conviction. And 
we, on top of life’s highest glory, celebrate and exalt 
faith with the sacred Word of the Veda and declare it as 
commitment to truth and reason. 


प्रियं श्रद्धे दद॑तः प्रियं she दिर्दासतः। 
प्रियं भोजेषु यज्व॑स्विदं म॑ उदितं कुधि॥२॥ 


1126 RGVEDA 


2: Priyam sraddhe dadatah priyam sraddhe dida- 
satah. Priyam bhojesu yajvasvidam ma uditam 
krdhi. 


O Shraddha, faith committed to truth, reason and 
more, do good to the faithful who give. Shraddha, do 
good to the faithful disposed to give. Do good to those 
who give and those who receive. Do good to the 
performers as well as to the beneficiaries of yajna. Pray 
do this and justify what I have said of faith and truth. 


यथां देवा असुरेषु श्रद्दामुगरेषुं चक्रिरे । 
एवं भोजेषु यज्व॑स्वस्माकमुदितं कधि ॥ ३॥ 


Yatha deva asuresu sraddhamugresu cakrire. 
Evam bhojesu yajvasvasmakamuditam krdhi. 


Just as noble and creative powers have faith in 
how they must deal with the cruel and the evil doers, so 
let my word of faith and truth be justified in relation to 
the generous and the yajnics for their success and 
fulfilment. 


श्रब्दां देवा यज॑माना वायुगोपा उपासते | 
श्रब्दां Cee याकूत्या श्रद्धयां विन्दते वसुं ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Sraddham deva yajamana vayugopa upasate. 
Sraddha hrdayyayakutya sraddhaya vindate vasu. 


Divinities of nature and humanity, performers 
of yajna, all protected by the universal energy of Vayu 
in meditation, love and value Shraddha without 
compromise. Shraddha, unshakable faith, which is 
heartfelt and unquestionable in conviction, deserves and 
earns wealth, honour and excellence in life. This is 
possible only by Shraddha. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 152 1127 


seat प्रातर्हवामहे श्रन्दां मध्यन्दिनं परिं। 

seat सूर्यस्य निप्रुचि श्रद्धे श्रद्धापयेह न॑: ॥ ५५ ॥ 
Sraddham pratarhavamahe sraddham madhyam- 

dinam pari. Sraddham suryasya nimruci Sraddhe 

sraddhapayeha nah. 

We invoke, love and worship divine faith in 
truth, at dawn. We love and worship faith in truth at the 
mid-day session of yajna. We love and worship 
Shraddha at the time of sun-set. O Shraddha, faith in 
truth and divinity, pray establish us all in faith in truth, 
charity and service of both divinity and humanity. 


Mandalal10/Sukta 152 
Indra Devata, Shasa Bharadvaja Rshi 
शास इत्था Tet अंस्यमित्रखादो sta: | 
न यस्य॑ ead सखा न जीय॑ते कदां STN ९॥ 
if Savasa ittha asyamitrakhado adbhutah. 
Na yasya hanyate sakha na jiyate kada cana. 


Indra, you are truly the great ruler and controller 
of the world, wondrous unique, destroyer of unfriendly 
and negative forces, supreme power whose friend and 
devotee is never destroyed, never hurt, never overcome. 


स्वस्तिदा fasreafddaer विमृधो वशी । 
वृषेन्द्रः पुर Ud नः सोमपा अभयंकरः ॥ २॥ 

2. Svastida visaspatirvrtraha vimrdho vast. 
Vrsendrah pura etu nah somapa abhayamkarah. 


Generous and virile Indra, giver of happiness 
and all round well being, ruler and protector of the 


1128 RGVEDA 


people, destroyer of darkness, sin and evil, who destroys 
enemies and rules and controls the world, may, we pray, 
ever be with us as protector and promoter of the soma 
joy of his creation and give us freedom from fear and 
oppression. 


fa vat वि geil जहि वि वृत्रस्य हनू रुज । 
वि मन्युमिन्द्र वृत्रहन्नमित्र॑स्याथिदासंतः॥ ३॥ 
ai Vi rakso vi mrdho jahi vi vrtrasya hanu ruja. 


Vi manyumindra vrtrahannamitrasyabhidasatah. 


Destroyer of the demon and the destroyer, break 
the jaws of evil. O Indra, destroyer of evil and darkness, 
shatter the mind and morale of the enemy who tries to 
suppress, subdue and enslave us. 


वि न॑ इन्द्रु मृधो जहि नीचा य॑च्छ पृतन्यतः। 
यो stent अथिदासत्यध॑रं गमया तम: ॥ ४॥ 

4. Vi na indra mrdho jahi nica yaccha prtanyatah. 
Yo asmam abhidasatyadharam gamaya tamah. 


Indra, throw off those powers and tendencies 
which seek to destroy us. Subdue those who seek to 
fight and subdue us. Take those down to deep darkness 
who seek to subdue and enslave us. 


अपेन्द्र द्विषतो मनोऽ प जिज्यासतो वधम्‌ । 
वि मन्योः शर्म यच्छ वरीयो यवया वधम्‌॥ ५ ॥ 


a: Apendra dvisato mano ’pa jijyasato vadham. 
Vi manyoh Sarma yaccha variyo yavaya vadham. 


Indra, beat off and eliminate the mind and 
intention of the jealous, blunt off the weapon of the 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 153 1129 


powers that wish to destroy. Let anger be calmed down, 
give us peace and comfort of higher order, and remove 
the killer death. 


Mandalal0/Sukta 153 
Indra Devata, Indramatara Devajamaya Rshis 


ईद्धय॑न्तीरपस्युव इन्द्रं जातमुपासते । 
भेजानासः सुवीर्यम्‌ gi 

il Inkhayantirapasyuva indram jatamupasate. 
Bhejanasah suviryam. 
Active, expressive and eloquent people, 
conscious of their rights and duties, serve and abide by 
the ruling power of the system, Indra, as it arises and 
advances, and while they do so they enjoy good health, 
honour and prosperity of life for themselves and their 
progeny. 
त्वमिन्द्र बत्मादधि सह॑सो जात sista: | 
त्वं वुंषन्वृषेदंसि ॥ २॥ 

2. Tvamindra baladadhi sahaso jata ojasah. 
Tvam vrsan vrsedasi. 


Ruling power, Indra, you have risen high by 
virtue of your strength, patient courage, and grandeur 
of personality. Generous as showers of blissful rain, you 
are mighty, excellent and refulgent as the sun. 


त्वमिन्द्रासि वृत्रहा ar -aftaratar: | 
उद्‌ द्यामस्तभ्ना ओज॑सा ॥ ३ ॥ 


2. Tvamindrasi vrtraha vyntariksamatirah. 
Ud dyamastabhna ojasa. 


1130 RGVEDA 


You, Indra, are destroyer of evil and demonic 
darkness of the system, breaker of the clouds for rain, 
you cross the skies and, like the sun sustaining the 
regions of light by its self-refulgence, you sustain the 
rule of light and law by your own charismatic grandeur 
of character and personality. 


त्वमिन्द्र सजोष॑समर्कं बिभर्षि aret: | 
वच्च शिर्णान ओज॑सा ux ui 


4. Tvamindra sajosasamarkam bibharsi bahvoh. 


Vajram sisana ojasa. 


You, Indra, bear a united and participative 
refulgence of personal dignity and social brilliance, 
keeping the force of your arms and blaze of justice and 
rectitude fresh and shining by the constant manifestation 
of your dynamic vigour of personality. 


त्वमिन्द्राथिभूरसि विर्वा जातान्योज॑सा। 
स विश्वा भुव आभ॑वः॥५॥ 

5. Tvamindrabhibhurasi visva jatanyojasa. 
Sa visva bhuva abhavah. 


You, Indra, are the supreme ruler over all things 
come into existence by your self-refulgence which 
indeed is the light and life of all the worlds. O ruler, 
you too be that all over the world. 


Mandalal0/Sukta 154 
Bhava-vrttam Devata, Yami Vaivasvati Rshi 


सोम एकेभ्यः पवते घृतमेक उपांसते। 
येभ्यो मधुं प्रधावंति तांश्चिदेवापि गच्छतात्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 154 1131 


im Soma ekebhyah pavate ghrtameka upasate. 
Yebhyo madhu pradhavati tamscidevapi gaccha- 
tat. 

Soma flows for many, they chant the Samans. 

Many love ghrta for the yajna fire, they chant the Yajus. 

Honey flows for those who chant the Atharva verses, 

and knowledge for the lovers of Rks. The spirit of life 

flows for all them, universally. 


तप॑सा ये अ॑नाधूृष्यास्तप॑सा ये स्वर्ययुः । 
तपो ये च॑क्रिरे महस्तंश्चिंदेवापिं गच्छतात्‌ २॥ 
४ Tapasa ye anadhrsyastapasa ye svaryayuh. 
Tapo ye cakrire mahastamScidevapi gacchatat. 
There are those who by tapas rise undaunted, 
those who by tapas rise to the heaven of bliss, and those 
who perform tapas of high order. The spirit of life flows 
for all of them, universally. 
ये युध्य॑न्ते werty शूरासो ये तंनूत्यज॑ः | 
ये वां खहस्त्॑दक्षिणास्तोँश्चिंदेवापिं गच्छतात्‌ ॥ ३॥ 
3: Ye yudhyante pradhanesu Surdaso ye tanutyajah. 
Ye va sahasradaksinastamscidevapi gacchatat. 


There are the brave who fight to the end in 
battles, who give up the body, and those who give in 
charity a thousand ways. The spirit of life flows to them 
also, universally. 


ये facge sacrard ऋतावान ऋतावृधः । 
पितृन्तप॑स्वतो यम ata देवापिं गच्छतात्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ye cit purva rtasapa rtavana rtavrdhah. 
Pitrn tapasvato yama tamSscidevapi gacchatat. 


1132 RGVEDA 


And those ancients eternally committed to the 
truth of law, committed to the law of truth by yajna, 
promoters of truth and yajna, parents and forefathers 
established in tapas, O soul on travel in existence, the 
spirit of life flows to them and through them too, 
eternally. 


aeatiter: कवयो ये गोपायन्ति wt 
ऋषीन्तपंस्वतो यम तपोजा अपिं गच्छतात्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Sahasranithah kavayo ye gopayanti suryam. 
Rsin tapasvato yama tapojam api gacchatat. 


Poets, seers and sages of hundredfold vision and 
virtue who adhere to the light of eternity at heart, and 
the Rshis established in tapas, O soul on the sojourn of 
existence, the spirit of life flows to them all and through 
them all, eternally. 


Mandalal0/Sukta 155 


Alakshmighnam (1, 4), Brahmanaspati (2, 3), 
Vishvedevah (5) Devatah, Shirimbishtha Bharadvaja Rshi 


अरायि काणे fame गिरिं wee aera 
शिरिम्बिंठस्य सत्व॑धिस्तेभिष्ट्रा चातयामसि neu 


im Arayi kane vikate girim gaccha sadanve. 
Sirimbithasya satvabhistebhistva catayamasi. 


O Stingy deprivation, famine and misfortune, 
distorted in vision, crooked of character, always whining 
and protesting, get away to naught. We scare you away 
by those superior forces of profuse rains of the cloud 
on mountains where you too may go. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 155 1133 
चत्तो इतश्चत्तामुतः सवी भ्रूणान्यारुषीं । 
अराय्यं ब्रह्मणस्पते तीक्ष्णश्युद्धोदुषच्निहि॥ २॥ 


Catto itaScattamutah sarva bhrunanyarust. 
Arayyam brahmanaspate tiksnasrngodrsannihi. 


Gone from here, be gone from there also, away 


from the mountain and the cloud. O lord of cosmic force, 
sharp with catalytic energy, come here, destroying this 
presence of deprivation, famine and indigence. 


अदो यद्दारु प्तव॑ते सिन्धोः पारे अ॑पूरुषम्‌। 
तदा र॑भस्व दुर्हणो तेन॑ गच्छ परस्तरम्‌॥ २३ ॥ 


Ado yaddaru plavate sindhoh pare apurusam. 
Tada rabhasva durhano tena gaccha parasta- 
ram. 


O man destroyer of want and deprivation, see 


that unmanned wooden boat that floats on water to cross 
the flood, take to that and sail to the other side (to fight 
out this want through enterprise and initiative). 


meg प्राचीरजंगन्तोरो मण्डूरधाणिकीः | 
हता इन्द्र॑स्य शत्र॑वः सर्वे बुद्बुदयाशवः ॥  ॥ 


Yaddha pracirajagantoro manduradhanikth. 
Hata indrasya Satravah sarve budbudayasavah. 


When floods of water flow forth bearing iron 


ore, rejoicing as if with croaking frogs, all adversities, 
enemies of humanity, disappear like bubbles, at once. 


परीमे गाम॑नेषत पर्यथिमंहषत | 
देवेष्व॑क्रत्‌ श्रवः क SUT आ द॑धर्षति ॥ ५॥ 


1134 RGVEDA 


5: Parime gamanesata paryagnimahrsata. 
Devesvakrata sravah ka imam a dadharsati. 


These farmers lead the bullocks to the fields. 
They light the fires all round to cook and for yajna. 
They offer libations to the fire for natural forces. Who 
can push them down to the state of poverty and 
misfortune? (None.) 


Mandala10/Sukta 156 
Agni Devata, Ketu Agneya Rshi 


अगिं हिन्वन्तु नो धियः सक्िंमाशुमिंवाजिषु। 
तेन॑ जेष्प धनंधनम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


if Agnim hinvantu no dhiyah saptimasumivajisu. 
Tena jesma dhanamdhanam. 


Let our thought, will and actions research and 
develop fire energy like a fleet or horse spurred to battle 
for victory so that thereby we may achieve the real 
wealth of wealths. 


यया गा आकरामहे सेन॑याग्ने तवोत्या | 
तां नो हिन्व मघत्तये ।॥ २॥ 


De Yaya ga akaramahe senayagne tavotya. 
Tam no hinva maghattaye. 


O leading light of life, energy of fire, with your 
powers and means of protection by which we acquire 
our lands and develop our fields and cattle wealth, pray 
enhance and accelerate that same power for us for 
acquisition of wealth, power and honour. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 156 1135 


smd स्थूरं रयिं भ॑र पृथुं गोमन्तमश्विनम्‌ | 
अङ्धि खं वर्तयां पणिम्‌ 3 ॥ 


Di Agne sthuram rayim bhara prthum gomanta- 
masvinam. Angdhi kham vartaya panim. 


O light and fire of life, bring us solid, vast and 
lasting wealth rich in lands, cows and culture, horses, 
transport and achievement, fill the firmament with 
profuse rain and vapour, and turn poverty and indigence 
into plenty and generosity. 


अग्ने नक्षत्रमजरमा al? रोहयो fafa 
दधज््योतिजनिंभ्यः।॥ ४॥ 


4. Agne naksatramajarama suryam rohayo divi. 
Dadhajjyotirjanebhyah. 


Agni, light of life, ruler of existence, let the 
unaging sun, star of good fortune, rise high in heaven 
so that it may bring light and energy for humanity and 
enhance their well being. 


अगन केतुर्विशाम॑सि प्रेष्ठ : श्रेष्ठं उपस्थसत्‌। 
बोर्धां स्तोत्रे वयो दध॑त्‌॥ ५॥ 


0 Agne deturvisamasi presthah srestha uapastha- 
sat. Bodha stotre vayo dadhat. 


Agni, light and fire of life, you are the essential 
brilliant definition and identity of humanity, blazing 
ensign of human culture, dearest, best, closest, freest, 
bearing food, energy and enlightenment for the 
celebrant. Pray listen, enlighten, and bless. 


1136 RGVEDA 


Mandalal0/Sukta 157 


Vishvedeva devata, Bhuvana Aptya or Sadhana 
Bhauvana Rshi 


इमा नु कं भुव॑ना सीषधामेन्द्रश्च विशवे च देवाः ॥ ९॥ 


i; Ima nu kam bhuvana sisadhamendrasca visve ca 
devah. 


Let us proceed, study and win our goals, 
successfully and peacefully, across these regions of the 
world, study and harness electric energy, and let all 
divine forces of nature and nobilities of humanity be 
favourable to us. 


aa च॑ नस्तन्वं च प्रजां चादित्यैरिन्द्रः Ge चीं क्ट्छपाति 2 


2: Yajnam ca nastanvam ca praja cadityairindrah 
saha ctklrpdati. 


Indra, the sun, the wind, electric energy of the 
firmament with all year’s phases of the sun, supports, 
strengthens and promotes our yajna, our body’s health 
and our people and future generations. 


आदित्यैरिन्द्रः सग॑णो मरुद्भिरस्माकं भूत्वविता तनूर्नाम्‌॥ 3 ॥ 
रः Adityairindrah sagano marudbhirasmakam 
bhutvavita tanunam. 


May Indra, ruling power of the world with all 
its natural and human forces, winds and stormy troops 
across the sun’s phases over the year, be the protector 
and promoter of our health of body and social 
organisations. 


ward देवा असुरान्यदायन्देवा देवत्वम॑धिरक्षमाणाः ॥ ४ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 158 1137 


4. Hatvaya deva asuran yadayan deva devetvama- 
bhiraksamanah. 


Divine forces of nature and nobilities of 
humanity attain to their status of divine positivity when 
they come together to preserve, protect and promote 
the positive forces and destroy the demonic forces of 
negativity and destruction. 


प्रत्यञ्च॑मर्कम॑नयजञ्छ्चींभिरादित्स्वधामिंषिरां पर्यपर्यन्‌॥ & ॥ 


a. Pratyancamarkamanayanchacibhiradit svadha- 
misiram paryapasyan. 


When the Vishvedevas, divinities of nature and 
human nobilities, offer their songs of adoration in their 
best of yajnic homage higher and higher forward, then 
only they see and experience divine inspiration and 
invigoration descending to them step by step from 
divinity through nature to humanity. 


Mandalal10/Sukta 158 
Surya Devata, Chakshu Saurya Rshi 


सूर्यो नो दिवरस्पातु वातो अन्तरिंश्चात्‌। 
ait: पार्थिविभ्यः।॥ ९॥ 


0 Suryo no divaspatu vato antariksdt. 
Agnirnah parthivebhyah. 


May Surya, the sun, protect and promote us from 
the regions of light, may Vayu, the winds, protect and 
promote us from the middle regions of the sky, and may 
Agni, fire and vital heat, protect and promote us from 
the earthly regions. 


1138 RGVEDA 


wet सवितर्यस्य ते et: शातं सवां अर्हति। 
पाहि at दिद्युतः पत॑न्त्याः ॥ २॥ 


pA Josa saviraryasya te harah §atam savam arhati. 
Pahi no didyutah patantyah. 


O Savita, lord creator and giver of light and life, 
O sun, whose receptive and radiative refulgence is 
worthy of a hundred yajnic activities on earth and other 
planets by human and natural forces, pray accept our 
homage and prayer and protect and save us from the 
flying and falling strikes of light and lightning. 


चक्षुर्नो देवः afar चक्षुर्न उत पर्वतः | 
चक्षुर्धाता द॑धातु नः ॥ ३॥ 


3 Caksurno devah savita caksurna uta parvatah. 
Caksurdhata dadhatu nah. 


May Savita, generous refulgent sun, give us light 
of the eye, may the cloud and mountain give us light of 
the eye, and may Dhata, lord controller and sustainer of 
life on earth, bless us with light of the eye. 


चक्षुर्नो धेहि चक्षुषे चक्षर्विंख्यै तनूभ्यः । 
सं चेदं वि चं पश्येम ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Caksurno dhehi caksuse caksurvikhyai tanu- 
bhyah. Sam cedam vi ca pasyema. 


Give us the light for vision outer and inner, give 
us the light to see the past and future for ourselves and 
our children, give us the vision to see this life and the 
world as a whole as well as in parts integrated in the 
essence. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 159 1139 


सुसन्दुशं त्वा वयं प्रतिं पश्येम सूर्य । 


वि पश्येम नृचक्षसः ॥ ५॥ 
Susamdrsam tva vayam prati pasyema surya. 
Vi pasyema nrcaksasah. 
O refulgent Sun of blissful light, may we always 
see you, and again and again see you as high and higher 


divinity, and in your divine light see things worthy of 
being seen by humanity for our guidance. 


Mandalal10/Sukta 159 
Shachi Devata, Shachi Paulomi Rshi 


उदसौ सूर्यो अगादुदयं मामको भग॑ः। 
अहं तदि दुला पतिंमभ्य॑साक्षि विषासहिः ॥ ९ ॥ 


I. Udasau suryo agadudayam mamako bhagah. 
Aham tadvidvala patimabhyasaksi visasahih. 


There rises the sun. It is also my good fortune 
thus arisen. I know this for certain. I have found my 
protection and sustenance and I shall overcome all my 
rivals and adversaries. 


अहं केतुर हं मूर्धाहमुग्रा विवाच॑नी । 
ममेदनु क्रतुं पतिः सेहानाया उपाचरेत्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Aham keturaham murdhahamugra vivacani. 
Mamedanu kratum patih sohanaya upacaret. 


I am my own refulgence, I am the one on top, I 
am the passion and the fire. I speak and I must have the 
response. I am the challenger, my master would surely 
know my acts and intentions positively and would 
respond favourably. 


1140 RGVEDA 


मम॑ पुत्राः श॑त्रुहणोऽथों मे दुहिता fara! 
उताहमस्मि संजया पत्यौ मे शत्ोकं उत्तमः UB 

Mama putrah satruhano ’tho me duhita virdt. 
Utahamasmi sanjaya patyau me Sloka uttamah. 


My sons are destroyers of enmity. My daughter 
is refulgent. I am the victor all round, so my song of 
adoration rises to my master who is the light and life of 
the world. 


येनेन्द्रो हविषा कृत्व्यभ॑वद्‌ द्युम्न्यु॑त्तमः। 
इदं तद॑क्रि देवा असपत्ना किलाभुवम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Yenendro havisa krtvyabhavad dyumnyuttamah. 


Idam tadakri deva asapatna kilabhuvam. 


The means and holy materials by which Indra, 
master and ruler, rises to honour and glory in action, I 
create and follow, and thereby I become free from rivals 
and adversaries. 


अस पलना duets जय॑न्त्यथिभूवरी। 
आवुंक्षमन्यासां वर्चो राधो अस्थेयसामिव ॥ ५॥ 

5. Asapatna sapantaghrni jayantyabhibhuvart. 
Avrksamanyasam varco radho astheyasamiva. 


I have no rivals, I throw off the adversaries, I 
emerge the victor, greater than the challengers, I turn to 
naught the power and valour of others who are no better 
than passing gusts of mild winds. 


aasafiar अहं सपल्नीरथिभूवरी । 
यथाहमस्य वीरस्य॑ विराजानि जन॑स्य च ॥ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 160 1141 


6. Samajaisamima aham sapatnirabhibhuvari. 
Yathahamasya virasya virajani janasya ca. 
I, ruling presence, must win over all these rivals 


so that I might shine 111 the eyes of my master and shine 
and rule over this people. 


Mandalal10/Sukta 160 
Indra Devata, Purana Vaishvamitra Rshi 


तीव्रस्याभिव॑यसो अस्य पाहि सर्वर था वि हरीं इह मुञ्च । 
इन्द्र मा त्वा यज॑मानासो अन्ये नि रीरमन्तुभ्य॑पिमे 
सुतास: ॥ ९॥ 


1. Tivrasyabhivayaso asya pahi sarvaratha vi hari 
tha munca. Indra ma tva yajamanaso anye ni 
riraman tubhyamime sutasah. 


O ruler of the world, Indra, take on, protect and 
promote this vibrant youthful social order, release all 
the versatile and abundant resources of development 
here for this purpose, let no other programme or 
programmers distract your attention. For you and your 
purpose all these natural and human resources are ready, 
trained and matured to the full. 


तुभ्यं सुतास्तुभ्यमु सोत्वासस्त्वां गिर॒ : श्वात्र्या आ ह्वयन्ति | 
इन्द्रे ena सव॑नं जुषाणो विश्व॑स्य विद्धां इह पाहि 
सोम॑म्‌॥ २॥ 

pa Tubhyam sutastubhyamu sotvasastvam girah 


svatrya a hvayanti. Indredamadya savanam 
jusano visvasya vidvam iha pahi somam. 


To you are these resources dedicated, those that 
are ripe and ready and those that are being prepared. 


1142 RGVEDA 


Voices of sincere devotion call on you. Indra, knowing 
well, loving and fully dedicated to this world programme 
of development, take it on here and now, protect, 
promote and raise the world to the heights of attainment. 


य उशता मन॑सा सोम॑मस्मै सर्वहृदा देवकामः Gta । न 
गा इन्द्रस्तस्य परां ददाति प्रशटस्तमिच्यारुमस्यै कृणोति ॥ ३ ॥ 


of Ya uSata manasa somamasmai sarvahrda 
devakamah sunoti. Na ga indrastasya para dadati 
prasastamiccarumasmai krnoti. 


Whoever is loyal and dedicated with 
enthusiastic mind and total devotion of heart and soul, 
and creates and matures the soma of universal value for 
Indra and the social order, the lord never ignores his 
words of prayer, never alienates his property and 
possessions, in fact he recognises his services with 
honour and makes him feel proud and blest. 


अनुस्पष्टो भवत्येषो अस्य यो steht Tara सुनोति सोम॑म्‌। 
निररत्नौ मघवा तं द॑धाति ब्रहयद्विषो। हन्त्यनानुदिष्टः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Anuspasto bhavatyeso asya yo asmai revan na 
sunoti somam. Niraratnau maghava tam dadhati 
brahmadviso hantyananudistah. 


The lord keeps in close and direct vicinity the 
person who, like a generous prosperous man, creates 
and offers the soma of sincere dedication to him. He, 
lord of all power and glory, protects him in full security 
without the shackles, and even without prayer, destroys 
the enemies of positivity and divinity in the social order. 


अश्वायन्तो गव्यन्तों वाजयन्तो हर्वामहे त्वोप॑गन्तवा S| 
आभूष॑न्तस्ते सु मतौ नवायां वयमिन्द्र त्वा शुनं हुवेम ॥ ५॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 161 1143 


a Asvayanto gavyanto vajayanto havamahe tvopa- 
gantava u. Abhiusantaste sumatau navayam 
vayamindra tva Sunam huvema. 


Enthusiastic and advancing for progress, 
prosperity and pride of achievement, we call upon you, 
Indra, ruling lord of the world, to come close to us and 
be with us. Winning the graces of life and doing glory 
to divinity, we pray, let us abide in your favour and 
adorable good will. We pray for peace and well being, 
we ask for divine grace. 


Mandalal10/Sukta 161 


Indra-Agni or Rajayakshmanashanam Devata, 
Yakshmanashana Prajapatya Rshi 


मुञ्चामि त्वा हविषा जीव॑नाय कम॑ज्ञातयक्ष्मादुत राज- 
यक्ष्मात्‌ । ग्राहिर्जग्राह यदि वैतदेनं तस्या इन्द्राग्नी प्र 
मुमुक्तमेनम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


l. Muncami tva havisa jivanaya kamajnataya- 
ksmaduta rajayaksmat. Gravirjagraha yadi vaita- 
denam tasya indragni pra mumuktamenam. 


I cure you and release you from the consumptive 
killer disease even of the highest severity and immunize 
you against such disease, known or unknown, with the 
administration of medicine and tonics by homa so that 
you may live a full and happy life. And if stroke, atrophy 
or paralysis has seized this patient, then let Indra, 
penetrative beams of nature’s energy, and Agni, vital 
heat of life in the body, light of the sun and magnetic 
force of the earth cure and release the patient. 


1144 RGVEDA 


afd क्चितायुर्यदि वा Wat यदि मृत्योर॑न्तिकं नीत एव । 
तमा ह॑रापि निऋतेरुपस्थादस्पाषमेनं शतशारदाय ॥ २॥ 


0.0 Yadi ksitayuryadi va pareto yadi mrtyorantikam 
nita eva. Tama harami nirrterupasthadasparsa- 
menam Satasaradaya. 


If the patient is extremely debilitated, sunk 
beyond hope, almost gone to the brink of death, I touch 
and bring him back from the depth of despair to live his 
full hundred years of life. (The word ‘asparsham’ 
suggests the efficacy of touch therapy.) 


सहस्राक्षेण शतशारदेन starter हविषाहाषमिनम्‌। 
शतं यथेमं शरदो नयातीन्द्रो विश्व॑स्य दुरितस्य पारम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


छ Sahasraksena satasaradena Satayusa havisahar- 
samenam. Satam yathemam sarado nayatindro 
visvasya duritasya param. 


With medicines, herbs and tonics of a 
thousandfold efficacy of light power, a hundred year’s 
vitality capable of sustaining a hundred year span of 
life, I have brought this patient back to life and health 
just as Indra, lord of life and his physician version, the 
doctor, takes this patient across all evils and maladies 
of the world to a full life of hundred years. 


शतं जीव शारदो वर्धमानः शतं हंमन्ताज्छतमुं वसन्तान्‌ । 
शतमिनद्रागी सविता बृहस्पतिः शतायुषा हविषेमं पुनर्दुः ।॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Satan jiva Sarado vardhamanah Satarh hemanta- 


nchatamu vasantan. Satamindragni savita brhas- 
patih Satayusa havisemam punarduh. 


O patient, live a hundred years through autumn, 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 162 1145 


winter and spring seasons, rising, growing and 
advancing. May Indra, lord of strength, power and glory, 
Agni, lord of light and fire in the fore front, Savita, lord 
of life’s generation and sustenance, and Brhaspati, lord 
of space and radiant knowledge, bless you with 
hundredfold joy and vest you with hundredfold span of 
life again with herbs and medications of high order for 
good health. 


आहार्षं त्वाविंदं त्वा पुनरागाः पुनर्नव । 
सवीङ्घ सर्व" ते aay: सर्वमायुश्च तेऽ विदम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 
Di Aharsam tvavidam tva punaragah punarnava. 


Sarvanga sarvam te caksuh sarvamayusca te’- 
vidam. 


I have delivered you from death and disease, 
brought you back to life. Live life again, renewed, 
refreshed again, healthy over all in all limbs, organs 
and systems function. I have brought back your vision 
and understanding in full, your life and age in full. 


Mandalal0/Sukta 162 
Garbha Samsrave Prayashchittam Devata, Rakshoha 
Brahma Rshi 
ब्रह्मणाः संविदानो tatter बाधतामितः | 
अमीवा सस्ते गर्भ" दुर्णामा योनिमाशये ue 
il. Brahmanagnih samvidano raksoha badhata- 


mitah. Amiva yaste garbham durnama yonima- 
Saye. 


May Agni, ‘chitraka’, with Brahma, ‘udumbara’, 
combined according to the formula in medical literature, 


1146 RGVEDA 


destroy the infection and viral pain that has entered, 
infects and afflicts your foetus, ovary and uterus in the 
reproductive system. 


यस्ते गर्भममीवा दुर्णामा योनिमाशये । 
अगिष्टं ब्र्हमणा सह निष्क्रव्याद॑मनीनशत्‌॥ २॥ 


De Yaste garbhamamiva durnama yonimaSaye. 
Agnistam brahmana saha niskravyadamaninasat. 


The acute infection that has entered your womb 
in the reproductive system and consumes your foetus, 
let Agni, ‘chitraka’, in combination with Brahma, 
‘udumbara’, according to the specific formula, destroy 
and eliminate. 


यस्ते हन्तिं पतयन्तं Proc यः संरीसूपम्‌। 
जातं यस्ते जिघांसति तपितो नाशयामसि ॥ ३॥ 


a: Yaste hanti patayantam nisatsnum yah sarisrpam. 
Jatam yaste jighamsati tamito nasayamasi. 


Whatever afflicts the insemination and 
fertilisation process or the moving foetus or whatever 
hurts and damages your new born baby, we destroy from 
here, 


यस्तं ऊरू विहरत्यन्तरा दम्प॑ती शये । 

योनिं यो santos तमितो नाशयामसि ॥ ॐ ॥ 
4. Yasta uru viharatyantara dampati Saye. 

Yonim yo antarareliha tamito nasayamasi. 


Whatever disturbs your thighs, interferes with 
the conjugal relation of the wife and husband, disturbs 
the couple in sleep or destroys the seed and the embryo 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 163 1147 
in the womb, we destroy and eliminate from here. 


यस्त्वा भ्राता पतिर्भूत्वा जारो भूत्वा निपद्यते | 
प्रजां यस्ते जिघांसति तपितो नाशयामसि ॥ ५ ॥ 
a. Yastva bhrata patirbhutva jaro bhutva nipadyate. 
Prajam yaste jighamsati tamito nasSayamasi. 
Whatever evil and afflication comes as brother, 
1.e., genetically, or as husband, i.e., through conjugal 
relationship, or otherwise through love and passion, and 
hurts, damages or destroys your progeny, we destroy 
and eliminate from here. 
यस्त्वा vada तम॑सा मोहयित्वा निपद्यते । 
प्रजां यस्ते जिघांसति तपितो नाशयामसि ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Yastva svapnena tamasa mohayitva nipadyate. 
Prajam yaste jighamsati tamito naSayamasi. 
Whoever or whatever approaches you either by 
creating dreams of reality or in the state of sleep or under 


veil of darkness or by hypnosis, and hurts or destroys 
your progeny, that we eliminate from here. 


Mandala10/Sukta 163 
Yakshma Nashanam Devata, Vivrha Kashyapa Rshi 


अक्षीभ्यां ते afters क्णीभ्यां छुवुंकादधि। 
यक्ष्मं शीर्षण्यं मस्तिष्कालिह्ाया वि daft ते॥ ९॥ 


I. Aksitbhyam te nasikabhyam karnabhyam chubu- 
kadadhi. Yaksmam Sirsanyam mastiskajjihvaya vi 
vrhami te. 


I eliminate the consumptive disease from your 


1148 RGVEDA 
eyes, nostrils, ears, mouth, head, fore head and tongue. 


ग्रीवाभ्य॑स्त उष्णिहाभ्यः कीकसाभ्यो अनूक्यात्‌ | 
यक्ष्मं दोषण्य4 मंसाभ्यां बाहुभ्यां वि date ते॥ २॥ 
2: Grivabhyasta usnihabhyah kikasabhyo anukyadt. 
Yaksmam dosanyamamsabhyam bahubhyam vi 
vrhami te. 
I remove the consumption, cancerous disease, 


from your throat, sinews, bones, spine, shoulders, arms 
and hands. 


आन्त्रेभ्यस्ते गुदाभ्यो वनिष्ठोर्हद॑यादधिं। 

यक्ष्मं मत॑स्नाभ्यां यक्नः warrant वि dart ते॥ ३॥ 
3: Antrebhyaste gudabhyo vanisthorhrdayadadhi. 

Yaksmam matasnabhyam yaknah plasibhyo vi 

vrhami te. 


I banish consumptive cancer from your 
intestines, rectum, colon, heart, kidneys, liver, and the 
lower and other parts of the digestive system. 
ऊरुभ्यां ते अष्ठीवद्धयां पार्ण्िभ्यां प्रप॑दाभ्याम्‌ | 
यक्षं श्रोणिभ्यां भासंदाद्धंस॑सो वि data ते॥ ४॥ 

4. Urubhyam te asthivadbhyam parsnibhyam 
prapadabhyam. Yaksmam sronibhyam bhasada- 
dbhamsaso vi vrhami te. 


I uproot the cancerous disease from your thighs, 
knees, heels, forefeet, hips, lower back and groin. 


मेह॑नाद्वनंकरंणाल्त्मो म॑भ्यस्ते नखेभ्यः | 
यक्ष्मं सर्व स्मादात्मनस्तयिदं वि daft ते॥ ५॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 164 1149 


=) Mehanadvanamkarandallomabhyaste nakhe- 
bhyah. Yaksmam sarvasmadatmanastamidam vi 
vrhami te. 


I uproot the cancerous disease from your 
prostate and urinary system, hair, nails and indeed I 
eliminate whatever wastes and consumes the vitality of 
your entire living system, I throw it out. 


aggrecan जातं पर्व॑णिपर्वणि। 
aed सर्व स्मादात्मनस्तयिदं वि date angi 


6. Angadangallomnolomno jatam parvaniparvani. 
Yaksmam sarvasmadatmanastamidam vi vrhami 
te. 


I eliminate the cancer, consumption and canker 
from every limb, every hair, every joint, wherever this 
wasting negativity takes root, from your entire living 
system, I throw it out for your life. 


Mandalal0/Sukta 164 
Duh-svapna Nashanam Devata, Pracheta Angirasa Rshi 


उपेहि मनसस्पतेऽ प॑ क्राम UST । 
परो नित्या आ dea बहुधा जीव॑तो मन॑: ॥ ९॥ 


ie Apehi manasaspte’pa krama parascara. 
Paro nirrtya a caksva bahudha jivato manah. 


Off with you, hypnosis of the mind, disturb not, 
get away and wander far around with death and 
adversity, and there proclaim that I am not for you, Iam 
alive, awake and alert, my mind is wakeful and versatile. 


1150 RGVEDA 


भद्रं वै वरं वृणते us युञ्जन्ति दक्षिणम्‌। 
ug वैवस्वते चक्षुर्बहुत्रा जीव॑तो मनं: ॥ २॥ 


pA Bhadram vai varam vrnate bhadram yunjanti 
daksinam. Bhadram vaivasvate caksurbahutra 
Jivato manah. 


People prefer to choose what is good and 
auspicious. They apply their mind to win the good and 
blissful. The eye is for the holy vision of the lord of 
refulgence. My mind is live and awake, alert and 
versatile. 


यदाशसा निःशसाभिशसोपारिम जाग्र॑तो यत्स्वपन्तः । 
अभिर्विंश्वान्यपं दुष्कृतान्यजुंष्टान्यारे अस्मद॑धातु ॥ ३॥ 


छ Yadasasa nih Sasabhisasoparima jagrato yat 
svapantah. Agnirvisvanyapa duskrtanyajusta- 
nyare asmad dadhatu. 


Whatever ill and undesirable we might have 
committed either in hope and expectation, or for fear 
and despair, or hate and calumny, while sleeping, 
dreaming or awake, may Agni, lord of light, giver of 
enlightenment, cast off all those alien evils and 
undesirables far away from us (leaving us only with the 
good and auspicious). 


यदिन्द्र ब्रह्मणस्पतेऽ fusté चरामसि। 
प्रचेता न आङ्िरसो द्विषतां पात्वंहसः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Yadindra brahmanaspate’bhidroham caramasi. 
Praceta na angiraso dvisatam patvamhasah. 


O lord omnipotent, Indra, O lord omniscient, 
giver of enlightenment, Brahmanaspati, whatever 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 165 1151 


hateful or malicious we might be facing or entertaining 
in thought and behaviour, may the divine spirit of 
knowledge, wisdom and love ever awake protect and 
save us from the sin and wrath of the enemies. 


अजैष्माद्यासनाम चाभूमानागसो वयम्‌। जा ग्रत्स्वघ्रः 
सङ्कल्पः पापो यं द्विष्मस्तं स ऋच्छतु योनो द्वेष्टि 
तमुंच्छतु ।॥ ५५ ॥ 


Ajaismadyasanama cabhumanagaso vayam. 
Jagratsvapnah samkalpah papo yam dvismastam 
sa rcchatu yo no dvesti tamrcchatu. 


(By the grace of Indra, Brahmanaspati, wakeful 
Pracheta and ever vibrant and loving Angirasa) we have 
won over sin and evil today, we have obtained love and 
freedom, and we have become pure and immaculate. 
Let the residue of sin and undesirable thought in the 
mind, if any, retire into that negativity hates us and which 
we reject. 


Mandalal10/Sukta 165 
Vishvedeva Devata, Nairrta Kapota Rshi 


This is a hymn of the Vishvedeva’s, i.e., the 
leading lights’, response to the arrival of a ‘pigeon’, 
bird of mysterious message, something like a 
premonition of destiny, and the human response with 
honour, acknowledgement and self-preparation. Any 
such message can be a message of love, friendship and 
cooperation, or it can be a message of disaster. In either 
case humanity must respond and make proper 
preparations to face the consequences. In modern terms, 
it is an ambassadorial hymn. 


1152 RGVEDA 


देवाः कपोतं इषितो यदिच्छन्दूतो Poker इदमाजगाम | 
तस्मा अर्चाम कृणवाम निष्कुतिं शं al अस्तु द्विपदे शं 
चतुष्पदे ॥ ९ ॥ 


I; Devah kapota isito yadicchan dito nirrtya idama- 
jagama. Tasma arcama krnavama niskrtimsam 
no astu dvipade sam catuspade. 


O Devas, leading lights of the nation, here is 
the pigeon, bird of message, ambassador from the land 
of destiny, come to deliver some message of deep intent. 
We honour the messenger and prepare for the response. 
May there be peace and well being for us, for our birds, 
animals and our people. 


शिवः कपोतं इषितो at अस्त्वनागा देवाः शकुनो गृहेषु | 
अभिर्हि विप्रो जुषतां हविर्नः परि हेतिः पश्चिणीं वृणक्तु ॥ २॥ 


2. Sivah kapota isito no astvanagd devah Sakuno 
grhesu. Agnirhi vipro jisatam havirnah pari hetih 
paksini no vrnaktu. 


May this bird sent from the land of destiny be 
good and auspicious for us. May the bird and its message 
be free from blame and violence in and for our homes. 
Let this vibrant messenger accept and enjoy our 
hospitality offered with faith and let there be no strike 
of the winged force of arms to disturb and uproot us 
from our settled land. 


हेतिः पक्षिणी न द॑भात्यस्मानाष््यां पदं कुणुते sifirery 
शं नो गोभ्यश्च पुरुषेभ्यश्चास्तु मा नो हिंसीदिह देवाः 
कपोतं; ॥ ३॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 165 1153 


a Hetih paksini na dabhatyasmanastryam padam 
krnute agnidhane. sam no gobhyasca puruse- 
bhyascastu ma no himsidiha devah kapotah. 


Let not the winged force of the messenger attack, 
destroy or deceive us. Let it create a place for itself in 
our space and in the yajnic hall. Let there be peace for 
our lands, cows and culture and for our people. O leading 
lights, this messenger must not hurt us here. 


Tera वद॑ति मोघमेतद्यत्कपोतं; TEA Pitta areal 
दूतः प्रहित एष एतत्तस्मैं यमाय नमो अस्तु मृत्यवे UX ॥ 


4. Yaduluko vadati moghametadyat kapotah 
padamagnau krnoti. Yasya dutah prahita esa 
etattasmai yamaya namo astu mrtyave. 


If the messenger is politic and speaks misleading 
and ambiguous language, that effort must be frustrated. 
If he thus risks his foot in the fire, then for his sender 
and controller let there be our thunderbolt for his death. 


ऋचा कपोतं नुदत प्रणोदमिषं मद॑न्तः परि गां न॑यध्वम्‌। 
संयोपयन्तो दुरितानि विवा हित्वा न ऊर्ज प्र प॑ता- 
wards: ॥ ५ ॥ 


a Rca kapotam nudata pranodamisam madantah 
pari gam nayadhvam. Samyopayanto duritani 
visva hitva na urjam pra patat patisthah. 


All the same, honour the messenger of the 
distant land with words of praise and courteous 
appreciation, and exhilarating him with choice 
hospitality, control your interpretaion positively and 
happily advance your message in response. Thus 
effacing all weaknesses and negativities of the message 


1154 RGVEDA 


and the response, send him back without having touched 
and compromised our power and force of the nation. 


Mandalal0/Sukta 166 
Sapatnaghnam Devata, Rshabha Vairaja or Rshabha 
Shakvara Rshi 

ऋषभं मा समानानां arab विषासदहिम्‌। 
हन्तारं शत्रूणां कृधि विराजं गोप॑तिं गर्वाम्‌॥ ९॥ 

1. Rsabham ma samananam sapatnanam visasahim. 
Hantaram satrunam krdhi viradjam gopatim 
gavam. 

Make me brave and generous among equals, 
challenger of rivals and adversaries, subduer of enemies, 
and brilliant leader, protector and promoter of lands, 
cows and culture of the peoples of the earth. 

अहमस्मि सपल्नहेन्द्र इवारिष्टो stata: | 
अधः सपत्ना मे पदोरिमे सर्वे अभि्ठिताः॥ २॥ 


2. Ahamasmi sapatnahendra ivaristo aksatah. 
Adhah sapatna me padorime sarve abhisthitah. 


I am like Indra, destroyer of adversaries, unhurt, 
uninjured, and unbroken. All these rivals, adversaries 
and enemies ranged against me are under my foot. 


अत्रैव वोऽ पिं नह्याम्युभे आर््रीडव Feat । 
वाच॑स्पते नि षेधेमान्यथा weet वदान्‌ ॥ ३॥ 


3: Atraiva vo’pinahyamyubhe artni iva jyaya. Vaca- 
spate ni sedheman yatha madadharam vadan. 


Here itself, both of you, rival parties, I bind and 


MANDAL - 10 / ऽ <^ - 166 1155 


hold you together in balance like the bow string holding 
both ends of the bow in tension. O Vachaspati, speaker 
and master of the Word of order and law of judgement, 
control these so that they speak under my discipline 
and control. 


अभिभूरहमागमं विश्वकर्मेण art 
an व॑ज्चित्तमा al व्रतमा वोऽ हं समितिं ee uw 


4. Abhibhurahamagamam visvakarmena dhanma. 
A vascittama vo vratama vo’ham samitim dade. 


I am the controller and disciplinarian over all, 
come with the light and power over the entire activity 
here. I take over, accept and honour your mind and 
speech, your law, discipline and behaviour, and your 
assembly under my power and control. 


योगक्चेमं व॑ आदायाहं भूयासमुत्तम आ वो मूर्धानमक्रमीम्‌ | 
अधस्यदान्म उद्व॑दत मण्डूकाइवोदकान्मण्डूका। उद्का- 
दिंव॥५॥ 


a: Yogaksemam va adayaham bhuydsamuttama a vo 
murdhanamakramim. Adhaspadanma udvadata 
manduka ivodakanmanduka udakadiva. 


Having taken over the power and responsibility 
of the defence, protection and security of public 
achievements and the progress and advancement of the 
nation further, and having become the highest and best 
of equals, I strive to lead you up to your highest and 
farthest possibility, and then under the law and discipline 
of the highest office of government, you would raise 
your voice of choice and freedom as free and vocal 
citizens in a state of transparent clarity, as a celebrant 


1156 RGVEDA 


society in a joyous state of advancement upward. 


Mandalal0/Sukta 167 


Indra and others Devata, Vishvamitra and 
Jamadagni Rshis 


तुभ्येदमिन्द्र परि षिच्यते मधु त्वं सुतस्य॑ कलशस्य राजसि | 
त्वं रयिं पुंरूवीरामु नस्कृधि त्वं तप॑: परितप्याजयः स्व॑: ॥ ९॥ 


1. Tubhyedamindra pari sicyate madhu tvam sutasya 
kalasasya rajasi. Tvam rayim paruviramu naskr- 
dhi tvam tapah paritapyajayah svah. 


Indra, ruler of the human nation, this exciting 
sweet soma state of society is matured and perfected 
for you to govern and enjoy your office. You rule and 
administer the state of law and order in perfect form. 
Pray create for us now the wealth and honour of an 
abundant youthful nation worthy of the brave. You have 
achieved this happy and heavenly state of the 
commonwealth through an arduous discipline of life 
and work. 


स्वर्जितं महिं मन्दानमन्ध॑सो gate UR शक्रं Yat उप॑ । 
इमं at यज्पिह बोध्या ग॑हि स्पृधो जय॑न्तं पघवान- 
मीमहे ।। २॥ 


2. Svarjitam mahi mandanamandhaso havamahe 
pari Sakram sutam upa. Imam no yajnamiha 
bodhya gahi sprdho jayantam maghavanami- 
mahe. 

Mighty winner of high renown, creator of a high 


state of freedom and happiness, lover and giver of the 
joy of achievement, we invite and adore you. Pray 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 167 1157 


acknowledge this yajnic success of our corporate 
creative struggle for social development, come and take 
it over. We invoke, exhort and exalt the mighty victor 
over rivals, adversaries and fighting forces of the 
enemies of life and humanity. 


सोम॑स्य राज्ञो वरुणस्य धर्मणि बृहस्पतेरनुंमत्या उ VT FUT | 
तवाहमद्य म॑घवन्नुप॑स्तुतौ धातर्विधातः कलशौ अभक्ष- 
यम्‌॥ ३॥ 


2. Somasya rajno varunasya dharmani brhaspatera- 
numatya u sarmani. Tavahamadya maghava- 
nnupastutau dhatarvidhatah kalasam abha- 
ksayam. 


O Maghavan, lord of power and glory, Dhata, 
ruler, Vidhata, controller of the state and its 
administration, this day I invite you to the holy 
investiture and to take over the various departments and 
institutions of the state in the ruling order of the law of 
Soma, peace, and Varuna, justice, in the house of 
Brhaspati, supreme presiding power, and Anumati, will 
of the nation. 


प्रसूतो भक्षमकरं चरावपि स्तोमं चेमं dea: सूरिरुन्परंजे। 
सुते सातेन यद्याग॑मं वां प्रतिं विश्वामित्रजमदग्री दमे ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Prasuto bhaksamakaram caravapi stomam 
cemam prathamah surirunmrje. Sute satena 
yadyagamam vam prati visvamitrajamadagni 
dame. 

O Vishvamitra, holy spirit of universal love and 


friendship, Jamadagni, blazing fire and radiant light of 
yajna, as I come up to you duty bound in this ruling 


1158 RGVEDA 


order enacted by the people, with the authority vested 
in me by the social will, now I, invested and anointed, 
take over the office of the state ruler, accept and honour 
this holy order, and first of all, with the best of 
knowledge, will and confidence, I would maintain the 
purity and glory of the order, I promise. 


Mandalal10/Sukta 168 
Vayu Devata, Anila Vatayana Rshi 


वात॑स्य नु महिमानं रथ॑स्य रुजच्नेति स्तनय॑न्नरस्य are: | 
दिविस्यूग्यात्यरूणानिं कृण्वन्नुतो एति पृथिव्या रेणुम- 
स्य॑न्‌॥ ९॥ 


1. Vatasya nu mahimanam rathasya rujanneti 
stanayannasya ghosah. Divisprgaydatyarunani 
krnvannuto eti prthivya renumasyan. 


Let us describe the greatness of the impetuous 
chariot of the wind: the storm goes roaring, thundering, 
crashing, shattering as it blows, touching the heights of 
heaven, raising a storm of dust over earth, and turning 
the skies red in all directions. 


सं प्रर॑ते अनु वात॑स्य विष्ठा एेनं गच्छन्ति सम॑नं न योषाः | 
ताभिः सयुक्सरथं देव fads स्य विश्व॑स्य भुव॑नस्य 
राजा uu 


2 Sam prerate anu vatasya vistha enam gacchanti 
samanam na yosah. Tabhih sayuk saratham deva 
tyate’sya visvasya bhuvanasya raja. 


Plants, creepers and solid structures on earth, 
like trees, wave and shake in deference to Vayu, wind 
energy, just as youthful maidens go to their love and 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 168 1159 


flashes of lighting go with the sky. And one with all 
these, goes the ruling energy of this whole universe, 
divine wind on the chariot of its currents. 


अन्तरिश्रे पथिधिरीय॑मानो न नि fasta कतमच्यनाहंः | 
अपां सखा प्रथमजा ऋतावा क्व॑ स्विज्नातः कुत॒ आ 
aye ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. Antarikse pathibhirtyamano na ni visate katama- 
ccanaha. Apam sakha prathamaja rtava kva 
svijjatah kuta a babhuva. 


Ever on the move by its own paths in the sky, 
the wind energy does not relent even for an instant. 
Friend and comrade of the waters, first born of nature 
after space, observing the divine laws of existence, 
where was it born? Where and whence emerged? 


आत्मा देवानां भुव॑नस्य गर्भो यथावशं च॑रति देव WH: | 
घोषा इदस्य श्वुण्विरे न रूपं तस्मै वाताय हविषां विधेम ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Atma devanam bhuvanasya garbho yathavasam 
carati deva esah. Ghosa idasya $rnvire na rupam 
tasmai vataya havisa vidhema. 


Energy and identity of the divine forces of 
nature, sustainer of the universe, this divine wind roams 
around at will freely. We have heard the roar of it but 
we have not seen its form. To that divine Vayu, we offer 
homage and adoration with oblations of havi to develop 
energy. 


1160 RGVEDA 


Mandalal10/Sukta 169 
Gavah Devata, Shabara Kakshivata Rshi 


मयोभूर्वातो! अभि वातूस्रा ऊर्ज स्वतीरोष॑धीरा रिशन्ताम्‌ | 
पीवंस्वतीर्जी वधंन्याः पिबन्त्वव॒साय॑ पद्वते रुद्र मृच्छ 112 


if Mayobhurvato abhi vatusra urjasvatirosadhira 
risantam. Pivasvatirjivadhanyah pibantvavasaya 
padvate rudra mrla. 


May the wind blow fresh, delightful, exciting 
and blissful. Let cows feed on nourishing and energising 
herbs and grasses and drink abundant life giving waters. 
O Rudra, divine spirit of peace, joy and compassion, be 
kind and generous to the animals to provide them with 
ample food and water. 


याः सरूपा विरूपा एकरूपा arate नार्मानि ae 1 
या अद्धिःरसस्तप॑सेह weed: पर्जन्य महि शर्म॑ 
TSW २॥ 


(१ Yah sarupa virupa ekarupa yasamagniristya 
namani veda. Ya angirasastapaseha cakru- 
stabhyah parjanya mahi Sarma yaccha. 


O Parjanya, generous powers of life and liquid 
nourishment, provide great peace, comfort, protection 
and felicity to cows and other animals of similar species, 
different forms but the same one genus, whose names 
and qualities, Agni, the scientist, knows through 
developmental study, and which the Angirasas, 
technologists, have developed through continuous 
dedicated research and experimentation. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 169 1161 


या देवेषु तन्व tara यासां सोमो विश्वां रूपाणि वेद । 
ता अस्मभ्यं पय॑सा पिन्व॑मानाः प्रजाव॑तीरिन्द्र गोष्ठे 
रिरीहि॥ ३॥ 


2 Ya devesu tanvamairayanta yasam somo visva 
rupani veda. Ta asmabhyam payasa pinvamanah 
prajavatirindra gosthe rirthi. 


Indra, ruler and controller of life’s development 
and progress, bring to our dairy farms those cows which 
produce and yield abundant quality milk for noble and 
brilliant people, all forms, breeds and qualities, of which 
creative experts know, which yield more and more milk 
for our health and growth, and which produce better 
and better breed of calves. 


प्रजापतिर्मह्य॑मेता रराणो विश्वैर्देवैः foal: संविदानः। 
शिवाः सतीरुप नो गोष्ठमाकस्तासां वयं प्रजया सं 
स॑देम su 


4. Prajapatirmahyameta rarano visvairdevaih pitr- 
bhih samvidanah. Sivah satirupa nogosthama- 
kastasam vayam prajaya sam sadema. 


Prajapati, lord protector, sustainer and promoter 
of the people with all divine energies of nature’s 
brilliance and nourishment, and the nation’s food 
minister with active consultation and advice of all 
brilliant scholars and nutrition experts of the land, give 
us these cows with joyous enthusiasm and bring to our 
cow Stall such cows as are the best and most abundant 
in nourishing milk. May we continue to benefit from 
the cow’s progeny of excellent breed. 


1162 RGVEDA 


Mandalal10/Sukta 170 
Surya Devata, Vibhrat Saurya Rshi 


विभ्राड्‌ geftiag सोम्यं मध्वायुर्द॑धंद्यज्ञप॑ता वविंहुतम्‌ । 
वात॑जूतो यो sifureifa त्मना प्रजाः पुपोष पुरुधा वि 
राजति ॥ ९॥ 


1. Vibhrad brhat somyam madhvayurdadhadyajna- 
patavavihrutam. Vatajuto yo abhiraksati tmana 
prajah puposa purudha vi rajati. 


May the mighty refulgent sun hold, shower, 
protect and promote the honey sweets of life’s soma 
nourishment, and bear and bring untainted health and 
long life for the performer and promoter of yajna, the 
sun which, energised by Vayu energy of divine nature 
protects and sustains all forms of life by its very essence, 
shines and rules life in many ways. 


विभ्राड्‌ gequd वाजसात॑मं धर्मन्दिवो धरुणे सत्यम- 
पितम्‌। अमित्रहा dae द॑स्युंत॑मं ज्योतिं्जज्ञे असुर हा 
संपल्नहा ॥ २॥ 


Ze Vibhrad brhat subhrtam vajasatamam dharman 
divo dharune satyamarpitam. Amitraha vrtraha 
dasyuhantamam jyotirjajne asuraha sapatnaha. 


The mighty refulgent sun, destroyer of 
unfriendly forces, darkness and evil, anti-life elements, 
adversaries and enemies, rises, bearing the light that is 
the highest giver of food, energy and growing 
advancement. Truly vested in the established order of 
nature in the solar region, blissfully sustained, it is the 
highest killer of negative and destructive forces 
prevailing in life and nature. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 171 1163 


इदं SS ज्योतिषां ज्योतिरुत्तमं विंश्वजिन्द॑ नजिदुच्यते ged | 


विश्वभ्राङ्‌ भ्राजो महि सूर्यो दृश se प॑प्रथे सह ओजो 
अच्युतम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 

Idam Ssrestham jyotisam jyotiruttamam visvaji- 
ddhanajiducyate brhat. Visvabhrad bhrajo mahi 
suryo drsa uru paprathe saha ojo acyutam. 


This mighty best and highest light of lights is 


exalted as universally pervasive winner and giver of 
wealth. This world illuminant light, great sun, is the 
light for the world’s vision. It expands far and wide, 
undaunted lustre and majesty that it is, imperishable and 
eternal. 


विभ्राजञ्ज्योतिंषा स्व श्रग॑च्छो रोचनं fea: । येनेमा विश्वा 
भुव॑नान्याभुंता विश्वकर्मणा विश्वदेव्यावता ॥ ४ ॥ 


Vibhrajanjyotisa svaragaccho rocanam divah. 
Yenema visva bhuvananyabhrta visvakarmana 
visvadevyavata. 


Blazing with self-refulgence, light of heaven, 


you pervade all regions from earth to heaven. By you 
are all these world regions sustained, omnipotent divine 
lord of universal action and universal glory: Vishvadeva. 


Mandalal10/Sukta 171 
Indra Devata, Ita Bhargava Rshi 
त्वं त्यमिटतो रथमिन्द्र प्राव॑: सुतावतः | 
sialon: सोमिनो हव॑म्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


Tvam tyamitato rathamindra pravah sutavatah. 
Asrnoh somino havam. 


1164 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord omnipotent, you hear the invocation 
and prayer of soma yajna, and you honour, protect and 
sustain the cherished desire of the celebrant who moves 
on way to divinity through meditation and yajna and 
distils the Soma for offering. 


त्वं मखस्य दोध॑तः शिरोऽ व॑ त्वचो भ॑रः। 
अग॑च्छः सोमिनो गृहम्‌ ॥ २॥ 
2. Tvam makhasya dodhatah siro’va tvaco bharah. 


Agacchah somino grham. 


You forsake the body and mind of the dissolute 
scoffer of yajna, and you reach and bless the house of 
the devotee who performs yajna and offers you the 
homage of exalted devotion, joyous divine soma. 


त्वं त्यमिन्द्र मर्त्य मास््रबुध्नायं वेन्यम्‌। 
We: श्रथ्ना मनस्यवे ।। ३ ॥ 


3. Tvam tyamindra martyamastrabudhnaya venyam. 
Muhuh Ssrathna manasyave. 


Indra, for the man of meditative thought and 
vision on way to freedom of the spirit over body, pray 
slacken and cast off the bonds of mortal love, hate and 
jealousy constantly, without relent. 


त्वं त्यमिन्द्र सूर्य' पश्चा सन्तं पुरस्कृधि । 
देवानां चित्तिरो ashi ४॥ 

4. Tvam tyamindra suryam pasca puraskrdhi. 
Devanam cittiro vasam. 


Indra, let the sun, now gone out of sight in the 
west, arise upfront in the east, mystery otherwise beyond 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 172 1165 
the reach of the devas, the senses. 
Mandalal10/Sukta 172 
Usha Devata, Samvarta Angirasa Rshi 
आ याहि वन॑सा ae गाव॑: सचन्त वर्तनिं यदूध॑भिः eu 


iP A yahi vanasé saha gavah sacanta vartanim 
yadudhabhih. 


Come, O Dawn, with holy light, with rays of 
blissful radiance on the chariot. The cows are on the 
move with the wealth of milk. 


आ याहि avert धिया Hest जार यन्म॑खः सुदानुभिः ॥ २ ॥ 
2. A yahi vasvya dhiya mamhistho jarayanmakhah 
sudanubhih. 

Come with blessed intelligence and holy action. 
The most generous yajamana is on way to completion 
of the yajna with most liberal gifts of homage. 

पितुभृतो न तन्तुमित्सुदान॑वः प्रतिं दध्मो यजामसि ॥ ३ ॥ 
a; Pitubhrto na tantumit sudanavah prati dadhmo 
yajamasi. 

Like generous performers of yajna bearing 
homage of havi and food, we carry on the thread of life 
and yajna from dawn to dawn. 

उषा अप स्वसुस्तमः सं व॑र्तयति वर्तनिं सुजातता ।॥ ॐ ॥ 
4. Usa apa svasustamah sam vartayati vartanim 
sujatata. 

The dawn continuously removes the darkness 
of its sister night, by circular motion of its rise every 


1166 RGVEDA 


morning through the succession of day and night. 


Mandalal10/Sukta 173 
Raja Devata, Dhruva Angirasa Rshi 


आ त्वाहार्षमन्तरेधि श्ुवस्तिष्ठाविंचाचलिरिः। 
विशस्त्वा सवौ वाञ्छन्तु मा त्वद्राषटमधिं भ्रशत्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


i; A tvaharsamanteradhi dhruvastisthavicacalih. 
Visastva sarva vanchantu ma tvadrastramadhi 
bhrasat. 


I, high priest of the nation, take you, O Ruler, to 
the high seat of governance and pray take it in our midst. 
Be firm, stay undisturbed. All the people have chosen 
and welcome you. Let not the state suffer embarrassment 
because of you, nor must the state fall foul of you. 


इहैवैधि ard च्योष्ठाः ud agarfatarate: 1 
इन्द्र इवेह TARA SS USA धारय ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Thaivaidhi mapa cyosthah parvata ivavicacalih. 
Indra iaveha dhruvastistheha rastramu dharaya. 


Here only, on this seat, Indra, be firm as a rock, 
never vascillate. Here as the one supreme, pole star of 
the nation, stay, rule and sustain the Rashtra, one 
organismic, self-governing, well governed common 
wealth, brilliant, glorious. 


इममिन्द्रो अदीधरद्‌ ye श्युवेणं हविषां | 
तस्मै सोमो अधि ब्रवत्तस्मां उ ब्रह्मणस्पतिः ॥ ३॥ 


3 Imamindro adidharad dhruvam dhruvena havisa. 
Tasmai somo adhi bravat tasma u brahmana- 
spatih. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 173 1167 


This common wealth, Indra, lord all potent, is 
committed to you. And this common wealth, the ruler 
holds and maintains steady, firm, inviolable, with the 
homage gift of steady, unshaken and unshakable rule 
and governance. O Ruler, to you and for this Rashtra, 
Soma Brahmanaspati, the divine, peaceable Advisor 
who knows, observes and communicates the wisdom 
of universal vision and conscience, speaks, and to this 
he holds you committed. 


gan eiear पुंथिवी gqara: पर्वता इमे । 
qa विश्वमिदं जग॑द्‌ gat राजा विशामयम्‌ ॥  ॥ 


4. Dhruva dhaurdhruva prthivi dhruvasah parvata 
ime. Dhruvam visvamidam jagad dhruvo raja 
visamayam. 

Firm is heaven, firm is the earth, firm are these 
mountains. Firm is this universe which is ever on the 
move, steadily and balanced at the optimum. Firm is 
this ruler of the people, steady, dynamic with optimum 
balance of constant movement. 


qa ते राजा वरुणो ya देवो बृहस्पतिः | 
qa त इन्द्रश्चागिश्च॑ us धारयतां qa ॥ ५ ॥ 


a, Dhruvam te raja varuno dhruvam devo brha- 
spatih. Dhruvam ta indrascagnisca rastram 
dharayatam dhruvam. 


For you, the brilliant ruling Varuna, head of law 
and justice, firmly maintains the state of law and order. 
Brilliant and generous Brhaspati, chief advisor, with 
supreme vision and knowledge of the nation’s genius, 
firmly maintains the character and culture of the nation. 


1168 RGVEDA 


For you, the commander of the nation’s forces, Indra, 
firmly maintains the peace and protection of the state. 
For you does Agni, enlightened leader of education and 
research, maintain the system of education and 
employment. May all these chiefs help you maintain 
the Rashtra firm, dynamic, steady and inviolable. 


qa श्चुवेणं हविषाभि सोमं मृशामसि । 
अथो त इन्द्रः के व॑त्लीर्विशों बलिहतंस्करत्‌॥। ६ ॥ 


6. Dhruvam dhruvena havisabhi somam mrsamasi. 
Atho ta indrah kevalirviso balihrtaskarat. 


With steady and undisturbed will and homage 
we accept, honour and support the firm, steady and 
unshakable Soma Ruler dedicated to peace and progress. 
May Indra, omnipotent ruler of the universe, enlighten 
and commit the people solely to the nation and the ruler 
so that they pay their due share of homage and gifts of 
havi for the yajnic governance of the common-wealth. 
(Let no one neglect the payment of taxes.) 


Mandalal10/Sukta 174 
Raja Devata, Abhivarta Angirasa Rshi 
अभीवर्तेन हविषा येनेन्द्रो अभिवावृते। 
तेनास्मान्ब्र॑ह्यणस्पतेऽ भि usta वर्तय। ९॥ 
iB Abhivartena havisa yenendro abhivavrte. 


Tenasman brahmanaspate’ bhi rastraya vartaya. 


O Brahmanaspati, lord of knowledge, 
governance and statecraft, enlighten us for dedication 
to the Rashtra, commonwealth of the people, with those 
means and methods of advancement and victory by 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 174 1169 


which Indra, ruler, advances to planned and time bound 
goals of progress and victory. 


अभिवृत्य aualafar या नो arta: | 
अभि da-ard तिष्ठाभि at न॑ इर स्यति 0 २॥ 


2. Abhivrtya sapatnanabhi ya no aratayah. 
Abhi prtanyantam tisthabhi yo na irasyati. 


O ruler commander of the nation, having 
surrounded and cornered the adversaries, our selfish 
exploiters, whoever want to wage war against us, or 
who hate and envy to down us, break down their force 
and rule over them. 


अभि त्वां देवः सविताभि सोमो stata! 
अभि त्वा विश्वा भूतान्य॑भीवर्तो यथास॑सि ॥ ३ ॥ 


ध Abhi tva devah savitabhi somo avivrtat. 
Abhi tva visva bhutanyabhivarto yathasasi. 


May the self-refulgent Savita, creative sun, 
Soma, nature’s spirit of peace and joy, and all the forms 
of matter, energy, thought and life of the universe, ever 
advance you so that you may rule over the world. 


येनेन्द्रो हविषा कृत्व्यभ॑वद्‌ द्युम्न्युत्तमः। 
इदं तद॑क्रि देवा असपलः कित्छभुवम्‌॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Yenendro havisakrtvyabhavad dyumnyuttamah. 


Idam tadakri deva asapatnah kilabhuvam. 


That input of vision, knowledge and action, that 
homage of faith and havi into Rashtra yajna by which 
Indra becomes a great performer, glorious, best and 
highest, that homage, O devas, brilliancies of nature 


1170 RGVEDA 


and humanity, I have done so that I may become free 
from rivals, adversaries and enemies. 
असपलः संपल्नहाभिरराष्रो faarafe: | 
यथाहमेषां भूतानां विराजानि जन॑स्य च ॥ & ॥ 
5. Asapatnah sapatnaha ’bhirastro visasahih. 
Yathahamesam bhutanam virajani janasya ca. 


Destroyer of enemies, free from enemy forces, 
I must still be a challenger and subduer of rivals, 
adversaries, oppositions and contradictions so that as 
ruler of the state I may control and rule over these 
citizens and a host of other forms of life. 


Mandala10/Sukta 175 
Gravanah Devata, Urdhvagrava Sarpa Arbudi Rshi 
प्रवो ग्रावाणः सविता देवः dag धर्म॑णा। 
धूर्षु युज्यध्वं सुनुत ug 
iL Pravo gravanah savita devah suvatu dharmana. 


Dhursu yujyadhavam sunuta. 


O Gravana, veteran wise scholars and sages, 
may Savita, self-refulgent creator, the sun and the noble 
ruler inspire you with the sense of Dharma and noble 
performance so that you may be appointed to high 
positions and you play a positive and valuable part in 
state affairs. 


ग्रार्वाणो अप॑ दुच्छुनामपं Beret safer | 
Set: कर्तन भेषजम्‌ २॥ 


2. Gravano apa ducchunamapa sedhana durmatim. 
Usrah kartana bhesajam. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 176 1171 


O Gravana, yajnic participants in state affairs, 
remove the evils of ignorance, injustice and poverty, 
stop and cast away nonsense, negativity and cynicism, 
and being generous and brilliant like rays of the sun, 
cure the ailments and distresses of society. 


ग्रावाण उप॑रेष्वा म॑हीयन्ते स॒जोष॑सः | 
वृष्णो दध॑तो वृष्ण्यम्‌ 3 ॥ 

a Gravana uparesva mahiyante sajosasah. 
Vrsne dadhato vrsnyam. 

Sages and scholars in high positions, while they 
contribute generously to the power performance of the 
mighty generous ruler, they rise in honour and esteem 
among the people around since they love, respect and 
cooperate with them all. 

ग्रार्वाणः सविता नु al देवः सुवतु efor | 
यज॑मानाय सुन्वते ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Gravanah savita nu vo devah suvatu dharmana. 
Yajamanaya sunvate. 


O Gravana, sagely participants in national rule 
and development with the ruler and the people, may 
Savita, lord creator, the Ruler and the cooperative 
people, all generous and brilliant, inspire you with 
Dharma by Dharma for the generous creative yajamana, 
the ruler in council with the people in the Rashtra yajna. 


Mandala10/Sukta 176 
Rbhavah (1), Agni (2-4) Devata, Sunu Arbhava Rshi 
प्र सूनव ऋभूणां बृहन्नवन्त FSM | 
क्षामा ये विश्वधायसोऽ para न मातरम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


1172 RGVEDA 


1. Pra sunava rbhunam vrhannavanta vrjana. 
Ksama ye visvadhayaso’snan dhenum na mata- 
ram. 


The children and disciples of Rbhus, expert 
makers, celebrate their mighty achievements of science 
and technology and, sustainers of world community, 
children of mother earth, they reach and explore the 
earth for service and resources like calves rushing to 
mother cows. 


प्र देवं देव्या धिया भर॑ता जातवेदसम्‌ । 
हव्या नो वक्षदानुषक्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


ps Pra devam devya dhiya bharata jatavedasam. 
Havya no vaksadanusak. 


O scholars and experts, with your divine and 
brilliant intelligence and actions, serve Agni, spirit of 
the light and life of all that exists, which instantly bears 
our oblations abroad as well as brings us the creative 
rewards of yajna without fail. 


अयमु ष्य प्र देवयुर्होता यज्ञाय॑ नीयते । 
रथो न योर भीतो घणीवाञ्चेतति त्मना ॥ ३॥ 
Be Ayamu sya pra devayurhota yajnaya niyate. 


Ratho na yorabhivrto ghrnivancetati tmana. 


This Agni is the same lover of brilliant divines 
dedicated to life and nature which is the leading light 
and power of yajna and which is invoked and honoured 
for the completion and success of any creative project, 
the same which is radiant and dynamic like the solar 
chariot and, surrounded by celebrants, gives light, 
knowledge and showers of the joy of achievement. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 177 1173 


अयपथिरुरुष्यत्यमूर्तादिव जन्म॑नः। 
सह॑सणश्चित्सहींयान्देवो जीवात॑वे कृतः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ayamagnirurusyatyamrtadiva janmanah. 
Sahasascit sahiyan devo jivatave krtah. 


This Agni, self-refulgent power manifest in 
existence, saves and protects us as mortals born or 
reborn of immortal existence. Mightier than the 
mightiest, this divine power is kindled, honoured and 
adored for the victory of life over suffering and death. 


Mandalal10/Sukta 177 
Mayabheda Devata, Patanga Prajapatya Rshi 


पतङ्कमक्तमसुरस्य मायया हृदा प॑श्यन्ति मन॑सा विप- 
fad: समुद्रे अन्तः कवयो वि dara मरीचीनां पदमिं- 
च्छन्ति वेधसः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Patangamaktamasurasya mayaya hrda pasyanti 
manasa vipascitah. Samudre antah kavayo vi 
caksate maricinam padamicchanti vedasah. 


Men of wisdom with dedicated mind and heart 
see the ‘patanga’, bird-like soul, wrapped in golden hues 
of mysterious Maya, wondrous potential of the Lord’s 
Prakrti, in the boundless ocean of the world of existence. 
Men of vision and imagination see it existing within 
the oceanic presence of the infinite spirit of the Lord 
and, inspired by the lord’s love and presence, love to 
reach nothing but the ultimate reality at the centre of 
the radiating rays of existence. 


wast वाचं मन॑सा बिभर्ति तां ग॑न्धर्वोऽ वदद्र्भे' अन्तः। 
तां द्योत॑मानां स्वर्यं मनीषामृतस्यं पदे कवयो नि पान्ति ॥ २॥ 


1174 RGVEDA 


2: Patango vacam manasa bibharti tam gan- 
dharvo’vadadgarbhe antah. Tam dyotamanam 
svaryam manisamrtasya pade kavayo ni panti. 


Patanga, the soul flying in various forms, bears 
the eternal Vak, divine Word, at the depth of its mind. 
Vak is the voice which Parameshvara, sustainer of the 
voice and the universe, speaks to the soul at the heart of 
existence. That same resonant and refulgent voice and 
its awareness, wise visionaries retain, hear and enjoy in 
the state of samadhi communion at the centre of the 
ultimate truth of existence. 


अपंर्यं गोपामनिपद्यमानमा च परां च पथिभिश्चरन्तम्‌ 
स सध्रीचीः स विषुंचीर्वसान आ व॑रीवर्ति भुवनेष्वन्तः ॥ ३ ॥ 


६ Apasyam gopamanipadyamanama ca para ca 
pathibhiscarantam. Sa sadhricth sa visucirvasana 
a varivarti bhuvanesvantah. 


I see this retainer of the divine Voice and its 
senses and mind, the soul ranging over different paths 
around here and far off. Shining, wearing different 
forms, moving in the right central as well as various 
directions, it goes round and round in the worlds of 
existence. 


(This verse can also be interpreted in 
continuation of the second verse: I see this eternal 
infallible master of the eternal Voice, existential and 
transcendental both, the Spirit that vibrates and 
manifests constantly in all directions, in all worlds of 
the universe.) 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 178 1175 


Mandalal10/Sukta 178 
Tarkshya Devata, Arishtanemi Tarkshya Rshi 


त्यमू षु वाजिनं देवजूतं सहार्वानं तरुतारं रर्थानाम्‌। 
अरिष्टनेमिं पृतनाज॑माशं स्वस्तये तार्य ret ह॑वेम ॥ ९॥ 


ll, Tyamu su vajinam devajutam sahavanam taru- 
taram rathanam. Aristanemim prtandjamasum 
svastaye tarksyamiha huvema. 


For the sake of good and all round well being 
of life, we invoke and study that wind and electric energy 
of the middle regions which is fast and victorious, 
moved by divine nature, powerful, shaker of the clouds 
and energiser of sound waves, inviolable, war-like 
heroic and most dynamic, moving at the speed of energy. 


इन्द्र॑स्येव रातिमाजोहुवानाः स्वस्तये नाव॑पिवा रुहेम । 
Sat न पृथ्वी बहुले गभीरे मा वामेतौ मा परेतौ रिषाम ।॥ २॥ 


2 Indrasyeva ratimajohuvanah svastaye navamiva 
ruhema. Urvina prthvi bahule gabhire ma vame- 
tau ma paretau risama. 


Invoking Tarkshya, wind and electric energy, 
studying and exploring the power for all round well 
being as the gift of Indra, divine lord of energy, we wish 
to use it like a boat across the seas to overcome the 
problems we face. O earth, O sky, both vast and deep as 
well as abundant, may we never be hurt while this energy 
travels hither and back far off in circuit over and across 
you both. 


सद्यश्चिद्यः waa पञ्च॑ कृष्टीः सूर्य इव ज्योतिषापस्ततान | 
सहस्रसाः शतसा अस्य रंहिर्न स्पा वरन्ते युवतिं न 
sree ३॥ 


1176 RGVEDA 


os Sadyascidyah savasa panca krstih surya iva 
Jyotisapastatana. Sahasrah satasa asya ramhi- 
rna sma varante yuvatim na Saryam. 


Instantly does this wind-electric energy reach 
all five peoples of the earth with its force, power and 
speed like the sun which spreads its light and brings 
vapours and showers of rain over earth for humanity. 
Hundredfold and thousandfold is its power that travels, 
and just as none can stop the arrow fixed on the bow 
and shot, so no one can stop the flowing current of this 
energy once it is initiated for use. 


Mandalal0/Sukta 179 
Indra Devata, Shivi Aushinara (1), Pratardana 
Kashiraja (2), and Rauhidashva Vasumana (3) Rshis 
उत्तिष्ठ तावं पश्यतेन्द्रस्य भागमृत्वियम्‌ | 
यदि श्रातो जुहोत॑न यद्यश्रातो ममत्तन ॥ ९ ॥ 


Ls Uttisthatava pasyatendrasya bhagamrtviyam. 
Yadi Srato juhtotana yadyasrato mamattana. 


Citizens, friends, arise, see whether the seasonal 
yajnic share of Indra, the ruler, is ripe and ready. If so, 
offer it by way of yajnic oblation as tax duty. If not, do 
not remiss, accelerate the ripening process and give. 


श्रातं हविरो ष्विन्द्र प्र याहि जगाम सूरो अध्व॑नो विम॑ध्यम्‌ । 
परि त्वासते निधिभिः सखायः कुलपा न तब्राजप॑तिं 
चरन्तम्‌॥ २॥ 

2. Sratam haviro svindra pra yahi jagama siro 
adhvano vimadhyam. pari tvasate nidhibhih 
sakhayah kulapa na vrajapatim carantam. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 180 1177 


The havi is ripe and ready for the offering. O 
Ruler, Indra, come, the sun has reached the middle of 
its course. Friends sit with their treasure offering and 
wait like family heads for the chief commander of hosts 
out on the sojourn on the borders and around. 


श्रातं म॑न्य ऊध॑नि श्रातमग्नौ सुश्रातं मन्ये तदूतं नवीयः | 
माध्य॑न्दिनस्य सव॑नस्य दध्नः पिबेन्द्र वचिन्पुरुकृलज्नु- 
घाणः।॥३॥ 


Sratam manya idhani $rdtamagnau 11111 
manye tadrtam naviyah. Madhyamdinasya sava- 
nasya dadhnah pibendra vajrin purukrjju-sanah. 


I believe the milk is ripe in the cow’s udders. I 
know the grain is ripe in the heat of the sun. I am sure 
every thing is ripe and ready for the yajna, ripe and fresh 
truly. O lord of versatile action, wielder of the 
thunderbolt of justice, law and order, loving, kind and 
cooperative, come and taste the milky sweets of the mid 
day’s session of yajna. Receive, taste, protect and 
promote the milk of cows and harvests of the field. 


Mandalal10/Sukta 180 
Indra Devata, Jaya Aindra Rshi 
प्र स॑साहिषे पुरुहूत WAS AS eA शुष्म॑ इह रातिर॑स्तु । इन्द्रा 
भ॑र दक्षिणेना वसूनि पतिः सिन्धूनामसि रेवतीनाम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 
1. Pra sasahise puruhuta Satrunjyesthaste Susma iha 
ratirastu. Indra bhara daksineta vasuni patih 
sindunamasi revatinam. 


O Ruler, Indra, invoked by all, you challenge 
and subdue the enemies. Highest is your power and force 


1178 RGVEDA 


here which may, we pray, be a positive boon for us. 
Indra, with your efficiency and perfection of governance 
and administration, bring us wealth, honour and 
excellence for the nation. You are the master and 
controller of the abundant and opulent rivers of the land, 
and equally well you manage the flow of the economy 
and social advancement of the nation. 


मृगो न भीमः कुचरो गिरिष्ठाः प॑रावत आ जंगन्था पर॑स्याः | 
सृकं संशाय पविमिन्द्र तिग्मं वि शररून्ताठ्ठिहि वि geil 
नुदस्व ॥ २॥ 


१.७ Mrgo na bhimah kucaro giristhah paravata a 
jagantha parasyah. Srkam samsaya pavimindra 
tigmam vi Satrun taliha vi mrdho nudasva. 


Terrible like a mountain lion roaming around, 
pray come from the farthest of far off places and, having 
sharpened the lazer fiery thunderbolt, destroy the 
enemies and throw out the violent adversaries. 


इन्द्रं क्षत्रमभि वाममोजोऽ जायथा वृषभ avian 
अपानुदो जनंममित्रयन्त॑मुरूं देवेभ्यो अकृणोरु CALM २३ ॥ 


Indra ksatramabhi vamamojo’jayatha vrsabha 
carsaninam. Apanudo janamamitrayantamurum 
devebhyo akrnoru lokam. 


Indra, glorious ruler, virile and generous leader 
of the people, arise and create a beautiful, grand and 
powerful social order. Throw out the people who are 
unfriendly to the nation and create a vast, beautiful 
mighty world of peace and progress for the noble, 
brilliant and generous people dedicated to divine values. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 181 1179 


Mandalal10/Sukta 181 


Vishvedeva Devata, Pratha Vasishtha (1), Sapratha 
Bharadvaja (2), Gharma Saurya (3) Rshis 


vive यस्य॑ wave नामानुष्टुभस्य हविषो हविर्यत्‌। 
धातुर्द्य्तानात्सवितुश्च विष्णो रथन्तरमा ज॑भारा वसिष्ठः ॥ ९॥ 


ih Prathasca yasya saprathasca namanustubhasya 
haviso haviryat. Dhaturdyutandat savitusca visno- 
rathantarama jabhara vasisthah. 


Vasishtha, the most brilliant seeker and teacher, 
aman of versatile mind and boundless possibilities who 
was gifted with a radiative spirit and passion for 
enlightenment, received the pure, applied, beatific and 
life giving Word of the Veda, the first, original and 
eternal gift of the lord of omniscience into his yajna of 
cosmic creation, from Agni, sustainer of the light of 
knowledge, Vayu, vibrant sage with passion and strong 
will, Savita, i.e., Aditya, brilliant and inspiring like the 
sun, and Angiras, the sage inspiring as omnipresent 
Vishnu and breath of life. 


(This Vasishtha, the brilliant disciple of the four 
sages, Agni, Vayu, Aditya and Angira, who then became 
the teacher of the Vedas, was Brahma. Swami 
Brahmamuni explains this interpretation of this mantra 
in his commentary on Rgveda and cites authoritative 
evidence from the Brahmana works. Swami Dayanand 
explains the cosmic process of creative evolution and 
Vedic revelation in his Introduction to his Commentary 
on the Vedas, Rgvedadi Bhashya Bhumika, saying on 
Vedic and ancient authority that the Vedas were first 
revealed to four sages: Rgveda to Agni, Yajurveda to 


1180 RGVEDA 


Vayu, Samaveda to Aditya, and Atharva veda to Angira. 
Brahma, the brilliant disciple and later the inspired 
teacher, learnt the Veda from these four sages and passed 
on this knowledge to his disciples.) 


अविन्दन्ते अतिहितं यदासींद्य्ञस्य धाम॑ परमं गुहा यत्‌। 
धातुर्ुतानात्सवितुश्च विष्णोर्भरद्वाजो बृहदा चक्रे अग्नेः ॥ २॥ 


00 Avindante atihitam yadasidyajnasya dhama 
paramam guha yat. Dhaturdyutanat savitusca 
visnorbharadvajo brhada cakre agneh. 


Those sages, i.e., Agni, Vayu, Aditya and Angira, 
received this knowledge, which was deeply hidden and 
perfectly preserved in the bottomless depths of 
omniscience of creative Divinity, and which is, still, 
deeply preserved in the depths of the human mind at 
the frequency of the cosmic mind, from the Lord 
Supreme that is all sustainer, self-refulgent, giver of light 
and life, immanent and omnipresent. From them and 
from the lord self-refulgent Agni, then, the disciple 
inspired with will and passion, Bharadvaja, receives and 
practically extends the knowledge which has, after all, 
no bounds. 


ds fasten दीध्याना यजुः ष्कन्नं प्र॑थमं दैवयानंम्‌। 
धातुर्युतानात्सवितुश्च विष्णोरा सूयीदभरन्घर्ममेते ॥ ३ ॥ 
3. Te’vindan manasa didhyana yajuh skannam 


pratham devayanam. Dhdaturdyutandat savitusca 
visnora suryadabharan gharmamete. 


They, brilliant in mind and vision, vibrant at 
heart and burning with passion, received the knowledge 
for life and living, revealed and released in incessant 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 182 1181 


flow, first and final for men on the path to divinity. And 
all these, Agni, Vayu, Aditya and Angira, Brahma, 
Bharadvaja and others that follow ultimately receive 
the knowledge, light and warmth of life, from the 
Supreme Sun, self-refulgent sustainer, giver of light, 
giver of life, omniscient, omnipresent Divinity. 


Mandala10/Sukta 182 
Brhaspati Devata, Tapurmurdha Barhaspatya Rshi 


बृहस्पतिं्नयतु दुर्गहा तिरः पुनं्नेषदघशंसाय मन्म | 
क्षिपदशस्तिमप दुर्मतिं हन्नथा कर द्यज॑मानाय शं योः ॥ ९॥ 


il, Brhaspatirnayatu durgaha tirah punarnesada- 
ghasamsaya manma. Ksipadasastimapa durma- 
tim hannatha karadyajamanaya sam yoh. 


May Brhaspati, lord of expansive universe, lead 
us across insufferable suffering and turn the thunderous 
strike of punishment to the supporter of wickedness, 
cast away malignity, destroy evil intention, and do good 
to the yajamana, free him from fear and disease and 
bestow good health and prosperity on him. 


नराशंसो! नोऽ वतु प्रयाजे शं नो अस्त्वनुयाजो हवेषु । 
क्िपदरस्तिमपं दुर्मतिं हन्नथा कर दजंमानाय शं योः ॥ २॥ 


2. Narasamso no’vatu prayaje Sam no astvanuydajo 
havesu. ksipadasastimapa durmatim hannatha 
karadyajamanaya sam yoh. 


May Agni, adorable favourite of humanity, 
protect and promote us in Prayaja yajna, the 
preliminaries of the performance. May Agni support and 
bless us with success and prosperity at our performance 


1182 RGVEDA 


of Anuyaja yajna, the great finale. May Agni cast away 
malignity, destroy evil intention, and do good to the 
yajamana, free him from fear and disease, and bestow 
on him good health and prosperity. 


तपुरमूर्धा तपतु रक्षसो ये ब्र॑ह्यद्विषः शर॑वे हन्तवा उ। 
क्षिपदशस्तिमप दुर्मतिं हन्नथा कर द्यज॑मानाय शं योः ॥ ३॥ 


2 Tapurmurdha tapatu raksaso ye brahmadvisah 
Sarave hantava u. Ksipadasastimapa durmatim 
hannatha karadyajamanaya sam yoh. 


In order that hate and violence may be 
eliminated from the world, may the lord of blazing light 
and refulgent intellect put to the crucibles of trial and 
punishment those who are wicked destroyers of the good 
and who malign and oppose the divine sages. May the 
great lord cast away scandal, strike away evil intention, 
and do good to the yajamana, free him from fear and 
disease and bless him with good health and prosperity. 


Mandala10/Sukta 183 
Yajamana, Yajamanapatni, Hotrashisha Devata, 
Prajavan Prajapatya Rshi 
अप॑श्यं त्वा मन॑सा चेकितानं तप॑सो जातं तप॑सो fester 
इह प्रजायिह रयिं रराणः प्र जायस्व प्रजया पुत्रकाम ॥ ९॥ 
1 Apasyam tvad manasa cekitanam tapaso jatam 
tapaso vibhutam. Tha prajamiha rayim raranah 
pra jayasva prajaya putrakama. 
I see you born of austere discipline and 


education with the lustre of discipline shining on your 
face and expressing your heart’s desire. Desirous of 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 183 1183 


progeny and prosperity here in the household, pray be 
reborn through your own child and fulfil your desire 
for progeny and continuity in life. 


(This verse may be taken as spoken by the wife 
to husband.) 


अप॑श्यं त्वा मन॑सा Steal स्वायां तनू See ATI । 
उप मामुच्या युवतिर्बभूयाः प्र जायस्व प्र॒जया पुत्र- 
HTT २॥ 


2. Apasam tva manasa didhyanam svayam tanu 
rtvye nadhamanam. Upa mamuccha yuvatirba- 
bhuyah pra jayasva prajaya putrakame. 


I see you moved at heart with desire, earnestly 
praying that you be fulfilled in life with the timely gift 
of progeny. Come, rise to me, be fulfilled as a youthful 
woman, reborn in your child as a mother. 


(This verse may be taken as spoken by the 
husband to the wife.) 


अहं गर्भ॑मदधामोषंधीष्वहं विश्वेषु भुवनेष्वन्तः | 
अं प्रजा अजनयं पृथिव्यामहं जनिभ्यो अपरीषु पुत्रान्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


3: Aham garbhamadadhamosadhisvaham visvesu 
bhuvanesvantah. Aham praja ajanayam prthivya- 
maham janibhyo aparisu putran. 


I plant the seed in herbs and plants. I plant the 
seed of life in all regions of the world. I engender the 
forms of life on the earth, and I would generate progeny 
for all others, women who love to be mothers for 
fulfilment. 


1184 RGVEDA 


Mandalal0/Sukta 184 


Lingokta Devata, Garbhakarta Tvashta or Vishnu 
Prajapatya Rshi 


विष्णुर्योनिं कल्पयतु त्वष्टा murat पिंशतु | 
आ सिञ्चतु प्रजापतिर्धाता गर्भ' दधातु ते॥ ९॥ 


1 Visnuryonim kalpayatu tvasta rupani pimsatu. 
A sincatu prajapatirdhata garbham dadhatu te. 


May Vishnu, omnipresent lord of life energy, 
prepare your womb through yajna. May Tvashta, 
nature’s formative intelligence of divinity, create the 
body form of the foetus in all details. May Prajapati, 
father spirit of divinity in nature, provide the life 
nutrients for the foetus. May Dhata, mother power of 
nature, hold and mature your foetus in the womb. 


गर्भ धेहि ferttarfe गर्भ" धेहि areata 
गर्भ ते अश्विनौ देवावा धत्तां पुष्करस्रजा ॥ २॥ 


0.0 Garbham dhehi sinivali garbham dhehi sarasvati. 
Garbham te asvinau devava dhattam puskara- 
sraja. 

O Sinivali, spirit of fecundity, sustain the foetus. 

O Sarasvati, universal spirit of intelligence, sustain the 
foetus. O fair expectant mother, may the Ashvins, sun 
and moon, nature’s complementary currents of creative 
and generative energy active in the firmament and on 
earth sustain and mature the foetus to fullness of its life 
and form. 


हिरण्ययीं अरणी यं निर्मन्थ॑तो afsaat 
तं ते गर्भ" हवामहे दामे मासि सूत॑वे॥ ३॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 185 1185 


a Hiranyayi arani yam nirmanthato asvina. 
Tam te garbham havamahe dasame masi sutave. 


Just as two golden arani woods produce the fire 
by friction, so do the Ashvins, by their dynamics of 
complementarity through nature’s nourishment and 
formative intelligence, nourish and mature your foetus. 
That baby in your womb we adore and welcome to 
emerge into full life in the tenth month of pregnancy. 


Mandalal10/Sukta 185 
Aditya Devata, Satyadhrti Varuni Rshi 


महिं त्रीणामवोऽस्तु Bat मित्रस्यार्यम्णः | 
दुराधर्षं वरुणस्य ॥ ९॥ 


1. Mahi trinamavo’ stu dyuksam mitrasyaryamnah. 
Duradharsam varunasya. 


May the great, refulgent and inviolable 
protection and promotion of the three, Mitra, Varuna 
and Aryaman bless the life of nature and humanity. 
(Mitra, Varuna and Aryaman are explained as prana, 
apana and heart energy, and as the sun of the summer, 
winter and spring seasons round the year.) 


नहि तेषाममा चन नाध्व॑सु azure | 
ईशे रिपुरघशंसः ॥ २॥ 

2. Nahi tesamama cana nadhvasu varanesu. 
Ise ripuraghasamsah. 


Neither in home nor on the roads under their 
invincible protection does any enemy or sinner or 
scandaliser dare to intrude and disturb a dedicated 
person. (Their rule and protection is complete and 


1186 RGVEDA 


inviolable.) 


यस्मै पुत्रासो अदितेः प्र जीवसे मत्यौय। 
ज्योतिर्यच्छन्त्यजंस््रम्‌ 3 ॥ 


ai Yasmai putraso aditeh pra jivase martyaya. 
Jyotiryacchantyajasram. 


No power can disturb or violate that mortal in 
life for whom the children of Aditi project their eternal 
light and protection for the life of man. 


Mandalal0/Sukta 186 
Vayu Devata, Ula Vatayana Rshi 


वात आ वातु भेषजं शंभु म॑योभु नो ee 
प्रण आयूँषि तारिषत्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


Ly Vata a vatu bhesajam sambhu mayobhu no hrde. 


~ —-wis,— -s 


May the wind of life energy blow for us as 
harbinger of sanatives, good health and peace for our 
heart and help us to live a full life beyond all suffering 
and ailment. 


उत वात पितासि न उत भ्रातोत नः सखा । 
सनो जीवातवे कृधि॥२॥ 

चः Uta vata pitasi na uta bhratota nah sakha. 
Sano jivatave krdhi. 


O wind of life energy, you are our fatherly 
protector and promoter, our brother, our friend. Pray 
strengthen and inspire us to live a full life. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 187 1187 


यददो ata ते गृहे 3s मूत॑स्य निधिर्हितः | 
ततों नो देहि जीवसे ।॥। ३ ॥ 


Di Yadado vata te grhe ’mrtasya nidhirhitah. 
Tato no dehi jivase. 


In your treasure home of immortal, inviolable 
energy, O breath of life energy, Vayu, there is 
immeasurable wealth hidden for us. Of that, from that, 
give us some, our share, so that we may live a full life 
of good health and joy. 


Mandalal0/Sukta 187 
Agni Devata, Vatsa Agneya Rshi 


प्राग्रये वाच॑मीरय वृषभायं farina 
स न॑ः पर्षदति द्विष॑ः ॥ ९॥ 


I, Pragnaye vacamiraya vrsabhaya ksitinam. 
Sa nah parsadati dvisah. 


O celebrant, sing your song of adoration in 
honour of Agni, virile, generous and refulgent leader 
and light giver of humanity. It casts away all our hate, 
jealousy and all enemies, and thus it washes us clean 
and immaculate. 


यः पर॑स्याः परावतस्तिरो धन्वांतिरोचंते। 
स न॑ः पर्षदति द्विष॑ः ॥ २॥ 


2: Yah parasya paravatastiro dhanvatirocate. 
Sa nah parsadati dvisah. 


Agni who pervades and shines beatific from far 
and farther, over the deserts and across the spaces, casts 
away all our jealous, malignant and enemy forces, and 


1188 RGVEDA 
washes us clean and immaculate. 


यो रक्षांसि निजूर्वति वृषा शुक्रेण॑ शोचिषा । 
स न॑ः पर्षदति द्विष॑ः ॥ ३ ॥ 


De Yo raksamsi nijurvati vrsa Sukrena Socisa. 
Sa nah parsadati dvisah. 


Who, generous and potent as he is, destroys the 
evil, wicked, demonic force with his blazing purity and 
power, may, we pray, eliminate our hate, jealousy and 
enmities, and wash us clean and immaculate. 


यो विश्वाभि विपश्यति भुव॑ना सं च पश्य॑ति। 
स न॑ः पर्षदति द्विष॑ः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Yo visvabhi vipasyati bhuvand sam ca pasyati. 
Sa nah parsadati dvisah. 


Who watches all the regions of the universe in 
their formal diversity as well as in their essential unity 
and integrity may, we pray, cast off our hate, jealousy 
and enmity and make us clean and immaculate. 


यो अस्य पारे रज॑सः शुक्रो अभिरजायत | 
स न॑ः पर्षदति द्विष॑ः ॥ ५॥ 


श Yo asya pare rajasah sukro agnirajayata. 
Sa nah parsadati dvisah. 


That Agni, self-refulgent supreme power that 
exists and manifests in and over and above this 
firmament and the oceanic depth of immeasurable space 
may, we pray, cast off our enemies and render us clean 
and free at peace. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 188 1189 


Mandalal10/Sukta 188 
Jataveda Agni Devata, Shyena Agneya Rshi 


प्र नूनं जातवेदसमश्वं हिनोत वाजिन॑म्‌। 
इदं नो! बर्हिरासदे ॥ ९॥ 


I Pra nunam jatavedasamasvam hinota vajinam. 
Idam no barhirasade. 


Invoke, kindle and delightfully feed Agni, all 
known, all knowing and all pervasive power and energy, 
sure achiever, all reacher and winner of victory. May 
this Agni grace the vedi of our yajna and lead our 
endeavour to success. 


अस्य प्र जातवेदसो विप्र॑वीरस्य मीव्च्हुषंः | 
महीमिंयरमिं सुष्टुतिम्‌ 2 

2. Asya pra jatavedaso vipravirasya milhusah. 
Mahimiyarmi sustutim. 
I raise my holy song of high adoration in honour 
of this Jataveda Agni, generous, virile and creative 
favourite of the brave and pioneering leading spirits of 
humanity. 
या Gal जातवेदसो देवत्रा ह॑व्यवाहंनीः | 
ताभिर्नो यन्ञमिन्वतु ॥ ३॥ 

3; Ya ruco jatavedaso devatra havyavahanith. 
Tabhirno yajnminvatu. 


May Agni bless and promote our yajna with 
those beatific flames of fire and light of omniscience 
which carry our homage to the divine power of nature 
for the gift of creativity. 


1190 RGVEDA 


Mandalal10/Sukta 189 
Surya or Atma Devata, Sarparajni Rshi 


आयं गौः पृश्निरक्रमीदसंदन्मातरं पुरः। 
पितरं च प्रयन्त्स्वः ॥ ९॥ 


ly Ayam gauh prsnirakramidasadanmataram purah. 
Pitaram ca prayantsvah. 


This earth moves round and round eastward 
abiding in its mother waters of the firmament and 
revolves round and round its father sustainer, the sun in 
heaven. 


अन्तश्चरति रोचनास्य प्राणाद॑पानती । 
व्यख्यन्महिषो दिव॑म्‌ ॥ २॥ 


Antascarati rocanasya prandadapanati. 
Vyakhyanmahiso divam. 


The light of this sun radiates from morning till 
evening like the prana and apana of the cosmic body 
illuminating the mighty heaven and filling the space 
between heaven and earth. 


त्रिंशब्दाम वि राजति वाक्प॑तङ्कायं धीयते। 
प्रति वस्तोरह द्युभिः ॥ २॥ 
९ Trimsaddhama vi rajati vak patangaya dhiyate. 
Prati vastoraha dyubhih. 
Thirty stages of the day from every morning to 
evening does the sun rule with the rays of its light while 


songs of adoration are raised and offered to the mighty 
‘Bird’ of heavenly space. 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 190 1191 


Mandalal0/Sukta 190 


Bhava-vrttam Devata, Aghamarshana 
Madhucchandasa Rshi 


ऋतं च॑ सत्यं चाभीब्दात्तपसोऽध्य॑जायत। 
ततो रात्यजायत dd: समुद्रो अर्णवः ॥ ९॥ 


ll, Rtam ca satyam cabhiddhattapaso’dhyajayata. 
Tato ratryajayata tatah samudro arnavah. 


By the arduous will of Divinity, Prakrti 
manifested in existence in its simultaneous modes of 
Satyam and Rtam, constant and mutable, under the 
Eternal Law. Then arose the night and darkness of no 
positive name. Then arose the spatial ocean of 
indeterminate particles of existence. 


समुद्रादर्णवादधि संवत्सरो अजायत | 
अहोरात्राणि विदधद्विश्वस्य मिषतो वशी ॥ २॥ 
2. Samudradarnavadadhisamvatsaro ajayata. 


Ahoratrani vidadhadvisvasya misato vast. 


From the spatial ocean arose the time parameter 
of existence, and from there the master creator of the 
universe with his will created the conceptual days and 
nights. 


सूयचिन्द्रमसौ! धाता य॑थापूर्वम॑कल्पयत्‌। 
दिवं च पृथिवीं चान्तरिश्चमथो स्व॑:॥ २॥ 


3. Suryacandramasau dhata yathapurvamakalp- 
ayat. Divam ca prthivim ca’nrarisamatho svah. 


The supreme master creator and controller 
planned the sun and moon, heaven and earth, the middle 


1192 RGVEDA 


regions and the regions of bliss as ever before since 
eternity. 


Mandalal10/Sukta 191 


Agni (1), Sanjnanam (2-4) Devata, Samvanana 
Angirasa Rshi 


संसमिद्युवसे वृषन्नगरे विश्वान्यर्य आ। 
sore समिध्यसे स नो वसून्या भ॑र ॥ ९॥ 


iL. Samsamidyuvase vrsanagne visvanyarya त. 
Ilaspade samidhyase sa no asunya bhara. 


Agni, self-refulgent, omnipotent master, giver 
of the showers of Infinity, you bring together and 
integrate all the elements and constituents of the 
universe of existence and shine in the earth-vedi fire 
and in the eloquence of the Voice divine of Veda. Pray 
bless us with the wealth, honour and excellence of life 
in the world. 


सं ग॑च्छध्वं सं व॑दध्वं सं वो मनांसि Sar । 
देवा भागं यथा पूर्वे संजानाना उपासंते ॥ २॥ 


De Sam gacchadhvam sam vadadhyamsam vo 
manamsi janatam. Deva bhagam yatha purve- 
samyanana upasate. 

Move together forward in unison, speak 
together, and with equal mind all in accord, know you 
all together as the sages of old, knowing and doing 
together, play their part in life and fulfill their duty 
according to Dharma. 


समानो मन्त्रः समितिः समानी संमानं मन॑: सह Fara षाम्‌। 
समानं मन्त्रमभि मन्त्रये वः समानेन वो हविषां जुहोमि ॥ ३ ॥ 


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 191 1193 


a Samano mantrah samitih samani samanam 
manah saha cittamesam. Samanam mantramabhi 
mantraye vah samanena vo havisa juhomi. 


Let your guiding mantra be one and equal, your 
assembly, one and equal, your mind, one in accord in 
thinking and purpose for all of you. I commit you all to 
the same one mantra for thought, goals and policy, and 
I vest you all with equal and common means and 
methods for living and working. 


समानी व आकूतिः समाना हृद॑यानि a: | 
समानमस्तु वो मनो यथां वः सुसहासंति ॥ ४॥ 


4. Samani va akutih samana hrdayani vah. 
Samanamastu vo mano yatha vah susahasati. 


Let your discussion and resolve be equal and 
common, your heart, feelings and passions equal and 
common. Let your thought and will be equal and 
common so that you may realise and enjoy a common- 
wealth of peace, progress and all round well being for 
all in commonalty. 


॥ इति ऋग्वेदसंहिता ॥ 


1194 RGVEDA 


