|| AUM | 
YAJURVEDA 


2 


(With Original Sanskrit Text, Transliteration & 
Lucid English Translation in the Aarsh Tradition 
of Maharshi Yaska and Swami Dayananda) 


English translation by 
Dr. Tulsi Ram M.A., Ph.D. (London, U.K.) 


(Professor, Administrator, Researcher and Writer) 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


Sanskrit Text as per publication of 


Paropakarini Sabha, Ajmer 


Your cooperation will help us bring more gems of Indian culture to 
forefront and support the cause of humanity. 


© Dr. Tulsi Ram 


YAJURVEDA by Dr. Tulsi Ram M.A., Ph.D. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


Dedication 
The Mother’s Gift 
For all her children 
——— E2 


Your path is up and onwards, 
Never downwards 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( vi ) 


Homage, Thanks and Acknowledgements 


Homage to Jyeshtha Brahma, the Eternal Guru. 
Homage to Immanent Brahma and Will Divine. 


Homage to Mother Trinity of Ida, Saraswati, Mahi with 
Bharati. 


Homage to the Rshis from Brahma to Dayananda. 
Homage to parents for inspiration and blessings. 


Homage to the sacred memory of my wife Maya Jyoti 
who waited until the last word of this project was written. 


Thanks and best wishes to my son Gianendra Sharma for 
his relentless and indispensable dedication to the management of 
this project till the completion. 


Thanks and best wishes to my daughter Indira Sharma 
and son-in-law Gulab Sharma and my brother Ram Kishan 
Sharma, wishing, waiting and assuring, with Gianendra Sharma, 
the publication of this work. 


Thanks to Sarvshri Amar Erry, Bhai Anand Roop Narain, 
Aditya Kumar, Amar Uma Das, Ramesh Gupta, and the other 
members of Arya Samaj Markham, Toronto and North America. 


Thanks and homage of gratitude to the teachers, scholars 
and translators of the Vedas from Swami Dayananda to the present 
day: Shripad Damodar Satavalekara, Pandit Jaya Deva, Pt. Tulsi 
Ram Swami, Pt. Kshema Karana Das Trivedi, Prof. Vishwa Nath 
Vidyamartanda, Pt. Dharma Dev Vidyamartanda, Acharya 
Vaidyanath Shastri, Swami Satya Prakash, Pt Devi Chand and a 
lot many others. 


Thanks to Shri Dharampal Arya, of Arsh Sahitya Prachar 
Trust, for the publication of this work. 


—Tulsi Ram 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( vii ) 


CONTENTS 
S. No. Particulars Page 
Homage, Thanks & 
Acknowledgements —Dr. Tulsi Ram vi 
l. About the Author ix 
2. From the Publishers Desk xi 
3. Foreword -Dr. Subhash Vedalankar xii 
4. About Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma's 
English translation of the 
Yajurveda —Dr. Krishan Lal xiv 
5. English Translation of Vedic 
Hymns : An Opinion-Dr. Bhawanilal Bhartiya XV 
6. Message —Dr. Balvir Acharya xvi 
7. Message —Prof. Mahavir xvii 
8. Appreciation —Dr. Baldev Singh xviii 
9. Sadbhavana(Good wishes) 
—Dr. Umakant Upadhyaya xix 
10. To the Reader —Dr. Tulsi Ram XX 
11. Introduction —Dr. Tulsi Ram XXIX 
12. Diacritical Marks of Transliteration XXXVI 
13. Yajurveda 
Ch Mg o —— — T 1-18 
S» cu amete 19-39 
TEN lak Ul nmm ————— 40-65 
Ghapter- IV emm 66-86 
cr. fe RE 87-114 
Ehapter V aetna cute autas pti 115-136 
Chapter VIl e —— — M 137-169 
Chapter VIT iiic eei erii sieiede: 170-206 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


Chapter IX Gee rere aan a ee e delet 207-236 
Ce 237-260 
Chapter X D ee ay ——— — 261-302 
Chapter XID esnai e A 303-357 
Chapter ressesie piii te tepido haies 358-390 
Chapter XIV aee etant ica. 391-416 
Chapter 4 T —— ee 417-454 
Chaptep- VL sous torso ale t 455-486 
Chapter VIL a. cn: 487-533 
Chapter—XVIIL............cscscsreeecceese ++ alf uh 534-578 
Chapter-XIX esce at e 579-624 
Chapter-XX .5.ieiecee e e NM vies 625-664 
Chapter-X XI Lo esed ob ee 665-704 
Chapier-X XIT i etf 705-725 
Chapter-XXI iioc serere 726-754 
Chapter-XXIV .............99...9............. 755-773 
Chapter-X XV. asse M ME qe 774-800 
Chapter-XXVL...i ii mec Ree 801-814 
Chapter-XXVII .......£. 499... 815-833 
Chapter-XXVIII .........agf....................eess- 834-863 
Chapter-X XIX AF. Meme... 864-893 
Chápigr-X Xa t eoe ee eas 894-907 
Chapter XT Wise gere ee eres 908-917 
ure. c I— 918-926 
Chap tet a edil "— 927-968 
giu. —————— 969-095 
ur DL A — — 996-1004 
Chapter-XXXVI m —— 1005-1014 
Chapter-XXXVII ade tbid 1015-1027 
Chapter XXXVIII ueteri en 1028-1042 
Chapter-XXXIX Qum '—— 1043-1050 
Chapter XL sees acsaccacescenestantsacstesteestacdoscenits 1051-1060 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( ix ) 


About the Author 


Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma 


Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma M.A. English (Delhi, 1949), Ph.D. 
(London, 1963) has been a university professor, academic administrator, 
researcher, and writer of long standing with prestigious assignments: 


Lecturer in English, Hans Raj College, Delhi 


Reader in the Department of English, Kurukshetra University, 
Kurukshetra (Haryana) 


Principal Shivaji College, Delhi 
Principal Swami Shraddhanand College, Delhi 


Visiting Ford Foundation Scholar, University of Leeds, Leeds 
(UK) 

Professor of English, Department of Languages, B.I.T.S. Pilani 
(Rajasthan) 


Professor Head of the Department of English, Maharshi 
Dayanand University, Rohtak (Haryana) 


Besides his professional studies of secular literature in English, 
Hindi, Sanskrit and Urdu, Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma has devoted his life 
and time to the study and discipline of Sacred literature, specially Vedas, 
Upanishads, Darshan Philosophy, Puranas, Ramayana, Mahabharata 
with concentration on the Bhagwad Gita, Greek, Roman, Sumerian 
and English Epics, Gathas of Zarathustra, Bible, Quran, and the writings 
of Swami Dayananda and Swami Vivekananda, in search of the essential 
values of Sanatan Vedic Dharma with reference to their realisation in 
life and literature through social attitudes, collective action, customs, 
traditions, rituals and religious variations across the fluctuations of 
history. 


Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma's research and publications include: 


The Neo-Classical Epic: an Ethical Interpretation (Delhi, 1971) 
Trading in Language: The Story of English in India 1781-1981 
(Delhi, 1983) 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


(x) 
The Original Philosophy of Yoga: Commentary on the Yoga- 
Sutras of Patanjali (Gurukul Jhajjar, Haryana, 1989) 
Bharat Main Angrezi: Kya Khoya Kya Paya (Delhi, 1997) 
Swami Dayananda’s Vision of Truth (Delhi, 2002) 
Translation of Nine Upanishads (Delhi, 1992) 
Translation of Swami Dayananda’s Sanskar Vidhi (Delhi, 1995) 


Translation of Swami Dayananda's short writings in Dayananda 
Granth Mala (paropakarini Sabha, Ajmer, Rajasthan, 1999) 


Translation of Swami Satya Pati's God Realisation through 
Simple Yoga (Delhi, 2000) 


And a number of articles such as: 
“Swami Vivekananda’s Vision of Man" (Prabuddha Bharat, 
1979) 


“G.D. Birla: Gandhi’s child”, in Birla Felicitation Volume (BITS, 
Pilani, Rajasthan, 1984) 

“Search for a Medium of Instruction in India”, in Mitra 
Felicitation Volume (BITS, Pilani, Rajasthan, 1984) 


“Shakespeare as a Creative Yogi” in Shakespeare, the Indian 
Icon Ed. Vikram Chopra for Jay L. Halio (2011) 


And now: English translation of all the four Vedas, in the Arsha 
tradition of Maharshi Yaska and Swami Dayananda. 


Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma has spent the last ten years on this 
translation of the four Vedas, all the time saying: “I came for this”. 
While English has been the language of his professional communication, 
Sanskrit is the voice of his life and living. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xii ) 


Foreword 


Veda Bhashya by Prof. Tulsiram - A step to make Vedas 
available to the English World 

I have had the privilege of going through some of the 
chapters of Yajurveda Bhashya written by Prof. Tulsiram, a well 
known Vedic scholar and author of English language and 
literature. I congratulate him because he has done this translation 
for an average English reader who is keen to know the Vedas. 
Knowledge of the Vedas is like the knowledge of science. Vedic 
language is a scientific language and nobody can understand that 
without the profound knowledge of Vedangas, especially Nirukta 
of Maharshi Yaska and the grammar of Panini and Patanjali. 
Nobody can interpret the Veda mantras without these two. This 
translation proves that Prof. Tulsiram has done this insightful 
translation after doing hard work in both Vedangas. 

In translating the Vedas, only literal meaning is just not 
sufficient, sometimes it may create confusion and contradiction. 
Prof. Tulsiram deeply merges himself into Vedic Mantras, 
thinking deeply about words, derivatives and analyzes the hidden 
nuances of meaning in their context. For example, 'Sumitriya na 
aapa oshadhayah santu.....Yajur. 36, 23': If we take literal meaning 
in the ordinary sense, "may the waters, vital forces of life, and 
herbs be friendly to us and may they be enemies to those who 
hate us and whom we hate", it will not make acceptable sense. 
After raising some questions, he says, "How can we accept this?" 
So, after going deeply into the words and context he gives this 
meaning of the said mantra: May waters, tonics, pranic energies 
and medicinal herbs be good friends of our health system and 
immunity and let the same waters, tonics, pranic energies herbal 
medicines act against those ailments, diseases and negativities 
which injure us, which we hate to suffer and which we love to 
destroy, moreover let them have no side effects because side 
effects too help the negativities and injure us. 

After giving the actual sense of the Mantra he writes that 
this Mantra is a reasonable prayer for the health programme of an 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xiii ) 


advanced society, and then, logically in the next Mantra, follows 
the prayer for a full hundred years and more of life and healthy 
living (Tacchakshurdevahitam purastat-Yajur.36, 24). 

The translation by Prof. Tulsiram is without any extraneous 
motive and without any extra-academic intention. The translation 
has been done purely as communication of the Vedic message 
for the welfare of mankind. 

While giving his opinion on the Vedas Prof. Tulsiram writes 
in his Introduction....Veda is the Voice of God revealed in 
scientific Vedic Sanskrit free from local color and historical facts, 
therefore Vedic language is to be interpreted and understood 
according to its own laws and structure, and the only key available 
for such interpretation is the Nirukta of Maharshi Yaska and the 
grammar of Panini & Patanjali. According to Maharshi Dayananda 
Saraswati, "without reference to these bases of Vedic interpretation 
certain words have been given a distorted meaning in the 
translations of Max Muller, Griffith, Whitney and even Sayana.' 
Actually the torch light for proper translation today, as Aurobindo 
says, is the Arsha tradition followed by Maharshi Dayananda 
Saraswati. 

At the end I will say that this translation of Yajurveda, based 
on Nirukta and Grammar, follows the known ancient Indian 
tradition. It is factual, without prejudice or hidden motive. Prof. 
Tulsiram thinks deeply on every word of the mantra, looks into 
the context and etymology according to Nirukta and then does 
the translation. I congratulate him on this one more pioneering 
step to make the knowledge of Vedas available to the western 
world and the average English knowing reader. May God give 
him long and healthy life so that he continues to do this kind of 
stupendous work. 

Prof. Dr. Subhash Vedalankar; 
Ex-Prof. and Chairman of Sanskrit Department, 
Rajasthan University, Jaipur, India. 

Presently Chairman, 

Dept. of Sanskrit and Vedic Vangmaya, 
Maharshi Dayananda Saraswati University, 
Ajmer, Rajasthan, India. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xiv ) 


About Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma's English translation 
of the Yajurveda 


I feel myself fortunate and blest with the Grace of God that 
I received a few pages of the English translation by Dr. Tulsi 
Ram Sharma with introduction of the Yajurveda. The comparative 
views expressed by him about the Vedas are essential for every 
student of the Veda since it is a further pointer to scientific research 
in the field of Vedic interpretation. 

Its conclusion is true: "In short Veda is an eternal articulation 
of omniscience, the voice of God". Each work of Prasthana Trayi 
i.e. Vedanta, Upanishads and Gita is not a take off from the Vedas 
but a continuation of Vedic studies in its own context of 
meditation, meditative teaching and a rousing call to action in a 
situation of karmic crisis. This English translation is a welcome 
addition to Vedic studies opening truly a new path establishing 
with ease the Vedas in the service of humanity. 


Dr. Krishna Lal 
Former Professor and Head 
of Sanskrit Department, 
University of Delhi. Delhi. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xv ) 


English Translation of Vedic Hymns: An Opinion 


Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma has taken an uphill task of translating 
all the four Vedas in lucid and thought provoking English. Most 
of the translations of Vedas by European scholars depend on the 
ritualistic meaning given by the medieval commentators like 
Sayana and others. But Dr. Sharma has taken a new course of 
translation. He agrees with the idea that the Yajurveda basically 
propounds the theory of Karma which it explains as Yajna, which 
neither denotes sacrifice nor mere ritual (Agnihotra etc.). The 
term Yajna carries a threefold meaning: the worship of God, 
unification of diverse factors of human society, selfless charity 
and replenishment of nature and the environment. 

The hymns of the Yajurveda carry lofty ideas of spiritual 
and ethical significance. Most of these mantras are, however, 
complicated and tough. It is difficult to make out useful meaning 
and draw important conclusion out of the text. But Dr. Sharma 
has fully succeeded in drawing out the natural and meaningful 
content of these mantras. In brief I can say that the present 
translation of the Vedas will be appreciated by the scholars of 
this Vedic lore as well as by the lay man who wants to understand 
the deep meaning of the Vedic texts or at least the basic knowledge 
hidden in these ancient works. It is all the more satisfying that 
Dr. Sharma has followed the dicta laid down by Maharshi Yaska 
and Swami Dayananda Saraswati in translating and explaining 
the inner wisdom of the sacred mantras. 


—Bhawani Lal Bhartiya 

Ex. Chairman and Professor 
Dayananda Chair for Vedic Studies 
Punjab University; Chandigarh 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xvi ) 


AUM 


It has been gratifying to go through the English translation 
of the Vedas rendered by Dr Tulsi Ram Sharma in as much as it 
conveys to the English-knowing world effectively the profound 
meaning and transcendental secrets enshrined in the Vedas. The 
most salient feature of this translation is its simple and lucid 
English. The Vedic words have been expounded here following 
the yaugik method of the Arsh tradition set up by Yaska, Panini 
and Patanjali (as opposed to the rudhi method which takes only 
the historically fixed meanings of words caring little for the context 
and the subject). As per the Arsh tradition name words like Agni, 
Vayu, Indra, Marut, etc., are synonyms indicating the various 
attributive names of the One that is the greatest and the most 
comprehensive 'Tattva' of existence, the Cosmic Spirit. It was 
Maharshi Dayananda who for the first time after Yaska and 
Patanjali advocated and followed this principle of interpretation 
on the basis of ancient supporting material. Dr. Sharma has 
religiously stuck to this theory while unfolding the truths enshrined 
in the Vedas. Obviously Dr Sharma's interpretation of Vedic 
hymns enjoys the authenticity of the Arsh tradition and challenges 
the western Vedic perspective and the medieval Indian 
interpretations of the Vedas which now need to be seriously 
reviewed in our present day context of science and inter-cultural 
communication 


—Dr Balvir Acharya 

Professor & Head 

Department of Sanskrit, Pali & Prakrit 
Maharshi Dayananda University 
Rohtak - 124001, Haryana (India) 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xvi ) 


Message 


Above the narrow boundaries of country, time, caste and 
creed, the Vedas have been a treasure house of eternal universal 
knowledge and spiritual wisdom. There have been numerous 
attempts by Indians and foreigners to make the knowledge of 
these Vedas available to the people at large. Among them the 
Vedic commentaries of the great social and spiritual leader, 
Maharshi Dayananda are the best works in this field. Inspired by 
Swami Dayananda, the translation of the Yajurveda into English 
by Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma is a commendable work in this line. 
Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma has been a great devotee of sacred literature, 
especially Vedas, Upanishads, and various philosophies. His life 
long study of the Vedas has given him deep insight into Vedic 
philosophy. His translation of the Yajurveda reveals it fully. Here 
he has translated the Yajurveda, the Veda of Karma, in such a 
way that even a common reader can grasp its essence. He has 
very effectively brought out how this Veda teaches us to apply 
spiritual knowledge in practical life. Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma 
deserves our congratulations and best wishes for having done 
translation of all the four Vedas in simple and clear English for 
the international community. 


—Prof. Mahavir 

Acharya & Pro-Vice Chancellor 
Gurukul Kangri Vishwavidyalaya 
Haridwar-249404, Uttarakhand, India 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xviii ) 
APPRECIATION 


I have gone through some chapters of the English translation 
of Yajurveda by Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma. As he has stated at the 
very beginning of the Introduction, this translation of Yajurveda 
is meant for an average English-knowing reader who is keen to 
know: What is Veda? What is it about? Is it old or new? To achieve 
this object, he has followed the Arsh method of interpretation. 
Accordingly, for example, he has mostly followed the 
etymological method of literal translation. But whenever he finds 
that the literal is not helpful in achieving his intended objective, 
he adds the implied explanation so that the essence of the Vedic 
hymn is quite clear. For example, his translation of, 'Yathemam 
Vacham Kalyanimavadani janebhyah' is rendered as follows- Just 
as I speak (reveal) this auspicious holy Word of the Veda for all 
people (without discrimination of high or low), so should you 
too communicate it to all people of the world, whosoever, 
whatsoever, where so ever they be'. That is the technique of Swami 
Dayananda also. 

I regard Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma as one in the commendable 
line of Pundit Damodar Satavalekara who studied Sanskrit at a 
mature age and did unique work in that language. Dr. Sharma has 
also mastered the Sanskrit language after his retirement and done 
full justice to the translation of the Veda. He richly deserves our 
gratefulness, our expression of gratification and our appreciation 
for succeeding in his sacred mission of presenting an 
understandable, logical and above all sensible English translation 
of Vedas which hitherto was unavailable. Thus a long felt need 
has been fulfilled. I am sure Dr Sharma's method of translation 
will not only be widely approved but will also be followed by 
others while translating the Vedas in other languages. 


—Dr. Baldev Singh 
Formerly Professor of Sanskrit 
Himachal Pradesh University, 
Shimla (India) 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xix ) 


Sadbhavana (Good wishes) 


Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma, is a profound scholar of English, 
Hindi, Sanskrit and Urdu. But his heart felt devotion goes to sacred 
literature, especially Vedas, Upanishads, Darshan Philosophy, 
Puranas, Ramayana, and Mahabharata with concentration on the 
Bhagwad Gita, Greek, Roman, Sumerian and English Epics, 
Gathas of Zarathustra, Bible, Quran and the writings of Swami 
Dayananda and Swami Vivekananda, in search of the essential 
values of Veda and Sanatan Vedic Dharma. It seems his real spirit 
and scholarly interest lies in the interpretation of the Vedas. I 
have gone through some portions of his English translation of 
Yajurveda and on perusal of this translation, I have marked two 
characterizing features: 

1. His language is perfectly lucid and 

2. His translation is faithful to the word and spirit of the 
Mantras. 

Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma has very correctly observed, "Veda 
is knowledge of existence, pure and simple, as Science is 
knowledge. Science is the knowledge of nature as nature is and 
as it works according to its own laws. In Science, there is no 
story, no history. Similarly, in the Vedas, there is no story, no 
history. And just as Science is knowledge in Scientific language, 
free from local colour and historical variations of form and 
meaning, so Veda too is knowledge in scientific language, free 
from local colour and historical variations." 

Veda is 'Knowledge' and knowledge is eternal. The 
interpretation of the Vedas requires the knowledge of the Arsh 
technique as explained by the Rshis like Yaska, Panini, Patanjali, 
Dayananda and Aurobindo. 

As Veda is pure knowledge, so is this translation in theArsh 
tradition, free from myth and history with no local colour, no 
attitude, no motive, except pure communication of the Original 
for all. 

With best wishes to the author and specially to the readers, 


—Umakant Upadhyaya 
Formerly Professor of Economics, 
Calcutta University. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xx ) 


To the Reader 


This translation of the *Hymns of Yajurveda' is an English 
Version of the Yajurveda for the common reader who wants to 
acquaint himself or herself with the content of this divine message 
of the dynamics of Karma, both human and divine, in the context 
of the nature, structure and purpose of the universe and the 
condition and position of the human being in it. While the opening 
mantra launches the human being on life with the exhortation: 
*Be vibrant as the winds", the closing mantra seals the success of 
vibrant humanity in action with the final achievement of *Om 
Kham Brahma” with Grace Divine. 


Life according to the Yajurveda is a journey from the 
beginning-less beginning to the endless end with the message: 


Immortal child of Divinity, 

Your roots go deep to Eternity, 
Your reach is unto Infinity. 

And your path is up and onwards, 
Never never downwards. 


This version is a scientific translation of the text within the 
parameters of Yaska and Dayananda with rational understanding 
of Sayana at the one end and the western scholars at the other. 
Sayana’s translation is ritualistic especially with reference to yajna. 
It came at a time when the “Renaissance, Re-awakening of 
Learning” was far off, not yet just at the next door. Even 
communication between the East and the West was not as hectic 
as it became after the advent of the East India Company into India. 
Thus mutual criticism and appreciation too was silent rather than 
vocal. Hence Ritualism was just the thing acceptable to a society 
settled on the side of stagnation more than of fermentation. 


Ritual, of course, is sacred. It is the most meticulous 
programme of action in pursuit of a holistic plan of life and living 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xxi ) 


which arises from a spiritual vision of Divinity. It is conducted 
with unreserved commitment of will in faultless action, and 
completed with total surrender in absolute faith. For this reason 
yajna in Veda and Upanishad, is described as the highest human 
action, “Shreshthatamam karma". This view is accepted in this 
translation too. But in addition, an extended interpretation of the 
same view of yajna is incorporated and followed in the light of 
Swami Dayananda, and also as warranted by the exhortation in 
the opening mantra: “Apply yourself to the highest form of action, 
yajna, in the service of Indra, lord of the universe, for the glory of 
the human nation". The highest actions in the world of existence, 
the creative evolution of the universe under the immanent 
presiding presence of Divinity, and the total corporate action of 
humanity for progress, peace and freedom, all this is yajna. And 
this idea leads us to discover for ourselves and understand the 
science, art and technology of participative living for progress, 
from the individual level, through the social, to the cosmic, as 
universal Yajna, human, natural and divine. 


There may or may not be an escape from Sayana, but there 
is no possible escape from Dayananda, and even from westerners 
especially for the sake of caution and self correction. 


I respect the western translators for their clarity and their 
art of communication. In addition, I find that they did recognise 
that the ideal way to interpret and explain the Sanskrit words of 
Indian scriptures such as Vedas was to trace back every word to 
its root, deconstruct and reconstruct it with the addition of the 
affixes, and then structurally explain its meaning. That precisely 
was the approach of Yaska, Panini, Patanjali and Swami 
Dayananda. Monier Williams, author of the well known Sanskrit 
English Dictionary, himself admired the Indians for their scientific 
approach to language, specially Sanskrit: 


“I draw attention at the very threshold to the fact that 
the Hindus are perhaps the only nation, except for the Greeks, 
who have investigated, independently and in a truly scientific 
manner, the general laws which govern the evolution of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xxi ) 
language." (Introduction, p. xii) 


He continues in relation to Sanskrit: *The synthetical 
process which comes into operation in the working of those laws 
may be well called Samskarana, ‘putting together’, by which I 
mean that every single word in the highest type of language (called 
Sanskrita) is first evolved out of a primary ‘Dhatu’—a Sanskrit 
term usually translated as ‘Root’, but applicable to any primordial 
constituent substance, whether of words, or rocks, or living 
organisms, and then, being so evolved, goes through a process of 
‘putting together’ by the combination of other elementary 
constituents." [Sanskrit, thus, becomes a language correspondence 
of the evolution, structure and dynamics of the world of reality, 
and Veda as articulation of the reality of existence. ] 


“Furthermore, the process of ‘putting together’ implies, of 
course, the possibility of a converse process of vyakarana. by 
which I mean ‘undoing’ or decomposition (deconstruction), that 
is to say, the resolution of every root-evolved word into its 
component elements. So that in endeavouring to exhibit these 
processes of synthesis and analysis, we appear to be engaged, 
like a chemist, in combining elementary substances into solid 
forms, and again in resolving these forms into their constituent 
ingredients." (p. xii). And in respect of this special character, 
Sanskrit, he says, is a different language from the Semitic 
languages (of which the Bible and the Quran are expressions). 


And yet, in spite of this clear understanding of Sanskrit, an 
Arsha dictionary remained with him only “a beautiful philological 
dream, a dream, however, which could not receive practical shape 
without raising the Lexicon to a level of scientific perfection 
unsuited to the needs of ordinary students." (p. xiii) 


Why unsuited? The answer lies in his mission and the 
main object of his mission. The scientific way of interpretation 
and explanation was counter to the purpose for which Monier 
Williams was appointed Professor of Sanskrit at Oxford where 
he occupied the Boden Chair after H.H. Wilson who had been a 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xxii ) 


member of the Committee of Public Instruction in India under 
Lord Macaulay as Chairman and Lord William Bentinck as 
Governor General of India. And then English had been accepted 
and introduced as the medium as well as the content of Education. 


Monier Williams says: “One consideration which led my 
predecessor (Professor H.H.Wilson) to pass on to me his project 
of a root-arranged Lexicon was that, on being elected to the Boden 
Chair, he felt that the elaboration of such a work would be 
incompatible with the practical objects for which the Boden 
Professorship was founded... The main object was really a 
missionary one, as I have shown in the Preface of this volume." 
(p. xi) 

The object, Professor Williams explains in the Preface to 
his Dictionary (p. ix): “I must draw attention to the fact that I am 
only the second occupant of the Boden Chair, and that its founder, 
Colonel Boden, stated most explicitly in his will (dated August 
15, 1811) that the special object of his munificent bequest was to 
promote the translation of the Scriptures (that is, the Bible) into 
Sanskrit, so as 'to enable his countrymen to proceed in the 
conversion of the natives of India to the Christian Religion'. 


*Surely then it need not be thought surprising, if 
following in the footsteps of my venerated master, I have made 
it the chief aim of my professional life to provide facilities for 
the translation of our sacred Scriptures into Sanskrit, and 
for the promotion of a better knowledge of the religions and 
customs of India as the best way to a knowledge of the religious 
needs of our great Eastern Dependency (India). My very first 
public lecture delivered after my election (to the Boden Chair) 
in 1860 was on *The Study of Sanskrit in Relation to 
Missionary Work in India' (published in 1861)". (pp. xxi) 


For any student of Veda, specially in India, in fact anywhere, 
it is difficult to overlook the words of Monier Williams in the 
Preface and Introduction to his Dictionary of Sanskrit, for the 
reason that from translation of Christian Scriptures into 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xxiv ) 


Sanskrit with a missionary motive, the translation of Sanskrit 
Scriptures into English was but the next and ‘logical’ step 
with that same missionary motive of conversion, one to extol, 
the other to denigrate: 


One example, of extolment, is the following translation of 
the Bible, “The Gospel according to John’: 


Yohana-likhitah Susamvadah; 
Ishvarasya vakyam Yishor mahatvam avatara katha ca. 


Jesus here is presented as an Avatara, someone a very God 
for the traditional Hindu, although the Gospel does not mention 
the incarnation at all. (The translation of The Bible in Sanskrit by 
J.Wenger is available on the internet.) 


The other example, of denigration, is given here below from 
W.D. Whitney's translation of the Atharvaveda (7, 107, 1) edited 
and revised by K.L. Joshi, published by Parimal Publications, 
Delhi, 2004: 


Namaskrtya dyavaprthivibhyamantariksaya mrtyave. 
Meksamyurdhvastisthan ma ma hinsishuri$varah. 


*Having paid homage to heaven and earth, to the 
atmosphere, to Death, I will urinate standing erect; let not the 
Lords (Ishvara) harm me." 


I give below an English rendering of the same mantra 
translated by Pundit Satavalekara in Hindi: 


*Having done homage to heaven and earth and to the middle 
regions and Death (Yama), I stand high and watch (the world of 
life). Let not my masters hurt me." 


An English rendering of the same mantra translated by 
Pundit Jai Dev Sharma in Hindi is the following: 


*Having done homage to heaven and earth (i.e. father and 
mother) and to the immanent God and Yama (all Dissolver), 
standing high and alert, I move forward in life. These masters of 
mine, pray, may not hurt me." 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xxv ) 


I would like to quote my own translation of the mantra now 
under print: 


*Having done homage to heaven and earth, and to the middle 
regions, and having acknowledged the fact of death as inevitable 
counterpart of life under God's dispensation, now standing high, 
I watch the world and go forward with showers of the cloud. Let 
no powers of earthly nature hurt and violate me." 


‘Showers of the cloud’ is a metaphor, as in Shelley's poem 
‘the Cloud’: “I bring fresh showers for the thirsting flowers", 
which suggests a lovely rendering. 


The problem here arises from the verb ‘mekshami’ from 
the root ‘mih’ which means ‘to shower’ (sechane). It depends on 
the translator's sense and attitude to sacred writing how the 
message is received and communicated in an interfaith context 
with no strings attached (or unattached). 


This extolment and denigration was happening around the 
time when the English language, English education and missionary 
work had been introduced into India and was raging on top. Swami 
Dayananda faced this challenge with boldness and caution, still 
with an open mind, all prepared even for correction. He based his 
interpretation of the Vedas on Nirukta and the etymological 
principles of word interpretation, and interpretation of the word 
in the context, both local and total, because the local is an integral 
part of the total whole. 


We are living in an age of science and reason, democracy 
and freedom, globalism and global communication, and we feel 
the need for a free and frank interfaith dialogue. In such an age, 
ritualism and mythology is not enough. If we want to understand 
and present Veda as a body of universal knowledge and 
articulation of divine awareness of existence, there is no escape 
from Yaska, Panini, Patanjali, Dayananda and Aurobindo, because 
they provide the key principles and practice of scientific 
interpretation of an ancient scientific language such as Vedic 
Sanskrit which has no historical parallel for comparison. The 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xxvi ) 


language of science tells no stories, no myths. It states the truth 
pure and simple. Hence the resort to Swami Dayananda, either 
before or after Sayana and the western scholars, is indispensable. 


There is one observation I must make on Swami Dayananda. 
Swami Dayananda has given a socio-economic orientation to the 
Vedic mantras because he underscores the relevance of the Vedas 
to the social, economic and political situation of humanity, 
especially in India, which was necessary and highly meaningful. 
For example, the Ashwins, in general, are the complementary 
powers of nature and humanity working as twin forces like the 
positive and negative currents of electricity, or like the theoretician 
and the laboratory man, or the curative and recuperative powers 
of medicine and nature's powers of rejuvenation. Swami 
Dayananda often explains such powers in the interest of practical 
understanding: he defines them as teacher and preacher, or father 
and mother, sun and moon, fire and water, prana and Apana 
energy, ruler and council, scientist and engineer, and so on, 
depending on the mantra context. Sometimes it appears as if he 
is delimiting the open-ended general meaning of the Veda. But 
we should be careful before we say so, and realise that the 
definiteness of his meaning is illustrative and in no way 
exhaustive. In this translation such situations have been 
appreciated and the meaning has been kept open ended, inclusive 
of the meanings given by Swami Dayananda, as suggested by 
Yaska and the etymology of the terms. In short, this translation 
has been done with cautious reference to Sayana, under the 
guidance of Swami Dayananda, with respect for Pundit 
Satavalekara and with very careful observance of the western 
anglers. 


Pundit Satavalekara comes in between Sayana and swami 
Dayananda for his excellent syntactic structures of mantra 
meanings in continuous Hindi. But he explains words such as 
Indra, Agni, Ashwins, Vrtra, Trita, Bhujyu, Kashyapa, Jamadagni, 
etc. as proper names so that the mantra appears to be a mythical 
or historical statement of either fact or fiction. But Swami 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xxvii ) 


Dayananda interprets these terms in the yaugic manner and 
explains them as scientific terms of the forms, functions, orders 
and attributes of the powers of existence representing the 
manifestive diversity of one Divinity and one Prakrti in the state 
of objective existence. These words are not historical names, 
because the time context of the creation of the Vedas remains 
unknown beyond history and imagination as even Max Muller 
confessed in his Gifford lectures in 1890. 


This translation respects the entire tradition of Vedic 
interpretation, and under the guidance of this tradition takes Vedic 
interpretation to the original level of scientific rationality in the 
context of modern consciousness, modern language and global 
culture, a message both sanatan and, at the same time, modern 
(ref. Atharva, 10,8,23). 


Take just one example of the problem I have faced, with 
the solution I have suggested: Yajurveda (36, 23) says, if we take 
the literal meaning in the ordinary sense: *May the waters, pranic 
energies and herbs be friendly to us and may they be enemies to 
those who hate us and whom we hate." How can we accept this? 
How can the same waters, tonics and herbs be good friends to us 
and enemies to those we hate or those who hate us? Medicine is 
medicine after all. This is excellent stuff for a translator who 
believes that Vedic poetry is nothing but the voice of a tribal 
society in the barbaric, not civilized, state of social evolution. 
But let us think deeply. What is the context? Who are our enemies 
in that context? Who or what are those that injure us? What are 
those we hate or want to injure and destroy? The context is health. 
In the context of health, they are the ailments, diseases, germs 
and bacteria, viruses, negativities and side effects of medicines 
in our system. So the correct and scientific interpretation in the 
context of health would be: *May waters, tonics, pranic energies 
and medicinal herbs be good friends of our health and immunity 
system and let the waters, tonics, pranic energies and herbal 
medicines act against those ailments, diseases and negativities 
which injure us, which we hate to suffer and which we love to 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xxvii ) 


destroy. Moreover let them have no side effects because side 
effects too aggravate the negativities and injure us." This is the 
reasonable prayer and health programme of an advanced society. 
And then, logically in the next mantra, follows the prayer for a 
full hundred years and more of life and healthy living (Yajurveda, 
36, 24). Veda thus is food for thought. 


In human terms: If a legendary celebrity can admire another 
human figure as “inscrutable, apocalyptic, a mysterious poem 
written in flesh and blood", how much more — infinitely more— 
mysterious, inscrutable, apocalyptic would be the Cosmic Poem 
(Devasya Kavyah) created in the language of the Ultimate Vision? 


Veda is a Cosmic Poem: the more we know, the more we 
know the Veda, and the more we know the Veda, the more we 
know. 


Indeed, every reader should stand before the Veda, every 
verse of It in fact, as Arjuna stood before the Cosmic Krishna, 
waiting and watching intently, for the burst of a thousand suns, 
for the Dawn on top of the Earth, for the Revelation. 


May the light burst forth, I pray. 


—Tulsi Ram 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xxix ) 


Introduction 


This translation of Yajurveda is meant for an average 
English knowing reader who is keen to know: 


What is Veda? What is it all about? Is it old or new? 


If it's old, what is its relevance today? And if it is relevant, is it 
relevant to me also? Or is it relevant only to some particular 
community in some particular country at some particular time. 


These are relevant questions especially in an age of 
science, democracy and globalism. 


Veda is Knowledge. The very word ‘Veda’ means 
knowledge. It is derived from the root ‘vid’, which means: ‘to be, 
to know, to think, and to benefit from’. 


So whatever is, is Veda, the very world of existence is 
Veda. The knowledge of the world of existence is Veda. The 
extension of knowledge through thought and research further is 
Veda. And to use that knowledge for the benefit of mankind with 
the protection and preservation of nature and environment, without 
hurting any form of life, that is Veda. 


Veda is knowledge pure and simple as science is 
knowledge. Science is knowledge of nature as nature is and as it 
works according to its own laws. In science, there is no story, no 
history. Similarly in the Veda, there is no story, no history. And 
just as science is knowledge in scientific language free from local 
colour and historical variations of meaning, so Veda too is 
knowledge in scientific language free from local colour and 
historical variations. Therefore Vedic language has to be 
interpreted and understood according to the laws and technique 
of its own structure as stated by seers such as Yaska, Panini and 
Patanjali and as explained by Swami Dayananda in his 
grammatical works and his notes on Vedic words in his 
commentary on the Vedas. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xxx ) 


But there is a difference between scientific knowledge 
and Vedic knowledge: While science is knowledge of nature to 
the extent that man has been able to discover it, Veda is the 
quintessential knowledge of all that is, including Nature, all that 
happens, all that we are, all that we do, and all that we reap in 
consequence of our action. It is the Original and Universal 
knowledge of the Reality of Existence and the Ideality of our 
aspirations, covering the facts and processes of existence, their 
interaction and the laws that operate in the interaction. In short, 
Veda is an eternal articulation of Omniscience, The Voice of God. 


Vedic knowledge is classified thematically into three: 
Stuti, Prarthana and Upasana. Stuti is, praise, solemn reverential 
remembrance and description and celebration of the attributes, 
the nature, character and function of divine powers. Prarthana, 
prayer, is an autosuggestive resolution to realise our limitations 
and rise above those limitations by calling on Divinity for aid 
and blessings when we have exhausted our effort and potential. 
Upasana is meditation, the surrender of our limited identity to 
participate in the Divine Presence. Stuti implies knowledge 
(Janana), Prarthana implies humility and action (Karma), and 
Upasana implies total love and surrender (Bhakti). So formally 
Vedic knowledge is divided into four: 


Rgveda is the Veda of Knowledge, Yajurveda is the Veda 
of Karma, Samaveda is the Veda of Bhakti, and Atharva-veda is 
Brahma Veda, an umbrella, celebrating the Divine Presence as in 
Book 10, hymns 7 and 8. 


Yajurveda is Karma Veda, knowledge of the application 
of knowledge in practical living in a positive, creative and 
constructive manner at both the individual and the collective level. 
This way of living and working is *Yajna" which, in simple words, 
means a selfless and participative way of life and thereby creating 
the maximum out of the minimum for all, including nature, 
humanity, the environment and the whole universe, with complete 
faith in the living, breathing, self-organising, self-conscious, 
Sovereign System. Living the yajnic way, we realise that Nature 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xxxi ) 


is a tree, Ashwattha, and the entire cosmos including ourselves is 
a Purusha, and we as human beings are but cells in this Divine 
Purusha. Without living this way in a state of full awareness, we 
cannot realise that you and I, Mother Nature and the Supreme 
Brahma are all together, one in union and communion. 


Vedic knowledge then is the Divine knowledge of 
existence from the dimensionless point and particle unto Infinity. 
And prayerful living and communion in meditation and yoga 
means: Self-integration of the particle, Re-integration of the part 
with the whole, and Re-Union of the finite with the Infinite. 


This is the climactic close of Yajurveda: The light and life 
that shines in and beyond the sun is that Supreme Purusha. That 
is there, and that is here in me. 


Om is the saviour. Om is Brahma. Brahma is Infinite, 
Sublime! 


The message of Yajurveda begins with the rousing divine 
call to live: *Be vibrant as the winds!" But we must be gratefully 
vibrant: ^O Lord we pray for and thank thee for the gift of food 
and energy for life, for the health and efficiency of body, mind 
and soul." All of us must dedicate ourselves to Savita, giver of 
life and light, with devotion to the highest, yajnic action, we must 
not hurt the cosmic ‘Cow’, and we must not allow a thief to boss 
over us and deprive us of our freedom of thought, word and deed. 


As you open the text of Yajurveda, you find the words: 
Savita Devata, Prajapati Parameshthi Rshi. ‘Devata’ here means 
the subject which is dealt with in the mantra. ‘Devata’ as a Vedic 
term means a presence, a power, a force, which is brilliant, 
illuminative, and generous. The ‘Devata’ of a mantra may be God, 
the One Sacchidananda Brahma as in the closing mantra quoted 
above, or Savita, the same One self-refulgent God as in the 
opening mantra; or it can be a generous divine power of Nature 
such as the sun, moon, earth; or it can be a noble person of brilliant 
quality of nature, character and performance as a ruler, leader, 
commander, teacher, etc. What the ‘Devata’ means in any 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xxxi ) 


particular mantra depends on the total context that emerges from 
the mantra. 


Prajapati Parameshthi is the Rshi of the opening mantra. 
The Rshi in the Arsh tradition is not the author of the mantra, 
Rshi is the exponent of the meaning of the mantra. As Maharshi 
Yaska says in the Nirukta, Rishis are the ‘seers of the mantras’: 
they are the sages who went into deep meditation unto the 
universal frequency of the Cosmic Mind and experienced the voice 
of Divinity speaking in the mantra; the mantra, a Semantic 
correspondence of the Divine Voice; the Divine Voice, a sound 
correspondence of Divine Awareness of the Reality of Existence 
in the modes of Being and Becoming. 


Who then is the poet of the Vedas? The answer is in 
Yajurveda 40, 8: That Cosmic Spirit which pervades and rules 
every moving particle in the moving universe is “the poet, thinker, 
all-comprehending, and self-existent”. That is the Lord who 
creates the world of existence, ordains the Laws of its dynamics, 
and reveals the poetry of its beauty and majesty, the Vedas. “From 
that Lord of universal yajna were born the Rks and Samans. From 
Him were born the chhandas of Atharva-veda and from Him were 
born the Yajus” (Yajurveda 31, 7). The Vedic lore comes in Pura- 
kalpa, the beginning of the world of humanity 
(Shvetashvataropanishad, 6, 22) and when its function is over at 
the end of the kalpa, one cycle of existence, it retires into Brahma- 
loka (Atharva-veda 19, 71, 1). 


The Vedas were revealed by the Lord Omniscient to four 
primeval Rshis: Rgveda to Agni, Yajurveda to Vayu, Samaveda 
to Aditya, and Atharva-veda to Angira, directly in their spiritual 
consciousness. The Sage Brahma received and collected the four 
from them and passed them on to other sages. 


When were the Vedas revealed? What is their age? How 
old are they? As old as the age of humanity on earth. The Lord 
who creates humanity leaves them not to nature like animals. He 
enlightens them with the knowledge of existence and their place 
in the world, with the vision of their journey, and its culmination. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xxxii ) 


Swami Dayananda works out the age of the Vedas on the basis of 
Surya Siddhanta which in the year 2010 A.D. comes to 
1,96,08,53,110 years. If someone does not accept it and insists 
on historical proof, we learn the problem but no possibility of 
solution on scientific and historical grounds from Max Muller, a 
world renowned Vedic scholar and exegesist of the West: Max 
Muller once ventured to pronounce a purely arbitrary date based 
on unproven assumptions that around 1200 B.C. was the date of 
the Rgveda. Later, he himself warned his students that “Whether 
the Vedic Hymns were composed in 1000 or 1500 or 2000 B.C., 
no power on earth could ever fix .... Whatever may be the date of 
the Vedic hymns... they have their own unique place and stand 
by themselves". The daring presumptions of western scholars 
about the date of the Vedas are exposed by Graham Hancock in 
his latest researches, in his book: Underworld : The Mysterious 
Origins of Civilization (2002). If no history, no Science, no human 
imagination can help, better follow the sages, tradition, Surya 
Siddhanta, and the daily sankalpa of the dedicated Brahmanas, 
and lastly follow the internal evidence of the Vedas themselves: 
Vedas are the Original, Universal, Eternal articulation of Divinity, 
by Divinity, for humanity at the beginning of human creation. 


Since Vedas are the oldest recorded knowledge of the 
world, no one can guess how much time, even ages, might have 
passed between the Vedas and the next work in Sanskrit. If so, 
there is no other work in Sanskrit comparable to the Vedas. 
Consequently the language of any other work would not provide 
any clue for the interpretation of Veda mantras. Vedic language 
then has to be interpreted on its own, and the only key available 
for such independent interpretation is the Nirukta and Nighantu 
of Maharshi Yaska, the grammatical works of Pinini and Patanjali, 
and Swami Dayananda's notes in his commentary on Vedic verses 
explaining the structure and meaning of words. Without reference 
to these bases of Vedic interpretation, certain words have been 
given a very twisted meaning in other translations, by Max Muller, 
Griffith, Whitney, and even Sayana. The torch light for proper 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xxxiv ) 


translation today is the Arsh tradition followed by Swami 
Dayananda. 


The Arsh way is the only right way, the key, to discover 
the truth of the Vedas. According to Shri Aurobindo, Swami 
Dayananda alone, in modern times, possessed this key to the secret 
of the Vedas. Interpreted this way the Vedas shine in their essential 
scientific refulgence. As science is pure knowledge, no story, no 
history, no mythology, so are the Vedas, pure knowledge: 
knowledge of nature, mind, spirit, human society, Dharma, the 
dynamics of existence and the right way of living as individuals 
and as members of organised society upto the international level. 
Even Max Muller, though he was once committed to uprooting 
the religion of India by his arbitrary translation of Rigveda, had 
to admit in his Biographical Essays that: “To Swami Dayanand, 
everything contained in the Vedas was not only perfect truth, but 
he went one step further and, by their interpretation, succeeded 
in persuading others that everything worth knowing, even the 
most recent inventions of modern science, were alluded to in the 
Vedas. Steam Engines, Electricity, Telegraphy and Wireless 
Marconogram were shown to have been at least in the germ known 
to the poets of the Vedas". In fact Shri Aurobindo in his essay on 
“Dayananda and the Veda” goes even further: “There is nothing 
fantastic in Dayananda's idea that Veda contains truth of science 
as well as truth of religion (i.e., Dharma). I will even add my 
own conviction that Veda contains other truths of a Science 
the modern world does not at all possess, and in that case, 
Dayananda has rather understated than overstated the depth 
and range of the Vedic wisdom". (see Bankim, Tilak, 
Dayananda, p. 57). 


The basic requirement of scriptural interpretation for us 
is faith and intellingential solemnity, not doubt and cynicism. This 
way, if we want to confirm our faith in the scientific vision of the 
Veda, refer to Rgveda 1, 34, 7 and 9 for three-stage rocket chariot 
of the Ashwins, to 1, 36, 18 for Agni missile, to 1, 37, 3 for winds 
and communication, to 1, 46, 10 for concentration of light, to 1, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xxxv ) 


52, 1 and 1, 36, 1 for the science of missile defence and space- 
craft, to 6, 46, 11 for missiles and war heads, and so on. Position 
of the solar system with planets and satellites, earth's and sun's 
gravitation, solar healing, parliamentary democracy, 
organisational structure of the nation and the international world, 
water and electric energy, and so many other subjects are hinted 
at in Vedic verses. We need serious research to work out the 
details. Had even Einstein read the Purusha Sukta of the Vedas 
and Brahma Sutras and Sankhya Vaisheshika philosophy, 
probably he would have found clues to his Unified Field theory 
of the universe. 


Beyond faith and intelligential solemnity we need vision, 
potential Darshan of the Vedic Rshis. Once you have had the 
vision of truth, doubts disappear and questions recede into silence 
because then, nothing shines but the Truth, and Divinity Itself 
reveals It's Reality with showers of Grace. In this mood and in 
this spirit, I suggest, you start your search for Vedic Truth and 
the Mystery of Existence. 


Lastly, if the Vedic lore is as old as humanity itself, what 
is its relevance today in the modern world? Ask yourself other 
questions: What is the relevance of Galileo or Newton or the 
Theory of Relativity, two plus two makes four, Swaraj, the Vedic 
word for freedom and self-discipline? Truth is truth, when the 
statement was made is irrelevant. Vedic truth, if you find it 
convincing and acceptable, is relevant not only for today but also 
for all time, to every person, everywhere. 


Yajurveda itself says (26, 2): 
*Yathemam vacham kalyanim avadani janebhyah": 


Just as I speak (reveal) this auspicious holy Word of the 
Veda for all people (without any discrimination of high or low), 
so should you too communicate it to all people of the world 
whoever, whatever, wherever they be. 


—Tulsi Ram 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


( xxxvi ) 


DIACRITICAL MARKS FOR TRANSLITERATION 


Vowels 

81 a am à S d % 1 

3 u a u mw r R or 

[M q dr 

U e u al at o 3 au 

SIR (^ )m fani (:) h 
( 5» 
Consonants 

Guttural 

ck "d kh w g “q gh an 
Palatal 

"Wc Bch Fj Wjh añ 
Lingual 

Zt th xd X dh Wn 
Dental 

dt A th qd 4 dh a n 
Labial 

Xp ph Ab MB squR 
others 

ay X r vef 1 q v 

XS Ws as € h 

(S? Vv m 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


AUM 
YAJURVEDA 


pde: 


CHAPTER-I 
1.  (Savita Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


gU ast ct aad cer dat d: ferat mA 
STRAIN pusema gaa ant wsireldi- 
Tafatsstaent m 4 Ese ea TISAI gas- 
athe rirddt cura agristarmer usr tè ngu 


Ise tvorje tva vayava stha devo vah savita pra- 
rpayatu $resthatamaya karmana' apyayadhva- 
maghnya’indraya bhagam prajavatiranamiva’ 
ayaksma ma va stena’ isata maghasamso dhruva’ 
asmin gopatau syata bahviryajamanasya pasun 
pahi. 

Be vibrant as the winds and thank the Lord 
Creator, Savita, for the gifts of food and energy, light 
and life, for the body, mind and soul. Pray that you 
dedicate yourself to the noblest action, yajna, and play 
your part in the service of the Lord. Be blest with the 
best of health and wealth in plenty, cows, healthy, strong 
and fertile, sacred, not to be killed. No thief to rule over 
you, no sinner to boss over you ! Growing in power and 
prosperity, be firm and loyal to this Lord of the Nation 
and protect the wealth and honour of the yajamana. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


YAJURVEDA 


(Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


ast: uferdufar atte oferta urafisd-at aqista 
fasasissrfa | wrüur smem qxeed Wr amt od 
dfi usu 


Vasoh pavitramasi dyaurasi prthivyasi mata- 
risvano gharmo'si vi$vadha'asi. Paramena 
dhamna drinhasva ma hvarma te yajna- 
patirhvarsit. 


Yajna is sacred. It is the light of the sun, the life 


of the earth, the breath of air, the holy warmth of life 
that sustains and sanctifies existence. Go on, expand 
and raise the joy of life to the heights of heaven. Neglect 
not yajna. May the Lord of yajna never forsake you. 


3. 


(Savita Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


wl: ufadufa vant eui: uferiufu weelemu i 
garat ufaat demq aat: ufenriur gaaon Wer 
gA: Ua 


Vasoh pavitramasi Satadharam vasoh pavitra- 
masi sahasradharam. Devastva savita punatu 
vasoh pavitrena $atadharena supva kama- 
dhuksah. 


Yajna is the sustainer and purifier of countless 


worlds. It is the sustainer and purifier of the universe in 
countless ways. May the lord creator Savita sanctify 
yajna. May the Lord purify and sanctify us with yajna 
and the knowledge of the Veda. What message do you 
hope to receive ? 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-I 3 


4. (Vishnu Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


"ur favara: wr fasadat wr fasaa: | 
super aad fact gerer wen 
Sa vi$vayuh sa vi$vakarma sa vi$vadhayah. 
Indrasya tva bhagamsomenatanacmi visno 
havyain raksa. 


Yajna: it is the life of the world. It is the science 
and structure of the universe. It is the law and sustenance 
of the system. It is the very act of the Lord of Creation. 
I stand by it fast and firm with the light of knowledge 
and the joy of life. 


5. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 
amt waud ad dRentt awa dui wear 
zamena TTT AT uu 


Agne vratapate vratam carisyami tacchakeyam 
tanme radhyatam. Idamahamanrtatsatyamupairmi. 


Lord of the fire of yajna, Lord of Law and vows 
of faith, I take to the vow of commitment to truth and I 
give up the untruth. Bless me that I may be able to keep 
the vow. Bless me that I may realize it. 


6.  (Prajapati Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


weet aie a cat ake wel vm aie aud 
wal Garr i Haut at crederem ei 


Kastva yunakti sa tva yunakti kasmai tva yunakti 
tasmai tva yunakti. Karmane vam vesaya vam. 


Who enjoins you? He enjoins you. Unto what 
does he enjoin you? Unto That/Himself (yajna) does 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


4 YAJURVEDA 


He enjoin you. He enjoins you for karma (action) 
knowledge and virtue (through yajna). 


7. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


wetexta: uereta freue Fretars-— 
sndau:i348-ifismfi ion 


Pratyustain raksah pratyusta' aratayo nistaptain 
rakso nistapta’ aratayah. Urvantariksamanvemi. 


Evil is uprooted, the selfish are eliminated. The 
lawless are punished and corrected. The selfish and anti- 
socials have suffered and converted. Let us be generous, 
as vast as space. 


8.  (AgniDevata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


RÈ yet gia spei ei aise gda vi et a erui 
sreilu: gamtai efaaucuateiau ufüadi sad 
vegdu uu 


Dhurasi dhurva dhurvantam dhurva tam 
yo'sman dhurvati tam dhurva yam vayam 
dhurvamah. Devanamasi vahnitamam sasnita- 
mam papritamam justatamam devahutamam. 


Fire of yajna, you are destroyer and preserver 
both. You save by burning up the evil and the dross. 
Destroy that which destroys. Destroy him who 
desecrates the yajna. Destroy what our yajna burns to 
destroy. To the good you are the quickest and the fieriest, 
greatest purifier, giver of highest fulfilment, most 
reverenced and worshipped by the good and noble 
people. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-I 5 


9. (Vishnu Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


sedate e ferert-i gees ur grat ct ersdfengieiaui 
Pawan HAMAS AAAI TATA PIM ASA i 


Ahrutamasi havirdhanam drinhasva ma hvarma 
te yajnapatirhvarsit. Visnustva kramatamuru 
vatayapahatam rakso  yacchantam panca. 
Lord of yajna, Vishnu, yajna is simple, straight 
and natural. Bless and increase the materials of yajna. 
Neglect not yajna, O man. May the master of yajna never 
forsake it. Lord Vishnu, the sun, expands yajna to space 
to purify the air, to cleanse the environment of evil and 
pollution. Apply your mind and senses to purify the 
yajna (and augment its power). 


10. (Savita Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


dene vor wrferq: Aasaa vet eri weatearg 
amà wed gremium aS eru uoi 
Devasya tva savituh prasave’svinorbahubhyam 
pusno hastabhyam. Agnaye justam grhnamya- 
gnisomabhyam justam grhnami. 

In this yajna of the creator, Lord Savita, I perform 
the yajna with the heat of the sun and the cool energy of 
the moon, and with the two-way motion of the pranic 
energy of the air for the sake of the knowledge of fire 
and of fire and water in the service of the Lord and his 
children. 


11. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 
gerd car mià verfufensti qed aui: gRr- 
adder uferereem arat ureureracms- 
SIRASI gerer Ig 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


6 YAJURVEDA 


Bhutaya tva narataye svarabhivikhyesam 
drinhantam duryah prthivyamurvantariksa- 
manvemi. Prthivyastva nabhau sadayamyaditya’ 
upasthe'gne havyam raksa. 


I set the vedi of yajna on the navel of the earth 
and in the centre of the sky for the prosperity of living 
beings and eradication of poverty and selfishness. Open 
the doors of the homes on earth and let us rise to the 
sky for visions of heavenly bliss. Lord of yajna, Agni, 
protect our yajna and the holy materials for oblations. 


12. (Ap-Savita Devate, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


wfe wait dare fendi: waa edemeeafes ur 
ufertur qat ea Tears: iaefivratssrnrersarimgars- 
sguuer ua teat gadis gerd aadi ga- 
"ru ues 


Pavitre stho vaisnavyau saviturvah prasava 
utpunamyacchidrena pavitrena suryasya 
rasmibhih. Devirapo' agreguvo' agrepuvo’gra’ 
imamadya yajnam nayatagre yajnapatim 
sudhatum yajnapatim devayuvam. 


In this cosmic yajna of Lord Savita, holy fire and 
wind are two carriers of yajna, sanctified by the ceaseless 
showers of the purest rays of the sun. The holy waters 
electrified by the sun, raised by the fire and carried by 
the wind travel through space and sky and shower on 
the earth to feed the growth of life. May the same divine 
rays of the sun, fire and wind, and the holy water carry 
the yajna ever forward, and may these and the yajna 
bless the yajnapati to move ever onward with health, 
wealth and noble virtue. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-I 7 


13. (Indra Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


1 ara eS Aaaa war AS 
Watt deata end'ur spere deren agisetesr: 
uires eem ues 


Yusma' indro'vrnita vrtraturye yuyamindrama- 
vrnidhvam vrtraturye proksita stha. Agnaye tva 
justam proksamyagnisomabhyam tva justam 
proksami. Daivyaya karmane $undhadhvam 
devayajyayai yadvo '$uddhah parajaghnuridam 
vastacchundhami. 

In the cloud-break-up, Indra, the sun, raises the 
waters. On the break-up, the waters act under Indra, 
Sun and wind. The waters are holy and you are sanctified 
by the showers. I consecrate yajna for the sake of agni, 
fire. I sanctify yajna for the sake of agni and soma, fire 
and water. Be pure and seasoned for noble action, for 
godly yajna. If there be things gone impure and polluted, 
I purify the same with yajna for you. 


14. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 
sriizreerreraitseerssrdaers fetcarenifar aft a- 
Rfid 1 aha areca oratfa yada: whe 
verfaeareenied uw 


Sarmasyavadhutain — rakso’vadhuta’ardtayo- 
dityastvagasi prati tvaditirvettu. Adrirasi 
vanaspatyo gravasi prthubudhnah prati tva- 
dityastvagvettu. 


The home of yajna is blessed. Evil is washed off. 
Selfishness and want is eliminated. Yajna is the shield 
of the earth, this home is the shield of the earth. Know 
this and the earth knows this and responds in covenant. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


8 YAJURVEDA 


Yajna is the cloud in the vast sky, replete with water for 
the earth. It feeds and is fed by the greenery. It is the 
preserver of the earth and the sky. Know this and the 
yajna responds in covenant. 


15. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


See arent fart atà car Teta sea. 
tate ermucr nusga deut gfer virrer gest 
write | efdepets efdunpsfs ueu 


Agnestanurasi vaco visarjanam devavitaye tva 
grhnami | brhadgravasi vanaspatyah sa'idam 
devebhyo havih $amisva su$ami samisva. 
Haviskrdehi haviskrdehi. 

Yajna is the metaphor of Agni in fire, wood and 
soma stone, speaking in the divine voice. I do it for the 
gods to receive the gift of divine bliss. Prepare, prepare 
the holy food for the fire. Offer it to the gods and receive 
the divine bliss. Come, come fragrance of life, from the 
flames of yajna-fire. 


16. (Vayu Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


epeepatstur ueifsrgseurmsinrea verat eredgras- 
dga ser addaa wld wr aids ad 
udama: alga srdaersdgcsvait agar fatale 
eat da: ufaa Rivan: uhoaa 
uat nggu 


Kukkuto'si madhujihva'isamurjamavada tvaya 
vayam samghatam samghatam jesma varsa- 
vrddhamasi prati tva varsavrddhan vettu 
paraputain raksah paraputa ardtayo’pahatam 
rakso vayurvo vivinaktu devo vah savita hiranya- 
panih pratigrbhnatvacchidrena panina. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-I 9 


You are the voice of the dawn soaked in honey- 
dew. Bring us the taste of life, strength of energy and 
the light of wisdom and, with you, we'll win the battles 
of the world. Lord of rain as you are, open for us the 
flood-gates of showers. Sin is washed off, miseries are 
gone, evil is eliminated. May the wind refine and carry 
your gifts around. May the Lord of life and light hold 
you fast and bless you with his hand of gold. 


17. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 
girnas a ate Papeete derast 


ae | gad yai deg rei cm aaah 
widasdeat ude em uou 


Dhrstirasyapa'gne' agnimamadam jahi 
niskravyadain sedha devayajam  vaha. 
Dhruvamasi prthivim drinha brahmavani tva 
ksatravani sajatavanyupadadhami bhratrvyasya 
vadhaya. 

Agni, Lord of yajna, bold and fearless you are, 
come and blow out the fire that consumes flesh cooked 
or raw; light the fire that brings holy men together for 
common good. Firm as you are, hold the earth steady 
and advancing. Protect the Brahmana for knowledge, 
protect the Kshatriya for justice and peace, protect all 
mankind and living beings. I call upon you for the protection 
of life, for the destruction of the enemies of life. 


18. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 
ara dal puia ereutuear-afisi qz Talat car 
aaah amaaan anders eremed à edie 
fed exe saat cm aaah amaaan 
wider aa | ferseriszreceansiszrissdasmfir Fact 
weireeiferdr qoa a quum qure ec 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


10 YAJURVEDA 


Agne brahma grbhnisva dharunamasya- 
ntariksam drinha brahmavani tva ksatravani 
sajatavanyupadadhami bhratrvyasya vadhaya. 
Dhartramasi divam drinha brahmavani tva 
ksatravani sajatavanyupadadhami bhratr- 
vyasya vadhaya. Visvabhyastvasabhya’upa- 
dadhami cita sthordhvacito bhrguna-mangi- 
rasam tapasa tapyadhvam. 

Lord of yajna, Agni, you are the centre-hold of 
the universe. Accept our hymns of praise and worship. 
Expand the light and love in our heart. I hold on to you 
for the protection of knowledge, justice and love for all 
like myself and for the elimination of the enemies of 
the joy of life. Lord of the cosmic dance of existence, 
protect and extend our vision of higher knowledge, 
justice and love of life as ourselves, and eliminate the 
enemies of the joy of life. We hold on to you for freedom 
and fearlessness from all directions in time and space. 
Children of the earth, be sanctified in freedom and 
fearlessness in your heart and soul, be consecrated in 
the bright and blazing discipline of the energy of life 
and the law of existence. 


19. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 
smear: veiselsrarsardaesfacareenifu wr 
verfafereivr à Raoa udi ufa coarfacareeneq 
fea cheritte toota mda uft cm udit 
dq ugen 


Śarmāsyavadhūtaň rakso'vadhuta'arátayo'- 
dityastvagasi prati tvāditirvettu. Dhisanasi 
parvati prati tvadityastvagvettu divaskambha- 
nirasi dhisanasi parvateyi prati tva parvati 
vettu. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-I 1 


Yajna is the source of joy, it is joy itself. Evil is 
eliminated, selfishness is eliminated. It is the protective 
cover of the earth. Let the children of the earth know 
this. The chant is the voice of omniscience. It is the 
light of heaven and main-stay of the stars. The chant is 
the music of the showers and the thunder of the clouds. 
Let the children of the earth know, let the beneficiaries 
of heaven know and realize. 


20. (Savita Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 
arate faafe dem wore arama vem eur 
wat a dtatay ufdfaarda at dar d: afer 
ftuar: ufehreurreerfeizrur urfürar redu car 
Tet uats RaR on 


Dhanyamasi dhinuhi devan | pranaya tvo- 
danaya tva vyanaya tva. Dirghamanu prasiti- 
mayuse dham devo vah savita hiranyapanih 
pratigrbhnatvacchidrena panina caksuse tva 
mahinam payo’ si. 

It is food consecrated by yajna, water purified by 
yajna. It is food for the gods, our body, senses, mind 
and soul. Take it for strength and energy, for smartness 
and vitality, for virtue and action toward a long and full 
life. May the Lord Savita, with His unstinted and 
generous hand, bless us with the gifts of light and life 
on the earth in abundance. 


21. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


dat var Ufad: dadsRartaigea eir gaa 
d dort amasei: aardern ras | atadt 


See: Gerdes a Herder: Gara us 9 t 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


12 YAJURVEDA 


Devasya tva savituh prasave '$vinorbahubhyam 
pusno hastabhyam. Sam vapami samapa’ 
'osadhibhih samosadhayo rasena. Sam revatir- 
jagatibhih prcyantam sam madhumatir-madhu- 
matibhih prcyantam. 


With the joint action of the light of the sun and 
the vital warmth of the earth, and with the up and down 
movement of the breath of air, I carry on a triple yajna 
in this creation of Lord Savita. The waters join and 
nourish the herbs, and the herbs join to produce the 
juices. The juices are mixed with the soothing herbs, 
and the soothing herbs with the honey-sweet juices. The 
yajna goes on. Keep it up and on for the sake of life and 
good health. 


22. (Yajna Devata, Antyasya Aagni Sautram Devate 
Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


wad ear dell raria ANARA cat SAT Sha 
favarteedars se teria t ersrdfer: wera re 
vei m igrat aam saag asf 
"meh A 


Janayatyai tva samyaumidamagneridamagni- 
somayorise tva gharmo'si visvayururupratha’ 
uru prathasvoru. Te yajnapatih prathata- 
magniste tvacam ma hiinsiddevastva savita 
Srapayatu varsisthe'dhi nake. 


The yajna I perform is for the well-being and 
prosperity of all on earth. The materials I offer is for 
Agni, to atomize in the fire. It is for Agni and Soma, 
generative powers of nature, for the production of food. 
The fire of yajna is the life of the earth, it is universal. 
Expand it, O man, and join the generative powers of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-I 13 


nature. May the Lord of Yajna, Agni, expand it for 
universal happiness. May the fire never injure your 
protection of body and wealth. May Lord Savita mature 
and perfect your yajna and bring about a very heaven 
of bliss on the earth. 


23. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


m wat afdaenrssrdtedaisdtedsiarer wit 
dard frat car fear cadena car esi 


Ma bherma samviktha’ atameruryajno ’tamerur- 
yajamanasya praja bhuyat. Tritaya tva dvitaya 
tvaikataya tva. 


Fear not, be firm in faith. Yajna is an act of faith. 
May the yajaman's children and other people be faithful. 
Keep it up for three: fire, action and the materials; for 
the purification of air and rain; and for the sole aim of 
happiness and well-being. 


24. (Dyauvidyutau Devate, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


dene vor ufad: tasaa vet Ger eeatvamqi 
smdassenend laasge smetfu afar: uget- 
aft: mad arate faradon fga es us 


Devasya tva savituh prasave '$vinorbahubhyam 
pusno hastabhyam. Adade’dhvarakrtam 
devebhya’ indrasya bahurasi daksinah sahasra- 
bhrstih $atateja vayurasi tigmateja dvisato 
vadhah. 


In this world of Lord Savita’s creation, I perform 
the sacred act of yajna for the well-being of the holy 
ones, for benefit from the light of the sun, soothing peace 
of the moon and the vital breath of air. It is the mighty 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


14 YAJURVEDA 


arm of the sun working with a hundred thousand rays 
maturing the vegetation on earth. It is the caressing 
power of the wind and the generative shower of the 
clouds on all forms of life for growth and energy. It is 
the death of mutual opposition, the elimination of hate 
and resolution of contradictions. 


25. (Savita Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 
yia ansaid ueicur feefurd ast ches 
Test ati a eireiema der ater: area ufzreures 
wed misera ci eb aa freed WT 
Hee 


Prthivi devayajanyosadhyaste mulam ma 
himsisam vrajam gaccha gosthanam varsatu 
te dyaurbadhana deva savitah paramasyam 
prthivyam $atena pasairyo 'smandvesti yam cha 
vayam dvismastamato ma mauk. 

Lord Savita of light and glory, I shall never do 
violence to the fertility of the earth, mother of 
vegetation. The earth is sacred, seat of yajna for the 
holiest of the holy. May the fragrance of yajna rise to 
the clouds and reach the sun and shower rain and light 
on the earth from heaven. On this holy seat of yajna, 
whoever oppresses us, and whom we oppose, bind him 
down with a hundred bonds and leave him not. 


26. (Savita Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 
* wires we afaa: urne ufereure$ vr 
miee a ot ad gen at die d 
shu fae m dat grea at HT eb asi Thes 
ther end à cider der afaa: rpm yfern 
wet mAsa ci cd ad feed ur 
tile Ren 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-I 15 


Apararum prthivyai devayajanadvadhyasam 
vrajam gaccha gosthanam varsatu te dyau- 
rbadhana deva savitah paramasyam prthivyam 
Satena pasairyo'smandvesti yam cha vayam 
dvismastamato ma mauk. Araro divam ma papto 
drapsaste dyam ma skan vrajam gaccha 
gosthanam varsatu te dyau-rbadhana deva 
savitah paramasyam prthivyam Satena pasairyo’- 
smandvesti yam cha vayam dvismastamato ma 
mauk. 


I destroy the evil from the earth which is the holy 
seat of yajna. Go to the congregation for knowledge, 
and shower the rain of knowledge and light of heaven 
on the earth. Lord Savita of light and glory, who ever 
opposes our yajna and whoever we oppose, bind him 
with a hundred bonds and leave him not. The wicked 
must not stop the light of heaven. The bubbles of his 
drink must not vitiate the nectar. Keep going to the 
congregation, bring the light of heaven on earth. 


27. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 
maA ver wur Ra aes cur oa 
aRar mha vor our ra gen rfi 
frat aifa e A gat arepe A 
udad cr non 


Gayatrena tva chandasa parigrhnami traistu- 
bhena tva chandasa parigrhnami | jagatena tva 
chandasa parigrhnami. Suksma casi siva casi 
syona casi susada casyurjasvati casi payasvati ca. 


The earth is beautiful, kind and gracious, rich in 
comfort and security, food and energy, overflowing with 
the honey-sweet juices of fruits. It is so by virtue of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


16 YAJURVEDA 


yajna. I dedicate myself to yajna with the inspiring music 
of gayatri, ecstatic freedom of trishtubh, and illuminating 
expansiveness of jagati. 


28. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


qu egre fagat ferfterqarart ufereit sire 
anna a aera sfrcieitsarTfass asa 
Wattinrates feral asa uci 


Pura krurasya visrpo virapsinnudadaya prthivum 
jivadanum. Yamairayamscandramasi svadha- 
bhistamu dhiraso' anudi$ya yajante. Proksanir- 
asadaya dvisato vadho 'si. 

Lord of virtue and power, having taken up the 
earth with its generative power, you placed it in the 
region of the moon in life-friendly space. Brave men of 
honour and virtue take up mighty arms and eliminate 
the destructive, and restore its powers and dignity. Pious 
men in advance perform yajna with oblations of 
rejuvenating materials and restore the generative powers 
of the earth. Men of virtue perform yajna, fight 
negativities and keep the balance of nature. Yajna is the 
death of the enemies of life. 


29. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


udeng: ueberssndaar freuen Preas- 
arida: srfsifsrdrsfa wucrfergrfsrd cat ersreury 
eal | uena: cusberssmiaür fedus 
frecurssrdaa: | Rrasa wucifirgrfsrii car 
areal Gar Re 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-I 17 


Pratyustam raksah pratyusta'aratayo nistaptain 
rakso nistapta'aratayah. Ani$ito'si sapatnaksi- 
dvajinam tva vajedhyayai sammarjmi. Pratyustam 
raksah pratyusta’ aratayo nistaptam rakso 
nistapta' aratayah. AniSita’si sapatnaksidvajinum 
tva vajedhyayai sammarjmi. 

Yajna is not a sharp-edged weapon of destruction 
but a peaceful mode of regeneration. The lawless are 
uprooted, the selfish are driven out. I take up the yajna 
materials for the recuperative purpose and consecrate 
these for the offering. The force of yajna is positive, of 
love and non-violence, but it is most effective in 
operation. It corrects the lawless, converts the selfish 
and eliminates the destructive. I honor this power for 
the sustenance of nature, life and humanity. 


30. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 
affer wet aote wisde ar 


waparetugerfi | eraa aes aan emet emer A 
Tq BAVIAT dol 


Adityai  rasnasi visnorvespo’syurje  tva'- 
dabdhena tva caksusavapasyami. Agnerjihvasi 
suhurdevebhyo dhamne dhamne me bhava 
yajuse yajuse. 


Yajna, you are the nectar of life for the earth. You 
are the presence of Vishnu, the creative power of yajna. 
You are life on the earth and light in the sky. You are the 
tongue of Agni, tasting the sweets of life. I see this 
presence in truth with steady and blessed eye for the 
sake of food, energy, and the light of life, in every place 
and in every chant of mantra. You are so close, invoked 
so freely, so be gracious for me too. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


18 YAJURVEDA 


31. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


fegset waessseliamafessur fertur eles TAR: | 
Gadd: weerssed-merfusaur uferxur gees TAR: | 
acts srenddieergd afar ara arate fret ara 
spec gamana sen 


Savitustva prasava' utpunamyacchidrena 
pavitrena suryasya rasmibhih. Saviturvah 
Prasava’ utpunamyacchidrena pavitrena 
suryasya rasmibhih. Tejo’si Sukramasyamrta- 
masi dhama namasi priyam devanamana- 
dhrstam devayajanamasi. 


Yajna, I consecrate you in the creation of Savita 
with a ceaseless shower of the purest rays of the sun. I 
consecrate you all in this cosmic yajna of Savita with a 
ceaseless shower of the purest rays of the light of 
Divinity. You are the light and fire. You are the life and 
immortality. You are the heaven, you are the Word, you 
are the darling of the gods, fearless and inviolable, you 
are the lord of worship for the pious, you are the light 
and life for humanity. 


sta waratseara: N 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


18 


CHAPTER-II 


1. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 
Pusat car wr tat afte aes 
var Wet Mate erf fer egrezrecar rez watan u 


Krsno’syakharestho’ gnaye tva justam proksami 
vedirasi barhise tva justam proksami barhirasi 
srugbhyastva justam proksami. 


Yajna is seated in the vedi carved out on the 
ground, and it is carried to the sky by the window. I 
refine and consecrate the holy offerings for the fire in 
the vedi. The fragrance rises to the sky for the higher 
vedi there for the formation of waters. I refine and enrich 
the holy materials/offerings consecrated by the fire for 
the yajna in the sky. The yajna is holy waters floating in 
the sky for showers on the earth. I refine, enrich and 
consecrate the holy materials of oblations, offered with 
ladles into the fire, for yajna from the sky. 


2.  (YajnaDevata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


afte epd-aufu fant vquisequiuasi car confit 
meae dasa spud: carer sped ceret 
Ward ude caret uz 


Adityai vyundanamasi visnoh stupo’syurna- 
mradasam tva strnami svasastham devebhyo’ 
bhuvapataye svaha bhuvanapataye svaha 
bhutanam pataye svaha. 


Yajna is shower of life for the earth. It is the fiery 
flag-pole of Vishnu. I refine the offerings with the stony 
grinder and cover the snug and beautiful vedi with food 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


20 YAJURVEDA 


for the gods. The yajna is for the Lord of the earth, it is 
for the Lord of the world, it is for the Lord of all the 
creatures, it is for the best creative souls among 
humanity. 


3.  (AgniDevata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


Trideat arada: uftasmg faves aster 
utiteataesttsa: | ster oetfa afo 
fraen eà mae uftfeteataitess tea: 
Raato arara: uerai yeror edon fergerearfieei 
aeaee uipi i ea: TEST 


Gandharvastva visvavasuh paridadhatu visva- 
syaristyai yajamanasya paridhirasyagni- 
rida'iditah. Indrasya bahurasi daksino 
vi$vasyaristyai yajamanasya paridhirasyagni- 
rida iditah. Mitravarunau tvottaratah pari- 
dhattam dhruvena dharmana visvasyaristyai 
yajamanasya paridhirasyagnirida 'iditah. 


Agni, Lord Supreme of the light and life of the 
universe, worthy of worship and worshipped through 
yajna, is Gandharva, the rest and haven of the world 
that holds the earth and the Divine Word. It is Agni, the 
fire and the sun, and Indra, the wind and rain of the 
cosmic energy that feeds and sustains the dynamics of 
existence. It is Mitra and Varuna, complementary 
motions of the cosmic circuit which feed and maintain 
the vitality of life. May Gandharva uphold the yajna 
and be all-round protector of the yajaman for the welfare 
of the world. May yajna, the right hand of Indra, provide 
for all-round protection of the yajaman toward the 
welfare and advancement of humanity. May Mitra and 
Varuna by their natural and inviolable dharma, provide 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-II 21 


for the yajaman's protection from above for the peace 
and progress of the world. Agni, worthy of worship, 
study and meditation, and worshipped, studied and 
researched through yajna, is the ultimate haven of the 
world, and yajna is the highest creative and productive 
action of humanity performed individually and 
collectively. 


4. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


AR cat ena wpegeufsfe i 
art qeta irs 


Vitihotram tva kave dyumantam samidhimahi. 
Agne brhantamadhvare. 


Agni, Lord Omniscient, may we, in this act of 
love and non-violence, light the fire of yajna, great and 
blazing giver of the gift of joy and prosperity, and may 
we, through this yajna, worship, study and meditate on 
you, Lord Almighty, greater than the greatest, most 
glorious and most generous giver of the light of 
happiness. 


5. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


fira fa sui eor areata ur encitfzerafurgizct | 
aagal xe 15301 Heri cer xquirfir versi Sasa 
ver edat wsrsasnfacm: deu p uuu 

Samidasi suryastva purastat patu kasya- 
ScidabhiSastyai. Saviturbahu  stha'urna- 
mradasam tva strnami svasastham devebhya’ a 
tva vasavo rudra 'adityah sadantu. 


Yajna: you are samidha, food of Agni, for the 
illumination of rare qualities. May the sun, with its two- 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


22 YAJURVEDA 


fold power of illumination and rejuvenation, protect and 
prepare you in advance for the sacrifice and higher life. 
May all the eight Vasus (abodes of life), eleven Rudras 
(sustainers of life) and twelve Adityas (lights and 
durations of life in time) come and participate in the 
rejuvenation as in the spring session of yajna. For this 
refinement and advancement of life I cover the yajna- 
vedi, snug, beautiful and pleasing, with holy offerings. 


6. (Vishnu Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 
yart stem ae fiir erat fires wassmdta 
waredequremem di Ao emed fis nasora 
qart gar ArT Se firur emet fier Gasset 
fuer eme fir masami d qarsəataa qq 
ari a fahr ure urf eub afte aad urfz at 
Iain u 


Ghrtacyasi juhurnamna sedam priyena dhamna 
priyam sada’ asida ghrtacyasyupabhrnnamna 
sedam priyena dhamna priyam sada' asida 
ghrtacyasi dhruva namna sedam priyena 
dhamna priyain sada'asida priyena dhamna 
priyam sada’ asida. Dhruva’ asadannrtasya 
yonau ta visno pahi pāhi yajnam pahi yajnapatim 
pahi mam yajnanyam. 


You are an instrument of yajna, Juhu by name, 
the ladle to offer oblations into the fire. With your own 
dear place and position in the yajna, enrich this home 
with all the gifts of plenty. You are Upabhrta by name, 
close by to carry offerings for the fire. With your own 
dear position and power, bless this happy home with 
all the gifts of joy. You are Dhruva by name, firm and 
inviolable in yajna. With your own dear power and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-II 23 


potential grace this blessed home with all the gifts of 
peace, freedom and progress. Be with this happy place, 
dwell here with all power, potential and grace, firm, 
secure, inviolable, in this blessed home of yajna, the 
seat of truth and righteousness. Vishnu, Lord 
Omnipresent and Universal yajna, protect all these, 
preserve and advance the yajna, protect and bless the 
yajnapati, save me and protect and advance the 
organization and system of yajna. 


7. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


arit anita art cer aed artistas weite 
wat dasa: caer faqed: Gad A sqpuTeTH igi 


Agne vajajid vajam tva sarisyantam vajajitam 
sammarjm. Namo devebhyah svadha pitrbhyah 
suyame me bhuyastam. 


Agni is the Lord of light and life, it is fire both 
physical and vital. It is the giver and purifier of food 
and the secret of victory and glory. It is fast in motion 
and action, burning up the libations and sending them 
up into the sky. I worship Agni and refine agni through 
yajna for food and energy, light and victory. Salutations 
to the Devas, celestial powers of light; food for the Pitris, 
powers of nourishment. May they both help us with food 
and energy to win honour and glory for us. 


8. (Vishnu Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 
sehr mensa mere Uftaranfestor ferui 
m coda erudite: wd cesranqdzsr fant 
verdiuaeitasg-si AAAHUIg Sf ssercsameeriq. ue. t 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


24 YAJURVEDA 


Askannamadya devebhya’ ajyam sambhriyasa- 
manghrina visno ma tvavakramisam vasumati- 
magne te cchayamupasthesam visno sthanam- 
asita' indro viryamakrnodurdhvo'dhvara' 
asthat. 

Vishnu, Lord Omnipresent, universal yajna, I 
bring libations of ghee, pure and secure, for the devas 
through the fire of the vedi. Agni, Lord of Yajna, may I 
never neglect or violate yajna, and I pray I may always 
live in your protective shade. The fire in the vedi is the 
seat of Vishnu. It rises from the vedi to the vast sky and 
from there the sun and wind carry it all round and 
convert it into the noblest acts of the devotees. 


9. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 
sri debi adamda wt wmetuferetssret @ 


aata Repna gs aA gfaat sparrer 
a wafer fA: usu 


Agne verhotram verdutyamavatam tvam 
dyavaprthivi’ ava tvam dyavaprthivi svistakrd- 
devebhya’ indra’ajyena havisa bhitsvaha sam 
Jyotisa jyotih. 

Agni, Lord of light and life, protect the act of 
yajna into the fire, protect the fiery rise of fragrance 
into the sky, protect the heaven and the earth, and may 
the heaven and the earth carry on your blessed purpose 
of yajna. May the sun, light of the world, with its 
radiance convert the libation of holy materials into the 
richest food for nature and for holy men. This is the 
voice of Divinity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-II 25 


10. (Indra Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


Tietdsstea demere wat waa: veran 
STEHTeh Uaioe: Gear 4: axarferassdear ufzreit 
aAa ni dfereit rar Gaara haart veret ue ot 


Mayidamindra 'indriyam dadhatvasman rayo 
maghavanah sacantam. Asmakam santvasisah 
satya nah santvasisa upahuta prthivi matopa 
mam prthivi mata hvayatamagniragni-dhrat 
svaha. 

May Indra, Lord Supreme of power and glory, 
in-vest me with the powers of sense and mind. May He 
enrich us all with the knowledge wealth and prosperity 
of the world. May all our hopes and aspirations come 
true and turn into blessings for all of us. May the mother 
earth invoked and served by us be kind and bless us. 
May Agni bless us from the vedi, the seat of yajna, with 
the gifts of fire. This is the voice of Divinity. 


11. (Dyavaprithivi Devate, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


sda elrferdra uri eirfarar gaa Ranea caret 
er ver afad: hasaa t uerit Senay 
Ufergrerr gre urn us eu 


Upahuto dyauspitopa mam dyauspita hvayata- 
magniragnidhrat svaha. Devasya tva savituh 
prasave'$vinorbahubhyam pusno hastabhyam. 
Pratigrhnamyagnestvasyena prasnami. 


Heavenly Father, invoked and worshipped! May 
the Heavenly Father receive me into His care and bless 
me with the gifts of fire from the vedi, the seat of yajna. 
In this blessed world of Savita's creation, you receive a 
free flow of good health and nourishment from the arms 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


26 YAJURVEDA 


of Ashwinis and the hands of Pusha, nature's currents of 
energy and the motions of vital air. Yes, with my own 
mouth, I take in the food and inhale the breath of life 
from the vital fire of the Lord's yajna. This is the voice 
of Divinity. 

12. (Savita Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


ud d da Ufadda wedged aerd | 
at cde wt ad aa ara ngon 


Etam te deva savitaryajnam prahurbrhaspataye 
brahmane. Tena yajnamava tena yajnapatim 
tena mamava. 

Lord Savita, this is the yajna of creation, the 
dynamics of existence and the paths of living in Dharma 
with knowledge, action and worship together in yajna. 
This yajna is for thee, they say. It is for Brihaspati, man 
of knowledge, and Brahma, man of faith and vision, to 
know and receive the highest gifts of yajna. Lord of 
existence, save yajna by yajna, save yajnapati by yajna, 
save me by yajna. 


13. (Brihaspati Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


"firi den | faye dardsge ulacrarirsurfusue a u 


Mano jutirjusatamajyasya brhaspatiryajna- 
mimam tanotvaristam yajnam samimam 
dadhatu. Visve devasa’iha madayantamom 
pratistha. 


The mind is fast, instant in motion. May my mind 
benefit from the offerings of yajna. May Brihaspati, 
Lord of the wide world, expand the yajna of existence. 
May the Lord sustain this yajna of ours in love and peace 
without violence. May the powers of nature be ever fresh, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-II 27 


may all good people ever rejoice by yajna. Be firm by 
Om, the voice of existence, the Eternal Word, the very 
name of the Divine. Om and yajna is our haven. Let it be 
so in our heart. 


14. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


wat Asar fire alta cem ot eres 1 aa 
a am ow uia 1 srt emen ar 
agai ASAT ue 


Esa te’agne samittaya vardhasva ca ca 
pyayasva. Vardhisimahi ca vayama ca 
Dyasisunahi. Agne vajajidvajam tva Sasrvamsam 
vajajitam sammarjmi. 

Agni, Lord of the fire of Yajna, this samidha (fuel 
wood) is food for you. Burn with it, grow, expand and 
illuminate. With the growth of yajna, expand us too in 
body, mind and soul. We shall grow, and we shall 
expand in body, mind and soul. Agni, you are food. 
You are knowledge, speed and motion. You are the lord 
of knowledge, speed and progress and the winner of 
victories. For the growth of food and knowledge, for 
the acceleration of speed and motion, and for the sake 
of victory over want and evil in life, we study, refine 
and multiply the power of fire through yajna for the 
common good. 


15. (Agni-Shomau Devate, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


amidase aster wr weet urelfi 
amir aadyqad ase site a dt aa fut 
astern weermdlerfa | saree esie 
m Wee Metà i gari aadyqaat alscary Site 
ad aa fg aster wseemdlerfa uu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


28 YAJURVEDA 


Agnisomayorujjitimanujjesam vajasya ma 
prasavena prohami. Agnisomau tamapanu- 
datam yo'sman dvesti yam ca vayam dvismo 
vajasyainam prasavenapohami. Indragnyo- 
rujjitimanujjesam vajasya ma prasavena 
prohami. Indragni tamapanudatam yo'sman- 
dvesti yam ca vayam dvismo vajasyainam 
prasavenapohami. 


Let us follow Agni and Soma, lords of fire and 
water and win whatever this duo has won. With 
inspiration for growth and development, we dedicate 
ourselves to study and work. May Agni and Soma ward 
off whoever hates us. For the sake of growth and 
development, we reject whatever we don't approve. Let 
us follow Indra and Agni, lords of power and fire, and 
win what this duo can win. With inspiration for growth 
and development, we dedicate ourselves to study and 
research. May Indra and Agni ward off whatever/ 
whoever hates us. For the sake of growth and 
development, we reject whatever we all hate. 


16. (Dyavaprthivi and Mitravarunau Devate, Parameshthi 
Prajapati Rshi vyantu iti Uttrardhasy Agni Devata) 


tamato cr qea | ard aarexhetor 
"redi gadis emm gsc fad wes adi at 
aende | aaarssimsta watt urf& ues 


Vasubhyastva rudrebhayastvadityebhyastva 
samjanatham dyavaprthivi mitravarunau tva 
vrstyavatam. Vyantu vayoktam rihana marutam 
prsatirgaccha vasa prsnirbhutva divam gaccha 
tato no vrstimavaha. Caksuspa'agne'si 
caksurme pahi. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-II 29 


Yajna is dedicated to the study of eight Vasus, 
supports of life, eleven Rudras, catalytic agents of the 
justice of existence, and twelve Adityas, centres of 
gravity and balance of nature. May we, with science 
and reason, know with reference to the sun and the earth 
what we can achieve with the yajna extended in space. 
May Mitra and Varuna, currents of vital energy, protect 
and enrich the world with rain. May the oblations in 
yajna rise to the sky with the wind, and from the sky to 
the sun with the cosmic currents, and bring down from 
there showers of rain to feed the rivers of earth. Just as 
birds go to rest in their nests, so do we, devotees of the 
Lord, meditate on the secrets of vaidic hymns to discover 
the mysteries of yajna. Agni, Lord of light and life, you 
are the giver of vision. Protect my eye and bless me 
with vision. 


17. (Agni Devata, Devala Rshi) 


«i URS weiekerssrrt aerafurfatzigratar: (i dium] 
wre sama Aradudaatassra: fusi mAs- 


diqu ue 


Yam paridhim paryadhattha'agne deva- 
panibhirguhyamanah, Tam ta'etamanu josam 
bharamyesa nettvadapacetayata’agneh priyam 
patho 'pitam. 


Agni, Lord of light and life, you hold and sustain 
the law of Dharma observed by the powers of nature 
and celebrated in the songs of the seers. I accept and 
act within the bounds of that law and feed upon the 
foods provided by nature and yajna. May I never neglect 
or violate that law. May I never be ungrateful to the 
Lord. May I never lose the vision of Divinity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


30 YAJURVEDA 


18. (Vishvedeva Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 
qse wren ged: uedresr: dfirabyer ar: 
gui adai fasd qpurdssmuemnfum. wféfu 
maaa T ATS US 
Samsravabhaga sthesa brhantah prastaresthah 
paridheyasca devah. Imam vacamabhi vi$ve 
grnanta’asadyasmin barhisi madayadhvam 
svaha vat. 

Stay firm, dedicated children of the earth, on the 
rock-bed foundations of knowledge and justice, and, 
great and expansive within the bounds of Divine law, 
sit around this yajna fire on seats of grass, chanting the 
holy songs of praise, offering the honey-sweets of your 
produce to the fire and receiving from agni, in return, 
the nectar of life. Thus you celebrate the Lord’s gift of 
life. Thus you enjoy in unison. Surrender and play your 
part, this is the voice of Divinity. 


19. (Agni-Vayu Devate, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


garei cat eal ures YA eet: GAY At ere, | ae 
qwa asst a age fra afkoma Rae d 
afde uen 


Ghrtaci stho dhuryau patam sumne sthah sumne 
ma dhattam. Yajna namasca ta 'upa ca yajnasya 
Sive santisthasva sviste me santisthasva. 

Fire and wind are foremost movers of the wheels 
of yajna. Replete in nutriments such as ghee and water, 
they are nature's agents of the growth and sustenance 
of humanity in comfort and joy. Yajna and humility are 
auspicious for you. Be firm in your devotion and 
performance and you will live happy in the protective 
shade of the Divine. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-II 31 


20. (Agni-Sarasvati Devate, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 
arisasemarssitau ure at fear: urfa wfdcr urfa 
fie ufe qtarnsetad 4+: fud poy | quar 
art taal arsma ndà carer MAA 
Senay carat uon 


Agne’dabdhayo’sitama pāhi ma didyoh pahi 
prasityai pāhi duristyai pāhi duradmanya’ 
avisam nah pitum krnu. Susada yonau svaha 
vad-agnaye samvesapataye svaha sarasvatyai 
yasobhaginyai svaha. 


Agni, Lord of universal yajna, giver of life, free 
and without fear, save yajna from evil and violence, 
save me from suffering, save me from bondage, make 
our food free from poison and inedibles, may our home 
be a blessed place of peace and happiness. This oblation 
is for Agni, protector of the home and the earth, this is 
for Sarasvati, voice of the Divine, sister of honour. 


21. (Prajapati Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 
aaista aa at aa ae xa: aatssiaeea vet 


w yn dat mea ud fara mafia | 
WduedsgH de amestatar aid at: us 


Vedo’si yena tvam deva veda devebhyo vedo’- 
bhavastena mahyam vedo bhuyah. Deva 
gatuvido gatum vittva gatumita. Manasaspata’ 
imam deva yajnam svaha vate dhah. 


Prajapati, Lord of the universe, omniscient, you 
are Veda, Divine Word Itself. The knowledge by virtue 
of which you are omniscient for the seers and sages, 
who know the Veda and the ways of the world, is the 
knowledge for me too. Enlighten me with that. The seers, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


32 YAJURVEDA 


having realized that knowledge of existence, sing the 
hymns and follow the paths of virtue. Lord of mind and 
knowledge, take this yajna with the winds to the heights 
of heaven and place it there. Our oblations for that yajna. 


22. (Indra Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


a efétzcaaresgferat gaa cata: wert: 
verat 3 


Sambarhiranktam havisa ghrtena samadityair- 
vasubhih sammarudbhih. Samindro visvadeve- 
bhiranktam divyam nabho gacchatu yat svaha. 


Let the yajna-vedi be covered with havan 
materials seasoned with ghee and offered by the best of 
devotees and let the fragrance, carried by fire, wind and 
currents of energy, rise to the heights of the sky with 
Adityas, Vasus and Maruts and, there in the regions of 
light, the sun would mix the fragrance with its rays and 
convert it into vital vapour to shower on earth as water. 


23. (Prajapati Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


exer fadsafa a var fadsata eet var fadsate 
weet car fadsetfa 1 urate vetat setts eau 


Kastva vimuncati sa tva vimuncati kasmai tva 
vimuncati tasmai tva vimuncati. Posaya 
raksasam bhago 'si. 


(i) Who leaves (offers) the oblations into the 
fire? Who releases nature-materials into the cosmic 
yajna of creation? The yajnapati. Prajapati, Lord Creator 
and father of His creatures. For what purpose? For self 
realization. For His purpose of creation. For 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-II 33 


nourishment, for preservation and protection, for 
destruction of the destroyers. 


(ii) Who gives you away/up? He gives you away/ 
up. For what purpose/to what end? For self-realization/ 
self-negation. For nourishment: you are the share of the 
good and the protectors; even of the wicked and the 
destroyers, but, for their punishment and destruction. 


24. (Tvashta Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 
a am uta aanta ater acres i 
wal Gent fader warsdare cat agit qr 


Sam varcasa payasa santanubhiraganmahi 
manasa sam $ivena. Tvasta $udatro vidadhatu 
rayo numarstu tanvo yadvilistam. 


May Lord Tvashta, eternal maker and generous 
giver, bless us with lustre of character and light of 
knowledge, food for body, mind and senses, peace and 
nobility of mind, good and glowing health of body. May 
the Lord grant us all kinds of wealth and stability. May 
He complete and perfect whatever is wanted in our body 
and mind and refine us with culture and virtue. 


Let us advance with holy light and lustre, honey- 
sweets of food and blooming health, and a mind at peace 
with noble aspirations, and attain all round prosperity. 
And may Tvashta, Eternal Maker and generous giver, 
complete what is lacking in our life and refine us to a 
state of perfection. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


34 YAJURVEDA 


25. (Vishnu Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


fafa hurija wma wer ddr Prater 
qere uou ad fuedpserfiar fereupedoneivd 
repr wa ad Feith aseareite ub dt aa 
fom: dfereur aortas WAU aT Act 
Foie dpunafe ad ot aa fgatsenaateet 
Wfresrarserr-n tq: a warfare ud 


Divi visnurvyakramsta jagatena chandasa tato 
nirbhakto yo'smandvesti yam ca vayam dvismo’ 
ntarikse visnurvyakramsta traistubhena 
chandasa tato nirbhakto yo'smandvesti yam ca 
vayam dvismah prthivyam visnurvyakramsta 
gayatrena chandasa tato nirbhakto yo'sman- 
dvesti yam ca vayam dvismo'smadannad asyai 
pratisthaya’ aganma svah sam jyotisabhuma. 


Vishnu, yajna, performed with the ecstatic chant 
of jagati verses, reached the regions of the sun, and from 
there eliminated all that opposes us and all that we 
oppose for the sake of life. Vishnu, yajna, performed 
with the spontaneous chant of trishtubh verses, rose up 
to the middle regions of the sky, and from there 
eliminated all that opposes us and all that we oppose 
for the sake of life. Vishnu, yajna, performed with the 
joyous chant of gayatri verses, went over the earth, and 
from there eliminated all that opposes us and all that 
we oppose for the sake of life. Feeding on the gifts of 
nature purified by yajna, let us rejoice, and in the service 
of the balance and harmony of life and existence, let us 
rise to the heights of heaven and we'll be one with the 
light of knowledge and Dharma. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-II 35 


26. (Ishvara Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


reat smt rfsudeiarssffu aat A ate 1 
yiera ues 


Svayambhurasi $restho ra$mirvarcoda' asi 
varco me dehi. Suryasyavrtamanvavarte. 


Lord of the universe, self-existent, self-refulgent, 
greatest of all, giver of light and honour, give me light 
and honour. I follow the path of the sun in orbit, the 
path of Dharma revealed by you. 


27. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 
amet eua wTeufaweratsrisg yeda qae- 
qria mats yeda yar: | sre uit 
TMU weg wae: usernpeauemdd uu 


Agne grhapate sugrhapatistvaya'gne'ham 
grhapatina bhuyasam sugrhapatistvam 
maya'gne grhapatina bhuyah. Asthuri nau 
garhapatyani santu Satam himah suryasyavrta- 
manvavarte. 


Agni, Lord of the House of Existence, Master of 
knowledge and the fire of yajna, great as you are as the 
keeper and sustainer of the world, so may I too, with 
you as the ideal, be a good and efficient house holder. 
And you too, over me, head of this family, be the 
protector and sustainer of this household. May we two, 
husband and wife, together perform the duties of the 
home for a good hundred years. May I follow the path 
of life like the sun in orbit, the path of Dharma revealed 
by you. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


36 YAJURVEDA 


28. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


art dud edd ads asisueitane a 
Tarstet ASRA ure 


Agne vratapate vratamacarisam tadasakam 
tanme’ radhi’damaham ya’ eva'smi so'smi. 


Agni, Lord of vows in the discipline of Dharma 
and Truth, whatever vows at your behest I have followed 
or would follow, I have followed and would follow 
because you made it possible and would make it 
possible. This me here, whatever I am, I am. Whatever 
I sow, so shall I reap. 


29. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


smd paama tater Urata fuu caret | 
sidgarsata tartesfa Afad: usu 


Agnaye kavyavahanaya svaha somaya pitrmate 
svaha. Apahata' asura raksamsi vedisadah. 


This oblation is for Agni, Lord of knowledge and 
giver of the gifts of knowledge and yajna through the 
science of yajna-fire. This is for Soma, lord of peace 
and prosperity and the beauty of the seasons and powers 
of nourishment. In truth and according to the voice of 
the Veda, the ignorant, the wicked, the cruel and unjust, 
robbers and grabbers of the vedi, seat of yajna, asuras 
of the earth are eliminated by righteous action for 
humanity. 


30. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 
X weurful ufegqserat-arssTHdu: red: Taera centu 
TT fragt 3r srisafisrerteeirenrq WOT © N 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-II 37 


Ye rupani pratimuncamana’asurah santah 
svadhaya caranti. Parapuro nipuro ye 
bharantyagnistamllokat pranudatyasmat. 


And who are the asuras? They are masters of 
hypocrisy and the art of changing faces. Friends and 
allies of the wicked, they encroach upon the rights of 
others and fill their coffers with ill-gotten wealth. 
Enemies of humanity, they roam around the world like 
giants. Agni, Lord of light, justice and social yajna, let 
them be thrown out and eliminated from the face of the 
earth. 


31. (Pitaras Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


at fudit areas aerated HTSIERTH | 
sive fat ammm sen 


Atra pitaro madayadhvam yathabhagama- 
vrsayadhvam. Amimadanta pitaro yathabhaga- 
mavrsayisata. 


Trustees and guardians of society, men of 
knowledge and wisdom, justice and merit, take your 
share as you deserve and, in your own right and proper 
place here, rejoice and celebrate the victory of yajna. 
Make all others happy and, as they deserve on merit, let 
them too rejoice and celebrate. 


32. (Pitaras Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 
"dl a: aA vata dl a: faa: viria Hb a: 
fusi sitara vat a: fü: caer aut a: fü 
ana aut a: fratt waa saat a: fugi: fada zat 
at rd: frat aa dat a: foatt Gurag: frat 
ard: nN 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


38 YAJURVEDA 


Namo vah pitaro rasaya namo vah pitarah 
Sosaya namo vah pitaro jivaya namo vah pitarah 
svadhayai namo vah pitaro ghoraya namo vah 
pitaro manyave namo vah pitarah pitaro namo 
vo grhannah pitaro datta sato vah pitaro 
desmaitadvah pitaro vasah. 


Salutations to the seniors of knowledge for the 
joy of learning. Salutations to those seniors who fight 
out exploitation. Salutations to the guardians of society 
for the joy of life and the means of the good life. 
Salutations for economic, social and political justice. 
Salutations for the fight against suffering for the advent 
of happiness. Salutations for righteous anger against 
the wicked. Salutations to the seniors, leaders and the 
guardians of knowledge, justice and well-being, life of 
good health, prosperity and happiness. Come to our 
homes and institutions and bless us with your gifts. 
Come that we may offer you the best we have. Come 
and accept our hospitality and gifts of clothes as mark 
of gratitude. 


33. (Pitaras Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


anda fara mf apart Usha d 
"erg yese uad 


Adhatta  pitaro | garbham | kumàáram 
puskarasrajam. Yatheha puruso 'sat. 


Teachers of knowledge, masters of wisdom, 
admit into your house of learning this boy wearing a 
lotus garland as a mark of desire for education. Accept 
him and hold him here as a mother bears the foetus in 
her womb so that he grows and is shaped into a brave 
and cultured young man. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-III 39 


34. (Apo Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


wot aeea ud ud: enremet aay i 
raat eat adda À Tay uswu 


Urjam vahantiramrtam ghrtam payah kilalam 
parisrutam. Svadha stha tarpayata me pitrn. 


Be masters of your own wealth and power and 
manage it well with justice and in virtue. Offer liberal 
hospitality with love and reverence to the senior 
benefactors of society, men of knowledge, experience 
and wisdom. Offer them delicious drinks of water and 
nourishing juices, health giving milk and ghee, 
sumptuous foods and honey-sweet fruits to their 
satisfaction. 


gta fedtitseara: n 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


40 YAJURVEDA 


CHAPTER-III 
1. (Agni Devata, Angirasa Rshi) 


aiea dena seit eraerfdfen à 
amfed4 geur wena ue 


Samidhagnim duvasyata ghrtairbodhayatathim. 
Asmin havya juhotana. 


Light up the fire and raise it with fuel, serve it 
like an honourable guest with pure ghee, and offer rich 
oblations of samagri into it, with love and faith. 


2.  (AgniDevata, Sushruta Rshi) 


ait wirferd we dte Sere | 
arat wradeds usu 


Susamiddhaya Socise ghrtam tivram juhotana. 
Agnaye jatavedase. 


To the fire, omnipresent, lit up, rising bright and 
blazing, sanctifying everything around, offer libations 
of ghee, pure, inflammable and purifying. 


3. (Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 
a wat ufa get engan | 
sever afar a 


Tam tva samidbhirangiro ghrtena vardhaya- 
masi. Brhacchoca yavisthya. 


O agni, bright and beautiful, young and powerful, 
generous giver of things, we offer samidhas and ghee 
and raise you to the heights. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-III 41 


4. (Agni Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


sd cars gfemddrdarefisi« eae d 
wee ufum wet ine 


Upa tvagne havismatirghrtaciryantu haryata. 
Jusasva samidho mama. 


O fire, bright and beautiful, generous giver, here 
come to you my samidhas soaked in ghee and fragrant 
things. Accept them, accept them. 


5. (Agni Vayu Surya Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
ada: vq atRa spear Yad after 1 eui 
vuferfer saat weis fierdtararememama st un t 


Bhur bhuvah svar dyauriva bhumna prthiviva 
varimna. Tasyaste prthivi devayajani prsthe’ 
gnimannadamannadyayadadhe. 


In expanse as vast as the bright heaven, in virtue 
as firm and generous as the earth, agni is ever present 
on the earth, in the sky and in heaven. Earth Mother, 
seat of yajna by the devas (noble people and the powers 
of nature) for the devas (good people and the powers of 
nature), here on the ground in the vedi on your surface, 
I place the sacred fire, consumer of the oblations of food, 
for the sake of food and energy. 


6.  (AgniDevata, Sarparajni Kadru Rshi) 


ami Ù: qfsdxentade- urn Ut: | 


faat cr Waxed: tg tl 


Ayam gauh prsnirakramidasadan matararn 
purah. Pitaram ca prayantsvah. 


This earth, child of the sun and waters in space 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


42 YAJURVEDA 


— solid concentration of agni (fire) and apah (waters) 
— revolves in its orbit round the sun, its father and 
sustainer in heaven, through the presence of its mother, 
the waters in space. 


7. (Agni Devata, Sarparajni Kadru Rshi) 
aasch rere urgmeurrdt |i 
eum ufzsr fadu wein 


Anta$carati rocanasya pranadapanati. 
Vyakhyan mahiso divam. 


The power of Agni is light and energy/electricity 
which creates and produces the circuitous currents- 
going up as prana in the universe as well as in the body, 
and the complementary current going down as apana in 
the body as well as in the universe. This universal energy 
of Agni is a mighty power which is the light of heaven 
and burns in the sun. 


8.  (AgniDevata, Sarparajni Kadru Rshi) 
Pressure fender eren dagt sfr ad 
ula ede aft: ue 
Trimsaddhama virajati vak patangaya dhiyate. 
Prati vastoraha dyubhih. 

Vak, the speech mode of Agni, dominates thirty 
abodes of life (out of thirty-three) and is used in the service 
of its lord, Agni, for the expression of the light of 
knowledge with which the omniscient and omnipresent 
power illuminates the world. 

9.  (Agni-Surya Devate, Prajapati Rshi) 
saath: Carel Gat vurfevutta: «si: 
wt | aNd wade: crear wat reet 
Aade: caret 1 Safa: Gal: gat arte: gt N 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-III 43 


Agnirjyotirjyotiragnih svaha -suryo jyotirjyotih 
suryah svaha. Agnirvarco jyotirvarcah svaha 
suryo varco jyotirvarcah svaha. Jyotih suryah 
suryo jyotih svaha. 


Agni, Supreme Spirit, is the light (jyoti) of 
existence, and Light (jyoti), Eternal Consciousness, is 
the identity of the Spirit. Vak, the virtual speech of 
Eternity is the common attribute of both spirit and 
consciousness. 

Sun, the Lord of Life, is the light (jyoti) of the 
world, and Light (jyoti), Omniscience, is the identity of 
the Sun, the Divine teacher of teachers. Veda, the 
universal voice of Divinity is the common attribute of 
both the knower (sun) and knowledge (Omniscience). 

Fire is the power and prosperity of the world, and 
power and prosperity from the heat energy of fire is 
converted to power by science and technology. 
Tecknowledge with its language is for the common 
benefit of both, the fire and the user. 

The sun is the power and prosperity of the world, 
and power and prosperity flows from the vital energy of 
the sun converted to power by science and technology. 
Tecknowledge with its language is for the common 
benefit of both, solar energy and the user. 

Light is the Lord and the Lord is Light. Light 
and the Lord are one. Veda, knowledge, is coexistent 
with both in unison. We offer the oblations to the Lord 
for the Light in faith with reverence. 


10. (Agni-Surya Devate, Prajapati Rshi) 


weet afar ay Aa »owperuitssrfiedq 
wee | wegen ufaat aseresac | TOT: 
gat aq carat ngon 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


44 YAJURVEDA 


Sajurdevena savitra saju ratryendravatya. 
Jusano' agnirvetu svaha. Sajurdevena savitra 
sajurusasendravatya. Jusanah suryo vetu svaha. 


May Agni, along with Savita in His creation and 
the dark night of energy, receive this oblation. 

May the Sun, along with Savita in His creation 
and the dawn of morning energy, receive this oblation. 


11. (Agni Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
suu-dlssreen mA areas i 
BSB SA gua (i$! 


Upaprayanto’ adhvaram mantram vocema- 
gnaye. Are’ asme ca Srnvate. 


Close to the vedi, while we are performing this 
sacred yajna, we chant the mantras for Agni who hears 
the chant near at hand as well as far away. 


12. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi) 


anaiai fea: eneperfd: uferearssram | 
sTareSiale$fu fsrefw 1221 


Agnirmurdha divah kakutpatih prthivya' ayam. 
Apain retamsi jinvati 
This Lord of the earth, Agni, who rules on high on 
top of heaven, constantly refreshes the generative powers 
of the waters for the earth. 


13. (Indragni Devate, Bharadvaja Rshi) 


sr aifirgnissmgesatsssm tela: we naadh 
wr qatati anita add ua 
ar ugsn 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-III 45 


Ubha vamindragni' ahuvadhya' ubha radhasah 
saha madayadhyai. Ubha dataravisarn 
rayinamubha vajasya sataye huve vam. 


Indra (wind and electric energy) and Agni (heat 
and fire), givers of energy, food, power and wealth, I 
call upon you both and invoke you for the gift of 
knowledge, energy, and food for joy and well-being. 


14. (Agni Devata, Devavata and Bharata Rshis) 
ara a ANa aat wrdrssmerem: i 
ad wrTdrssmüpgren At agar TT ew 


Ayam te yonirrtviyo yato jato' arocathah. Tam 
janannagna' arohatha no vardhaya rayim. 


Agni, Lord of the Universe, the fire is born of vayu, 
wind and electric energy, and, according to the seasons, 
rises and shines and, like the suns, brightens the world. 
Knowing that, and with the knowledge of that, raise us 
and develop our power and wealth. 


15. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


state ta enfer emqfreiar afstectsateatedied: | 
meters wet aera far fervet fafa n 


Ayamiha prathamo dhayi dhatrbhirhota 
yajistho’ adhvaresvidyah. Yamapnavano 
bhrgavo virurucurvanesu citram vibhvam 
visevise. 

Here in the world of Lord Agni, the fire, placed 
and lighted in the vedi by the devotees, is the first and 
foremost agent of yajna for production and 
development. Adorable and worthiest of pursuit in study 
and research through collective action of the most 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


46 YAJURVEDA 


cherished kind as it is, scholars of the science of heat 
and energy should maintain and continue through their 
disciples the tradition of research and development of 
this wonderful and versatile power in laboratories and 
institutions in every country for every community. 


16. (Agni Devata, Avatsara Rshi) 


iig Waray a dagsga: d 


NQGI 


Asya pratnamanu dyutam $ukram duduhre’ 
ahrayah. Payah sahasrasamrsim. 


The Rishis and scholars dedicated to the study of 
the heat and light of agni in yajna have discovered and 
received the purest showers of the waters of life from 
this timeless source-power of a thousand gifts of 
achievement (just as you tend and milk the mother cow 
and receive the gift of the purest nourishment for life). 


17. (Agni Devata, Avatsara Rshi) 


ases wat OU ourmqaissierseandi afa 
wearsastersfirereb d ef 1 ama ast dmm 
AASSTAUT ul 


Tanupa' agne’si tanvam me pahyayurda’agne’- 
syayurme dehi varcoda' agne’si varco me dehi. 
Agne yanme tanva’ unam tanma’ aprna. 


Agni, you are protector of the body with health 
and nourishment. Protect my body. You are the giver of 
life. Give me full life. You are the giver of lustre and 
glory. Give me lustre and glory. Whatever is short and 
wanting in me, that, I pray, fulfil and complete and 
perfect. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-III 47 


18. (Agni Devata, Avatsara Rshi) 


bici dn faatae verfa 3 rekemen 


Indhanastva $atam hima dyumantain samidhi- 
mahi. Vayasvanto vayaskrtam sahasvantah 
sahaskrtam. Agne sapatnadambhanama - 
dabdhaso' adabhyam. Citravaso svasti te 
paramasiya. 


Agni, wonderful lord and treasure-home of the 
wealth of the world, we, men of full life and vigour, 
strong yet forbearing, fearless and irresistible, having 
lighted the fire of yajna in worship of you — you, bright 
and blazing, giver of life and health, strength and 
forbearance, irresistible destroyer of enemies —we pray 
that we keep the fire of yajna burning and bright in 
honour and service of you. May we, by your grace and 
blessing, overcome the want and hurdles of life and 
attain prosperity and happiness. May we thus live on 
for a hundred years and more. 


19. (Agni Devata, Avatsara Rshi) 


a ann quier aciamean: aginst | a 
fact smem e a ade a wT a 
Terardor fast ure 


Sam tvamagne suryasya varcasagathah 
samrsinam stutena. Sam priyena dhamna 
samahamayusa sam varcasa sam prajaya sam 
rayasposena gmistya. 


Agni, celebrated by the Rishis’ songs of praise, 
come full well with the light and glory and energy of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


48 YAJURVEDA 


the sun to your own home of celebrity. Come that I may 
also, with the same songs of praise and the pranic energy 
of the sun, come to attain a happy home, full age, honour 
and lustre, a good family and liberal means of life. 


20. (Apo Devata, Yajnavalkya Rshi) 


are emet at weit ud ca wel at srefpursi 
eat at refer qrereare ter Treen aT stair it 


Andha sthandho vo bhakstya maha stha maho 
vo bhaksiyorja sthorjam vo bhakstya rayasposa 
stha rayasposam vo bhakstya. 


There are foods for health — herbs, vegetables, 
grains, etc. — I would feed upon these to be strong. 
There are foods for greatness — agni, vayu, electricity, 
knowledge, etc. —I would feed upon these and be great. 
There are foods for energy — water, milk, ghee, honey, 
etc. — I would take these and be smart and energetic. 
There are rich tonics — invigorating, rejuvenating — I 
would take these to increase my competence and 
efficiency. 


(Know the quality of foods and drinks and take 
what is good to maintain your health and efficiency). 


21. (Vishvedeva Devata, Yajnavalkya Rshi) 


Yeldt theese inis atecirep sfera ati 
Bea *d Aa Ren 


Revati ramadhvamasminyonavasmin gosthe’- 
sminlloke' smin ksaye. Ihaiva sta mapagata. 


Revati — all the variety of wealth, good health, 
sense and mind, knowledge, ethics, good conduct, cows, 
etc. — may abound in this life, this body, this home, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-III 49 


this farm-house, everywhere in this world. Rejoice, 
never forsake these. May these too never forsake you. 


22. (Agni Devata, Vaishvamitra Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


wefearfd farase ureter tia 1 sd wart 
feafea aTatercaférar aa var masr 3 u 
Samhitasi visvarupyurja mavisa gaupatyena. 
Upa tvagne divedive dosavastardhiya vayam. 
Namobharanta’ emasi. 


Immanent in all the forms of existence, universal 
energy, come, inspire and bless me, as a protector and 
sustainer. Agni, dispeller of darkness of the night, we 
come to you for light day in and day out. With all our 
wealth of food and energy, mind and intelligence, in all 
humility and faith, we come to you. 


23. (Agni devata, Vaishvamitra Madhuchhanda Rshi) 
mteaa roared ata far | 
aS aAA A usd 


Rajantamadhvaranam gopamrtasya didivim. 
Vardhamanam sve dame. 


With all our wealth and power, in all faith and 
humility, we come to Agni, bright and blazing, protector 
and sustainer of yajnas, illuminater of Truth, Right and 
the Law of existence, thriving in His own state of bliss. 


24. (Agni Devata, Vaishvamitra Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


aa: fude mas qure we | 
Bata A: xen URS 


Sa nah piteva sunave'gne supayano bhava. 
Sacasva nah svastaye. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


50 YAJURVEDA 


Agni, as father to the child, be the father, guardian 
and protector for all of us. Be with us always, for 
happiness and well-being. 


25. (Agni Devata, Subandhu Rshi) 
sr cb Wissrdussq urar fetal dar ene? | 
enirfiredsrerssrest Afar Gaara at: usw 
Agne tvam no’ antama’ uta trata Sivo bhava 


varuthyah. Vasuragnirvasusrava’ accha naksi 
dyumattamam rayim dah. 


Agni, life of our life, saviour, kind and gracious, 
be an intimate friend and giver of goodness. Vast abode 
of all, brilliant and all-percipient, bless us richly with 
the brightest wealth and knowledge of the world. 


26. (Agni Devata, Subandhu Rshi) 


v vet virferes Afaa: arr p ufus: 1a 
at oer set gde Uilssrarad: GACT URE N 


Tam tva Ssocistha didivah sumnaya nunamimahe 
sakhibhyah. Sa no bodhi $rudhi havamurusya 
no’ aghayatah. samasmat. 

Lord of the universe, Light of life, purest of the 
pure and self-luminous, we pray sincerely for happiness 
for us and our friends. May the Lord enlighten us and 
hear our chant of yajna, may He save us from sin and 
evil. 


27. (Agni Devata, Shrutabandhu Rshi) 
sssugfdasuf& enrrarsud i 
aft ww: eR sare URI 


Ida’ehyadita’ ehi kamya' eta. Mayi vah 
kamadharanam bhuyat. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-III 51 


Come earth, come freedom, justice and 
abundance. May all desires come true wholly. May the 
Lord in-vest me with the stability of ambition and 
fulfilment thereof. 


28. (Brihaspati Devata, Prabandhu Rshi) 
RAs Pups eror | 
cnaitedd astra: ren 


Somanam svaranam krnuhi brahmanaspate. 
Kaksivantam ya’ auSijah. 

Lord of Eternal knowledge, keen as I am for 
knowledge and learning like a very child of Wisdom, 
shape me into a scholar with a sense of ethical values, a 
persuasive speaker and a teacher and maker of 
rejuvenating tonics. 


29. (Brihaspati Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


at tary Asahia dge: | 
a a: faved weg ure 


Yo revan yo’amivaha vasuvitpustivarddhanah. 
Sa nah sisaktu yasturah. 

May He who is Lord of wealth and knowledge, 
who destroys pain, grief and disease, who is the knower 
of all the good things of the world, who gives all physical 
and spiritual strength, who is keen and instant in doing 
and having things done, may He bless us with all virtues 
and good actions. 


30. (Brahmanaspati Devata, Varuni Saptadhriti Rshi) 
Al A: yDeHESSTURWE oft: Wore Aes |d 
tat ur sm Boll 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


52 YAJURVEDA 


Ma nah $amso' araruso dhurtih pranan 
martyasya. Raksa no brahmanaspate. 


May our songs of praise never be lost. Lord of the 
universe and of the Divine Word, save us against the 
selfishness and violence of the mrtals. 


31. (Aditya Devata, Varuni Saptadhriti Rshi) 


"fé iomas eat Raeadr: | 
auf AAE gae 


Mahi trinamavo’ stu dyuksam mitrasyaryamnah 
Duradharsam varunasya. 

Lord of the universe, may the generous and 
inviolable protection of the three, Mitra (pranic energy 
both internal and external), Varuna (air and water), and 
Aryama (sun and stability) be ours for the divine 
knowledge of the Veda, illuminating, irresistible, and 
great. 


32. (Aditya Devata, Varuni Saptadhriti Rshi) 


afè vata a atedyy arate a 
Set Roasts: URRM 


Nahi tesamama cana nadhvasu varanesu. Ise 
ripuraghasamsah. 


Never in their homes, nor in their paths of life, nor 
ever in their defences, shall there be any enemy or a 
supporter of evil. The Lord is in command of the life of 
the pious devotees. 


33. (Aditya Devata, Varuni Saptadhriti Rshi) 
a fe wardrsasrfad: u sitaa aceite | 
SSIES 1133 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-III 53 


Te hi putraso' aditeh pra jivase martyaya. 
Jyotiryacchantyajasram. 


Mitra, pranic energy, Varuna, air and water, and 
Aryama, the sun, they are the children of Imperishable 
Nature. They provide inexhaustible light and energy for 
the life and sustenance of the mortals on earth. 


34. (Indra Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 
wat at Etta at cuvufu um a 
sag Huen wassa a ard xeu Gera sei 


Kada cana starirasi nendra sa$casi dasuse. 
Upopennu maghavan bhuya' innu te danam 
devasya prcyate. 


Indra, lord of generosity and well-being, when is 
it that you don't wholly favour the man of charity, 
overwhelming him with gifts of knowledge and joy? 
Lord giver of power and prosperity, your gifts of reward 
for karma (action), again and again, constantly, follow 
upon the philanthropists' acts of charity. 


35. (Savita Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 


wq dfagesius ant mew sifz i 
frat at 4: owed usu 


Tatsaviturvarenyam bhargo devasya dhimahi. 
Dhiyo yo nah pracodayat. 


Let us meditate on the blazing glory of Savita, Lord 
Creator, pure and generous giver of light and happiness 
— glory which is magnificent, most worthy of our choice. 
And may the Lord with His grace inspire our mind and 
will to dedicate ourselves to noble actions. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


54 YAJURVEDA 


36. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


UR à «qeu vemseutsussiydrq farad: i 
aa tatfe umm: uasa 


Pari te dudabho ratho'smain' asnotu visvatah. 
Yena raksasi dasusah. 


That formidable chariot of knowledge by which 
you protect and redeem the man of charity in all ways 
from all sides, by that very chariot protect us too, Lord 
of the Universe, and let us cross the panorama of 
existence. 


37. (Prajapati Devata, Vamedeva Rshi) 


aaa: ta: Gost: weft: wee di: qur: 
me: pre wot N are vreset us 3 ured ftd 
a ur usen 


Bhurbhuvah svah suprajah prajabhih syam 
suviro viraih suposah posaih. Narya prajam me 
pāhi samsya pasun me pahya-tharya pitum me 
pahi. 

Lord Existent, Intelligent and Blissful, merciful to 
the noble people, protect my people, Lord worthy of 
praise, protect my wealth and cattle, Lord firm and 
irresistible, protect my food, I pray, may I be a happy 
family man with noble people and children, nobly brave 
with heroic friends around generously supportive, blest 
with rich means of health and support. 


38. (Agni Devata, Asuri Rshi) 
santa femedaunend ufedu | 
amt worst gear agsarteses 11320 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-III 55 


Aganma vi$vavedasamasmabhyam vasuvitta- 
mam. Agne samradabhi dyumnamabhi 
saha'ayacchasva. 


Agni, Lord of the Universe, blesses with all round 
honour and glory, all round enduring strength. Light of 
the world, may we realize and attain to the spirit 
omniscient of the universe, to the power omnipresent in 
the abodes of life in the world. 


39. (Agni Devata, Asuri Rshi) 


amami diré wa: strat aa fads: | 
amet qecashr ger wgssmedwsra 13811 


Aymagnirgrhapatirgarhapatyah prajaya 
vasuvittamah. Agne grhapate bhi dyumnamabhi 
saha'ayacchasva. 


This agni that resides in the home with the inmates 
is the sustainer of the home and brings all kinds of wealth 
to the family. Agni, Lord of Light and Energy, bless us 
with honour and glory all round and bless us with 
enduring strength all round. 


40. (Agni Devata, Asuri Rshi) 


amma: dren tear yfad: od 
art yie gem wgssndesra ison 


Ayamagnih purisyo rayiman pustivardhanah. 
Agne purisyabhi dyumnamabhi saha’- 
ayacchasva. 


This agni is the source of wealth, with it we grow 
and develop in health and prosperity, it helps to complete 
our plans and projects, to make up all our wants and to 
grow further. Agni, Lord of Light and Energy, bless us 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


56 YAJURVEDA 


with all round honour and prosperity, bless us with 
strength and endurance all round. 


41. (Vastu Agni Devata, Asuri Rshi) 


"Ter "ur fesita m Auai fendasudfa i 
aot fersdg: gaat: qaer Teri Ata raura: ine u 


Grha ma bibhita ma vepadhvamurjam bibhrata’ 
emasi. Urjam bibhradvah sumanah sumedha 
grhanaimi manasa modamanah. 


Masters of the house, inmates of the home, fear 
not, tremble not. Bubbling with energy and power, go 
forward. With energy, power and enthusiasm, with a 
happy heart and high intelligence, I come home rejoicing 
at heart, for you. 


42. (Vastupati Agni Devata, Shamyu Rshi) 


retenu weet ae Sa aE: | 
wua wd at Seed Oa: seu 


Yesamadhyeti pravasan yesu saumanaso bahuh. 
Grhanupahvayamahe te no janantu janatah. 


The man far away, the visiting guest, remembers 
the homes abundant with happiness of the mind and 
open doors of welcome. We, the guests and chance 
visitors call at such homes. They know us, may they 
continue to know. 


43. (Vastupati Devata, Barhaspatya Shamyu Rshi) 
sdedisse Wassdedssmiad: | atatssttet 
Amass Ted a: | Erde a: yay uda 
Rrra yi: eat: rss 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-III 57 


Upahuta' iha gava’ upahuta'ajavayah. Atho’ 
annasya kilala’ upahuto grhesu nah, Ksemaya 
vah $antyai prapadye Sivam $agmain $amyoh 
Samyoh. 


The cows are brought and called in, sheep and 
goats are brought and called in, and then, plenty of food 
is brought in and stored in our homes for your comfort 
and safety and for our comfort and protection. With all 
the means of comfort in safety, I am at peace with the 
joy of well-being. Peace! peace! and joy! 


44. (Maruts Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


wart care meds RIEA: | 
amot asda: weed 


Praghasino havamahe marutasca risadasah. 
Karambhena sajosasah. 


We home-keepers invite and treat guests and 
learned men dedicated to yajna who, free from 
ignorance, are men of universal love, who fight evil 
and remove human weakness, and who welcome our 
hospitality and love and enjoy good food. 


45. (Maruts Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


rx wa edu ad aura ufafud d 
aaga efe dqeeemag vem Irs 
Yadgrame yadaranye yatsabhayam yadindriye. 
yadenascakrma vayamidam tadavayajamahe 
svaha. 

Whatever wrong we have done or might do in 


our village community, in the forest among the foresters 
(Vanaprasthis), in the assembly or in the mind with our 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


58 YAJURVEDA 


senses, that we abjure and give up, and whatever is 
true and good, to that we commit ourselves and dedicate. 


46. (Indra and Maruts Devate, Agastya Rshi) 


Ay utsge org Arfa fe wat c vrferarera: i 
Tears "itt aden gfasiat met ere Tf: (nes t 


Mo su na' indratra prtsu devairasti hi sma te 
Susminnavayah. Mahascidyasya midhuso yavya 
havismato maruto vandate gtih. 


Mighty Indra, in the battles of this life, protect 
us well along with the learned and the wise, hurt us not. 
Lord of infinite power, surely the high and divine voice 
of yours reveals the nature and virtue of those who, in 
every season, with appropriate samagri, perform the 
yajnas. The yajamana, host-performer of yajna, with his 
offerings sings the songs of praise in honour of the lord 
of rain and the carriers of the yajna, the winds. 


47. (Agni Devata, Agastya Rshi) 


amA ch eed: Ge erem Herne i 
ang: wi pom Ud ayga: dee 


Akran karma karmakrtah saha vaca mayobhuva. 
Devebhyah karma krtvastam preta sacabhuvah. 


Men of noble action, yajna, who act together in 
the company of the pious and dedicated people, using 
the delightful language of love in communication in 
accordance with the sacred Word of the Divine, Veda, 
having played their part, go home and retire from life 
in peace and tranquillity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-III 59 


48. (Yajna Devata, Aurnavabha Rshi) 
saya Para faeta Prager: | ste gada- 


teria Atep Gera de fru- 
atè nss 


Avabhrtha nicumpuna nicerurasi nicumpunah. 
Ava devairdevakrtameno 'yasisamava martyair- 
martyakrtam pururavno deva risaspahi. 


Cleansed and purified by knowledge and Dharma, 
I am calm and constant. You are calm and constant too. 
I collect and arrange the Samidhas (fuel wood for yajna) 
and through yajna, give up the sins committed with the 
mind and senses as well as the evil done with the body. 
You too save yourself from sin and evil. Lord Supreme, 
save us from violence, sin and evil, the cause of long 
suffering. 


49. (Yajna Devata, Aurnavabha Rshi) 


got fé ud ug ade yanda i 
aera fesnlumegrszuusie Srdendt (né 


Purna darvi para pata supurna punarapata. 
Vasneva vikrinavaha' isamurjam satakrato. 
The ladle, full with ghee and samagri, goes up 
(to the sky from the vedi). It comes down to the earth, 
full again (with water). Lord of infinite vision and a 
thousand yajnas, may we too, yajamana and the priest, 
give and take, as in exchange,yajna, food, energy and 
other things. 


50. (Indra Devata, Aurnavabha Rshi) 


ef Ud xaifa ata afe Hd aa 
fet a ete d fer faea à carat uod 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


60 YAJURVEDA 


Dehi me dadami te ni me dhehi ni te dadhe. 
Niharam ca harasi me niharam niharani te 
svaha. 
In truth of word: you give me, I give you. You 
use what I give you, I use what you give me. Give me 
for a price, I pay the price to you. 


51. (Indra Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


aama ure frarssiged | steed tanta 
fam aean adh aist feng a ow une 


Aksannamimadanta hyava priya'adhusata. 
Astosata svabhanavo vipra navisthaya mati yoja 
nvindra te hari. 


Lord of the world/assembly, Indra, your people, 
learned and wise, brilliant in their own right, with latest 
application of their mind and discovery/invention, sing 
in praise of the Lord, celebrate their success, feast and 
enjoy themselves and, dear even to others who are 
opposed, shake the enemies of humanity. Saddle your 
horses fast, Indra. Rise up, nation, with all your might 
and mind. 


52. (Indra Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


aes vem ad qe aai a aa guider 
qur atts ayisen ast fag A ST ug? 


Susandrsam tva vayam maghavan vandisimahi. 
Pra nunam purnabandhura stuto yasi vasaim’ 
anu yoja nvindra te hari. 


Lord of the world/President of the assembly. 
Indra, lord of all the wealth and power, brilliant and 
blissful to the eye, we sing songs of praise for you. Sung 
and celebrated, full of love and kindness, everything in 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-III 61 


bond with you, you proceed to us with all the gifts and 
blessings for us. Saddle your horses fast, Indra. Rise 
up, nation, with all your might and mind. 


53. (Mana Devata, Bandhu Rshi) 

Tat erae ARTS Sa |d 

Fagor a AAT: 3n 

Mano nvahvamahe nardsSamsena stomena. 

Pitrnam ca manmabhih. 

With the contribution of our predecessors, 

continuous sacrifice and dedication of our colleagues, 
and the generous resources of our seniors, we 


concentrate on the mind to develop its power and 
potential all round. 


54. (Mana Devata, Bandhu Rshi) 
at Ast Wa: Ua: wA cata sia d 
ren A Et FT oux 


A na’ etu manah punah kratve daksàya jivase. 
Jyok ca suryam drSe. 


May the mind, seat of memory, come to us whole 
and entire, again and again, from birth to birth across 
time, for continuous and cumulative retention of 
knowledge, karma and sanskaras — seeds and 
impressions of thoughts, actions and ideas — for 
growing strength and competence, for increasing health 
and longevity of life and for a constant vision of the 
Sun, the Supreme Spirit of life and the universe. 


55. (Mana Devata, Bandhu Rshi) 


uii: fuat Tit aata da wa: | 
Wet areas uuu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


62 YAJURVEDA 


Punarnah pitaro mano dadatu daivyo janah. 
Jivam vratam sacemahi. 


May this wonderful sagely man, with the 
blessings of our forefathers who protected, prepared and 
shaped him, help us regain, here and hereafter, a noble 
mind and intelligence, so that with him we live a virtuous 
life of discipline and holy vows. 


56. (Soma Devata, Bandhu Rshi) 
erae ad da watery fada: od 
wida: wem usd 


Vayam soma vrate tava manastanusu bibhratah. 
Prajavantah sacemahi. 


Soma, Lord of peace and creator of the universe, 
giver of health and vitality, may we, biding within the 
holy bonds of your discipline and our vows, with alert 
minds and healthy bodies, live on in peace and joy with 
our children and the community. 


57. (Rudra Devata, Bandhu Rshi) 
WW tea WT: Ue venemfisenem d Wee | 
waren ad ee msma uwsp og! 


Esate rudra bhagah saha svasrambikaya tam 
jusasva svahaisa te rudra bhaga’ akhuste pasuh. 


Man of justice, Rudra, this is your share of 
knowledge. Take it with its sister, companion, the vision 
of the Veda. Serve it with reverence. Extend it in creative 
action through yajna. Man of justice and power, this is 
your share of wealth. Take it with its sister, companion, 
the voice of the Veda. Serve it with reverence. Use and 
enjoy it with restraint. Take up the tool, the spade, and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-III 63 


dig your garden. Work is wealth and worship. Use the 
tool and the wealth with the voice of the Veda. 


58. (Rudra Devata, Bandhu Rshi) 
aid nadie xe sheen pen Ar aehoenzerat 
a: Adama AT areal ue 


Ava rudramadimahyava devam tryambakam. 
Yatha no vasyasaskaradyatha nah $reyasas- 
karadyatha no vyavasayayat. 


We worship Rudra, Lord of justice, destroyer of 
evil, brilliant and generous, constant in vision and 
awareness in the three phases of time, past, present and 
future. We worship him so that we eliminate want and 
suffering, so that he may bless us with comfortable 
homes, greatness and honour, and firm resolution in hard 
work and industry. 


59. (Rudra Devata, Bandhu Rshi) 


waste sas Tasvata Wears Aas | 
ga Fart He yen 


Bhesajamasi bhesajam gave'$vaya purusaya 
bhesajam. Sukham mesaya mesyai. 


You are the panacea, universal cure for the 
ailments of the body, mind and soul, saviour against 
the evils of ignorance, injustice and poverty. You are 
the healer for the cows, horses, humans, rams and their 
females. You are health and happiness for all. 


60. (Rudra Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


shack asad are dita 1 saena 
aera ata arsed I a wemme Et 
"feed «ra | satena aera Heia Arad: us o u 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


64 YAJURVEDA 


Tryambakam yajamahe sugandhim pusti- 
vardhanam. Urvarukamiva bandhanan- 
mrtyormukstya ma'mrtat. Tryambkam yajamahe 
sugandhim pativedanam. Urvarukamiva 
bandhanadito mukstya mamutah. 


We worship Rudra, Lord of the Universe, 
constant and invariable in all the three phases of time, 
and the first cause of health, growth, prosperity and 
happiness. May we, with His grace, be released from 
the bonds of death into freedom, immortality and eternal 
joy (ananda), just as the ripe fruit of melon falls off 
from the stalk on the branch to fullness and freedom. 
And may we never fall off from the state of freedom, 
immortality and eternal joy in the company of the Lord. 
We worship the Lord, Rudra, constant and invariable 
through time, purest and purifying, sustainer and 
protector who reveals Himself to His devotees. May 
He with His grace release us from the bonds of mortality 
here just as the melon fruit is released from the stalk, 
but we may never fall off from freedom, immortality, 
ananda and the presence of the Lord. 


61. (Rudra Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


wad ware ad at taisit 1 aaaea 
fasterag: afdtarasateveas: foratsdtf ngu 


Etatte rudravasam tena paro mujavato 'tihi. 
Avatatadhanva pinakavasah krttivasa’ 
ahimsannah $ivo 'tihi. 

Rudra, warrior of the bow in readiness, strong in 
position with shield and armour, this is the way you 
defend and protect. Come down from the mountain 
heights and be with us wholly. Hurt us not, be good and 
kind and gracious. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IV 65 


62. (Rudra Devata, Narayana Rshi) 

HIS Waa: PRA aT | 

aad sarge deitsateq STARA GR 

Tryayusam jamadagneh kaSyapasya tryayusam. 

Yaddevesu tryayusam tanno' astu tryayusam. 

Bless us with the threefold life — of the body, 

mind and spirit, for the three stages of life - childhood, 
youth, and age, upto 300-400 years, for all the ashrams 
(functional periods), and all the varnas (professional 
communities). Give us the threefold life of the eye, 
internal and external, of knowledge of the body, mind 
and soul, and of the world. Give us the threefold life of 
creativity for service, growth and spirituality. Give us 
the threefold life of the devas, the learned, wise, 
generous people, for excellence, contribution and 
removal of ignorance, injustice and poverty. 


63. (Rudra Devata, Narayana Rshi) 
frat aratfa cafetfaed fact amsa our at 
feat: frebdarrardassretea: wma wereorata 
qera gatas ue 30 


Sivo namasi svadhitiste pita namaste’astu ma 
ma himsth. Nivarttayamyayuse’nnddyaya 
prajananaya rayasposaya suprajastvaya 
suviryaya. 


Rudra, Lord and father, Shiva you are by name, 
saviour, giver of knowledge, peace and prosperity. 
Salutations to you in reverence and worship. Hurt me 
not, father. I abide and pray for life and health, food 
and sustenance, virility, children, family, strength and 
prowess, prosperity, and freedom from suffering. 


sta adratseara: i 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


66 


YAJURVEDA 


CHAPTER-IV 


(Apah and Oshadhis Devate, Prajapati Rshi) 


warren east gfe at aerdrssrsiu-a fase 
RTA ASTRA Ast vrereiriur finr dau 
Bassa: we A wd adhd arcka verfi 
Triefesdr ngu 


Edamaganma devayajanam prthivya yatra 
devaso' ajusanta vi$ve. Rksamabhyam 
santaranto yajurbhi rayasposena samisa 
madema. Ima' apah $amu me santu devirosadhe 
trayasva svadhite mainain himsth. 


Lo! here we come to this holy place of yajna for 


the gods, powers of health, where the noblest of the 
world collected and delighted in their sacred enterprise. 
With joyous recitation of Riks, Yajus and Samans (with 
knowledge and action in the hope of joyous benefits) 
we offer food for the fire with libations of rich materials 
energetically and enthusiastically and cross the hurdles 
and suffering. May the holy waters bring health and 
peace. Noble herb, cure and save; unfailing power, do 
not hurt or kill this person. 


PA 


(Apah Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


SITHLSSTEHTA AI: VAST Tat A TAL: WAHT |d 
ferserefe Ru wada ediefeates: wrferr gasd 
denver at cat frereserar ue wg 


auf weh usu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IV 67 


Apo’ asmàün mátarah $undhayantu ghrtena no 
ghrtapvah punantu. Visvam hi ripram 
pravahanti devirudidabhyah $ucira puta' emi 
Diksatapasostanurasi tam tva Sivam $agmarni 
pari dadhe bhadram varnam pusyan. 

Mother waters purify us: with their essence and 
efficacy, they sanctify us. The waters are sacred powers 
of nature: they wash off the entire dirt and let all the 
wanted health and knowledge flow in. Pure and 
sanctified by the waters, I come up. This body is a gift 
of Diksha and Tapas, commitment to health and laws 
of nature, and hard discipline of body, mind and soul. 
That body I bear as a blessing, lovely, strong and 
graceful, shining with the golden glow of good health. 


3. (Megha Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


uda udisfu aatar aat a Afè | 
qaia miarat aAA ate uad 
Mahinam payo'si varcoda'asi varco me dehi. 


Vrtrasyāsi kaninaka$caksurda'asi cakşurme 
dehi. 


The waters of life flow to the earths from the sun. 
The life of the cloud radiates from the sun. The sun is 
the giver of light and lustre. Give me the light and lustre 
of life. The sun is the giver of the light of the eye. Give 
me the light of the eye internal as well as external. 


4.  (Paramatma Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


Ra wg wreufdat uq gat at ufaar 
trafa uferdur ees teat: 1 at er ufersud 
uR Genta: UT SRT gne 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


68 YAJURVEDA 


Citpatirma punatu vakpatirma punatu devo ma 
savita punatvacchidrena pavitrena suryasya 
rasmibhih. Tasya te pavitrapate pavitraputasya 
yatkamah pune tacchakeyam. 


Lord of intelligence and awareness, I pray, 
enlighten me. Lord of the Divine Vak, I pray, sanctify 
me with the voice of the Veda. Savita, Lord Creator of 
the universe, I pray, consecrate me with a ceaseless 
shower of the purest rays of the sun. Lord of purity, 
purest of the pure, whatever the desire for which I pray 
for purity, that desire may be fulfilled. Bless me that I 
may make it possible. 


5. (Yajna Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


em at masin amt WIAA | 
at at garasos afatet germE unu 


A vo devasa' imahe vamam prayatyadhvare. 
A vo devasa' asiso yajniyaso havamahe. 

Devas of Yajna, mother powers of nature, learned 
and wise men, experts of the science of yajna, through 
the performance of this yajna, we pray for virtues of 
character, competence and of noble action. We, devotees 
of yajna, ask for your blessings that our desires and 
projects may be fulfilled and completed with success. 


6. (Yajna Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


veTel aa ata: career | ver 
mralyfadtarestaral aaa Rt eme usi 
Svaha yajnam manasah svahororantariksat. 
svaha dyavaprthivibhyam svaha vatadarabhe 
svaha. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IV 69 


With the voice of the Veda, in the language of 
expertise through education and training for the 
illumination of knowledge, with the sentiments of truth 
and love in togetherness for the sanctity of dealings in 
the business of living, I begin the yajna from the purity 
and sincerity of the mind, from the wind, and then from 
the vastness of the sky and space, in the service of the 
earth and heaven. 


7. (Agni-Ap-Brihaspati Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


ark Wasisma vemel Herat atasma caret 
dara mds cael aS. STA caret | 
amt eeaideditavasrearar emetufzretssiissraivsr 
weurda gemi fada carat wen 


Akutyai prayuje'gnaye svaha medhayai 
manase'gnaye svaha diksayai tapase'gnaye 
svaha sarasvatyai pusne'gnaye svaha. Apo 
devirbrhatirvisva-sambhuvo dyavaprthivi’ uro’ 
antariksa. Brhaspataye havisa vidhema svaha. 


This oblation is for lighting of the fire for the 
resolution and dedication of the mind to virtue and the 
voice of the Veda. This is for the development of 
intelligence and the study of science and electricity for 
the general good in the language of common 
understanding. This is for commitment to Dharma and 
the teaching and learning of solar energy and the original 
universal heat in the language of universal 
understanding. This is for knowledge and education and 
the study of nourishment and vital heat of the body with 
scientific language for all. We study the heavenly waters 
of great and universal good and peace, earth and heaven 
and the vast middle regions of the sky. And we study 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


70 YAJURVEDA 


all these with oblations of appropriate samagri materials 
with the chants of the divine revelations of the Vedas. 


8.  (Ishvara Devata, Atreya Rshi) 


fasat geet Aqta atta Ger | 
fasat vrasdweufa get duitt werd carat uci 


Visvo devasya neturmarto vurita sakhyam. Visvo 
raya’ isudhyati dyumnam vrnita pusyase svaha. 


May all mankind choose and pray for the love 
and friendship of the Lord and Ruler of the world, and 
may all, with prayers to Him, try for the attainment of 
wealth and prosperity for health and growth. 


9.  (Vidvan Devata, Angiras Rshi) 


BRA: fred vat aÀ a at raner 
waren: sratfa snm aes Asa at at 
fè: neu 


Rksamayoh Silpe sthaste vamarabhe te ma 
patamasya yajnasyodrcah. Sarmasi Sarma me 
yaccha namaste’ astu ma ma himsth. 


After the study of Rigveda and Samaveda, both 
treasures of science and technology, in which study the 
content of the verses is actually realized, I begin this 
practical yajna of science and technology (in the 
laboratory and the workshop). May the two protect me 
and bless me. Reverence and salutations to you, to the 
teacher, to the Lord. Accept my salutations. Hurt me 
not, put me not off. You are peace and comfort. Give 
me peace and comfort of mind. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IV 71 


10. (Yajna Devata, Angiras Rshi) 


wubenfzrepisansssiufü afe quen Arata 
ao: ymd st astarerdtes aie que: 
paper | Sagas aad SHeat At US ass 
Tarea e: o 


Urgasyangirasyurnamrada’ urjam mayi dhehi. 
Somasya nivirasi visnoh $armasi Sarma 
yajamanasyendrasya yonirasi susasyah 
krsiskrdhi. Ucchrayasva vanaspata’ urdhvo ma 
pahyainhasa'asya yajfiasyodrcah. 


You are tecknowledge, giver of wealth and power, 
realized with the energy of fire (heat), revealer of the 
secrets of energy and cover of safety for the creations 
of power. Give me energy and power. 


You are the source of comfort and prosperity, 
gifted by yajna created by the man of knowledge, meant 
for the people devoted and dedicated to yajna by the 
grace of Indra. Increase and multiply the products of 
agriculture. Herbs and trees, grow and increase. Nourish, 
protect and help me to grow and rise high. Nourish and 
protect the man of yajna who has realized the mysteries 
of the power of the divine knowledge of nature. Save 
us from sin and evil. 


11. (Agni Devata, Angiras Rshi) 
ad korten ad errerfezifard: 1 deft ferd 
wae Castes cereis uenteuedtem 
atsaragst 1 à dar crbsmar wins agaa 
saq à 4: urd asa: carat ugei 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


72 YAJURVEDA 


Vratam krnutagnirbrahmagniryajno vanaspatir- 
yajniyah. Daivim dhiyam manamahe 
sumrdikamabhistaye varcodham yajnavahasam 
sutirtha no’asadvase. Ye deva manojata 
manoyujo daksakratavaste no'vantu te nah 
pantu tebhyah svaha. 


Keep the vow of yajnagni, the fire of yajna. Agni 
is Brahma, the ultimate existent, omniscient, blissful 
Reality. Agni is yajna, individual, collective and 
ultimate act of creation. Agni is the nourishing and 
sustaining power of the forests, and must be served 
through yajna. We work and pray for sacred intelligence 
— excellent instrument of the knowledge and pursuit 
of science and spirituality, source of brilliance and 
power and the means of the extension and development 
of yajna — for the sake of happiness and well-being. 
May this intelligence, bright and gracious, saviour as a 
‘tirtha’ for pilgrimage, ever shine in our mind and faith. 
May the masters of the science of yajna, men of genius, 
dedication and application of mind protect us, nourish 
us, advance us. Theirs is the language of enlightenment. 
They have it for us, for yajna, for Agni, for Brahma. 
Keep up the vow. 


12. (Apah Devata, Angiras Rshi) 
vara: drar Wad qatt sarenga Ysera: | 
assTenaqgenssitaaissmhra: verd-q aats- 
smargel: Ng 
Svatrah pita bhavata yūyamāpo’ asmakama- 
ntarudare susevah. Ta’ asmabhyamayaksma' 


anamiva’ anagasah svadantu deviramrta' 
rtavrdhah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IV 73 


Taste and drink deep of the celestial waters of 
immortality, so sweet and agreeable to assimilate and 
internalize. Free from sickness, disease and sin, peace- 
giving and replete with knowledge and wisdom for all 
of us, they extend the frontiers of our knowledge of 
truth and divine law. They protect you against diseases 
like fever, dysentery and tuberculosis. 


13. (Apah Devata, Angiras Rshi) 


gu d ufsut at gen a wey |» sre: 
Arly: ufererurfesra uferem we esi 


Iyam te yajniya tanurapo muncami na prajam. 
Amhomucah svahakrtah prthivimavisata 
prthivya sambhava. 


This body of yours is for yajna by yajna. I release 
the waters but not my creation and my people — I save 
my people. Mix the waters — sterilized, purified, 
reinforced, invigorated — wholly and fully with the 
earth, and you too be one with the earth (to regain health 
and vigour). 


14. (Agni Devata, Angiras Rshi) 
mA wax y bie eeu Haaf i 
Tat uitssrdzpes- wast A: gepa esi 
Agne tvam su jagrhi vayam sumandisimahi. 
Raksa no’ aprayucchan prabudhe nah 
punaskrdhi. 


Agni is universal, ever awake. It is awake while 
we are awake. It is awake while we are asleep. Never 
relenting, it protects and preserves us. And after our 
sleep it wakes us up again. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


74 YAJURVEDA 


15. (Agni Devata, Angiras Rshi) 


Gada: Garretssierga: WDUT: GRIT ASAT- 
yara: Ua: st aussie | serrer 
Sesser: Ure «frardeema uuu 


Punarmanah punarayurma’ agan punah pranah 
punaratma ma’ agan punascaksuh punah 
Srotram ma’ agan. Vaisvanaro’ adabdha- 
stanupa' agnirnah patu duritadavadyat. 


After sleep, after death, after Pralaya, annihilation, 
we get back the mind, we get back the life, we get back 
the vital pranic energy, we get back the spirit, we get 
back the eye, the ear, and all other senses. May Agni, 
immanent life and lord of the earth, irresistible and 
indomitable, save and protect us from despicable evil 
and sin. 


16. (Agni Devata, Vatsa Rshi) 
veri aaursstfa gasan edem | cat GATS: i 
Treader y m dat 4: ufaat aatatar 
"ela i9 N 


Tvamagne vratapa 'asi deva’ a martyesva. Tvam 
yajnesvidyah. Rasveyatsoma bhuyo bhara devo 
nah savita vasordata vasvadat. 


Agni, Lord of the universe, immanent vitality and 
energy of the world, you are the guardian and preserver 
of our spiritual vows, moral commitments and projects 
and resolutions in the mortal human world. You are 
worthy of adoration, of study, service and development, 
through yajna and collective enterprises. Soma, lord 
giver of honour and glory through art and industry, give 
us the wealth of success and honour again and again. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IV 75 


Savita, Lord Creator of the world, giver of stability and 
security of home, give us inspiration, security and 
stability of the good life. 


17. (Agni Devata, Vatsa Rshi) 


wur d wn djtageberer ata ursus | 
wf gat ata Seer AtA ngon 


Esa te $ukra tanuretadvarcastaya sambhava 
bhrajamgaccha. Jurasi dhrta manasa justa 
visnave. 


O man, virile and brave, this body is yours, borne 
with love and service and maintained for Vishnu, 
sustainer of the world, and for yajna, noble action. It is 
your honour and glory. Be with it, act with mind and 
soul and achieve the glory of life. You are fast in action 
and vibrant in spirit. Act fast with your mind and soul 
and achieve the brilliance of knowledge and wonder of 
succes in enterprise. 


18. (Vak & Vidyut Devata, Vatsa Rshi) 
wake dada: waa det uenit caret | 
edia ametenda avadadte ngen 


Tasyaste satyasavasah prasave tanvo yantra- 
mastya svaha. Sukramasi candramasyamrta- 
masi vai$vadevamasi. 


Lord Creator, true and glorious, in the yajna of 
creation of yours, with electric energy and the divine 
knowledge of the Veda in unison, I pray, I may design 
an instrument and apparatus of the form and structure 
which would be faultless and a source of comfort, peace 
and happiness for all in general, and a matter of pride 
and satisfaction for the scholars. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


76 YAJURVEDA 


19. (Vak & Vidyut Devate, Vatsa Rshi) 


ford far tanta effer afalumfar erate afar- 
fafepraa: yio (cur a: gaet qddreate 
Raat ufa dettat uurssei-rearfer-sremesamr UN 9 N 


Cidasi manasi dhirasi daksinasi ksatriyasi 
yajniyasyaditirasyubhayatah Ssirsni. Sa nah 
supraci supraticyedhi mitrastva padi badhnitam 
pusa'dhvanaspatvindrayadhyaksaya. 


Lord of truth and glory, in this creation of yours, 
great is the use of the vision and power of the language 
of Divinity, Veda, in the development of human society. 
So is the use of the power of universal electric energy. 
It gives us an awareness of knowledge, which makes 
thought and communication possible. It is a tool and 
instrument of intelligence and will. It facilitates 
expertise and the business of governance. It augments 
yajna and production, which is efficacious and powerful 
both internally and externally. It is permanent and 
indestructible, and a source and means of comfort and 
well-being before and after. We pray that Pusha, the 
powers of nourishment and development friendly to 
mankind, may hold and control the use of these powers 
in the way of their application in the service of the Lord 
Supreme, observer and controller of the wealth of the 
world, and may the Lord protect humanity in the course 
of their progress. 


20. (Vak & Vidyut Devate, Vatsa Rshi) 


art cat rer Harare faasa uro STATA VAT 
wisa: pur dfe demere driessseteiuq 
vate unum GRE uou 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IV 77 


Anu tva mata manyatamanu pita’nu bhrata 
sagarbhyo’nu sakha sayuthyah. Sa devi 
devamacchehindraya somam rudrastva 
varttayatu svasti somasakha punarehi. 


May your mother approve and bless your pursuit 
of energy and the literature of knowledge. May your 
father permit and bless and help, may your brother agree 
and support, may your friend in the community consent 
and cooperate in your project. May that goddess of light 
and energy come and bless you with sweet success in 
your programme for the glory of Indra and the happiness 
of humanity with beneficent means of comfort and well- 
being. May the Lord of justice and love inspire you. 
May the scholar of Rudra discipline and knowledge 
guide you. May success and honour come to you again 
and again, friend of humanity and devotee of the Lord 
Supreme, for the sake of life and the environment. 


21. (Vak & Vidyut Devate, Vatsa Rshi) 


eeemeríafavcefacmtd cert werd i 
qzae GA vua est aaa ua 9 u 


Vasvyasyaditirasyadityasi rudrasi candrasi. 
Brhaspatistva sumne ramnatu rudro vasubhi- 
racake. 


This energy and the language (which you pursue) 
pertains to the heat of agni that supports life on earth, 
pursued by scholars of twenty four years discipline. It 
relates to the pranic energy of life, pursued by scholars 
of forty-four years discipline. It pertains to the solar 
radiation, pursued by scholars of forty-eight years 
discipline. It is blissful as the light of the moon. It is 
correct and beneficent like the justice and love of Rudra, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


78 YAJURVEDA 


it is brilliant like the glory of the sun. And this energy is 
indestructible, eternal. May the great lord of knowledge, 
Brihaspati, inspire you; may Rudra, lord of love and 
correctness, dedicate you; may they bless you to enjoy 
this noble pursuit of yours and shine with the scholars 
dedicated to life-energies of nature. 


22. (Vak & Vidyut Devate, Vatsa Rshi) 


aema yeaa aaa uferegrs- 
sshumuradfua qaaa et 1 aÀ aÀ d 
eA Weal A Tat at aa eNA farta ddr 
ue: NRN 


Adistyastva murddhannajigharmi devayajane 
prthivya' idayaspadamasi ghrtavat svaha. Asme 
ramasvasme te bandhustve rayo me rayo ma 
vaya rayasposena viyausma toto rayah. 


Energy and Word of the Divine, you are on top of 
the sky, in the middle of the earth, and in the chant of the 
divine verses in celebration of the devas in yajna. I light 
up and activate the energy and the Divine voice with 
rich libations of ghee and chant of the vaidic hymns. You 
too light up and activate this energy and the Divine voice. 
Come with us and rejoice. It is our brother, our love, 
yours too. Wealth is yours. Mine too. The wealth of 
knowledge, power and materials you gain. We too. 
Knowing, resolving and doing, we may never be void 
of this wealth of life for health and happiness. 


23. (Vak & Vidyut Devate, Vatsa Rshi) 


adr der ferar ui afaturarectarar | AT Assia: 
wuldrdissre dd dit fede ad afe weft eau 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IV 79 


Samakhye devya dhiya sam daksinayo- 
rucaksasa. Ma ma 'ayuh pramosirmo’ aham tava 
viram videya tava devi sandrsi. 


With a vision and intelligence, inspired, 
enlightened and versatile, precise, scientific and practical, 
I clearly see the divine gifts of natural energy and the 
voice of the Veda, and describe and show them applied 
and enacted in actual life. May this energy and this voice 
never hurt my life. May I never neglect or lose it. May I 
never be unfair to your heroes. You too never be unjust to 
my heroes. 


24. (Yajna Devata, Vatsa Rshi) 


wu d mad szit Horis aa a usd 
asgi A data geri a arta rsg Barat 
spares-aramraresurmgteegwbfd Todi gaT- 
wurenrsfu speed Teil ferferdecar fared usw 


Esa te gayatro bhaga 'iti me somaya brutadesa 
te traistubho bhaga'iti me somaya brutadesa te 
jagato bhaga' iti me somaya brutacchando- 
namanam samrajyamgaccheti me somaya 
brutadasmako'si $ukraste grahyo vicitastva 
vicinvantu. 


“This is that part of Soma-Yajna which you can 
realize for yourself with the Gayatri verses", say this 
for me, to the seeker of the chemistry of Soma. “This is 
that part of Soma-Yajna which you can realize for 
yourself with the Trishtubh verses", say this for me, to 
the seeker of the manufacture of Soma. “This is that 
part of Soma-Yajna which you can realize for yourself 
with the Jagati Verses", say this for me, to the seeker of 
the value of Soma. “Perform the Soma-Yajna with the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


80 YAJURVEDA 


specific verses for social management and governance 
and be on top of success", say this for me, to the seeker 
of the power of Soma. You are pure, specialist of Soma- 
Yajna, you are purifier, you are ours, so wise, 
knowledgeable, so adorable. We, the seekers of 
knowledge and discrimination, accept you, support you 
and advance the yajna. 


25. (Savita Devata, Vatsa Rshi) 
afte at dreredferariarugr: enferehqureit fir acres 
Tasers fra ufd enfe i weed ueamfauis 
aaaea füiusurfunfia and: ur 
vail e Waren SOTO wah- 
wife mn 


Abhi tyam devain savitaramonyoh kavikratu- 
marcami satyasavam ratnadhamabhi priyam 
matim kavim. Urdhva yasyamatirbha' 
adidyutatsavimani hiranyapaniramimita 
sukratuh krpa svah. |. Prajabhyastva 
prajastva’nupranantu prajastvamanupranihi. 
For the love of the people I adore the lord of light, 
creator of earth and heaven and the middle regions of 
the skies, the eternal poet who composed this wonderful 
world of paradisal beauty and truth adorned with the 
jewels of life from His inexhaustible treasure of nature, 
lord so dear to the learned and the wise, the brilliant 
manifestation of whose existential form blazes in the 
heaven above and the earth below which He made. With 
His infinite mercy He created the regions of bliss for 
the people, the creatures He created and loved. The 
people adore you, lord, with their breath of life. Lord of 
the golden bough in both hands, bless the people with 
the breath and energy of life existential as well as eternal. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IV 81 
26. (Yajna Devata, Vatsa Rshi) 


wr wat hot mote erg cerumgdaugda bu 
a mir d regrfor adenaqifa wsrdaddt: writ 
ust spp Geers dump Re I 


Sukram tvà $ukrena krinámi candram 
candrenamrtamamrtena. Sagme te gorasme te 
candrani tapasastanurasi prajapatervarnah 
paramena pa$una kriyase sahasraposam 
puseyam. 


Yajna, you are a symbol of the discipline of fire. 
You are the golden choice of Prajapati, father of the 
creatures. Your gifts are begot for the price of the highest 
wealth. You are pure and immaculate, begot in return 
for the purest offering of mine. Golden and blissful you 
are, I offer the richest gold of my life for the celestial 
bliss. You are the nectar of life. I get you with the offering 
of the immortal knowledge I have. Your wealth is in the 
womb of the moving earth and the environment. May 
that wealth be ours too with yajna. You nourish life in a 
thousand ways. May I, by the grace of Prajapati, 
participate in the nourishment. 


27. (Vidvan Devata, Vatsa Rshi) 


fir asufe aftiaasectetreartaer afalurgerasrddos - 
Tp: Bary | vera uTsmQ aralt wea aged 
gad d: wrendumerdareei Wr at «974 URI 


Mitro na'ehi sumitradha’ indrasyorumavisa 
daksinamusannusantam syonah syonam. Svana 
bhrajanghare bambhare hasta suhasta 
krsanavete vah somakrayanastanraksadhvam 
ma vo dabhan. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


82 YAJURVEDA 


Friend of friends, man of knowledge and wisdom, 
come, be friends with us. Pleasant and aspiring, come 
along, sit on the right side of Indra, lord of power and 
wealth and knowledge. Gentle and decent, come to the 
gentle and the decent. Persuasive teacher, guardian of 
Soma, brilliant, fearsome to the wicked and the non- 
serious wasters, smiling, versatile, dominant master, 
defend and protect those who value the gifts of Soma 
and knowledge. Let no one bully you. 


28. (Agni Devata, Vatsa Rshi) 


uf ana sufre seres ar aaa A gd 
sardar verra CATA TAR SBT UREN 


Pari magne du$caritad badhasva ma sucarite 
bhaja. Udayusa svayusodasthamamrtam’ anu. 


Agni, Lord of light and life, save me all round from 
evil, drive off from me all that is bad in character and 
conduct. Establish me firmly in good character and 
conduct. Help me stay up there for a long age of 
goodness and high immortal virtue. 


29. (Agni Devata, Vatsa Rshi) 


Ufa wets verfi à 
aa fewer: oft fub rfe faa ad usu 


Prati panthamapadmahi svastigamanehasam. 
Yena visvah pari dviso vrnakti vindate vasu. 


Agni, lord of light and life, may we all follow the 
path of goodness, love and non-violence by which the 
good man keeps off all hate and fear and attains to the 
safe haven of happiness and freedom. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IV 83 
30. (Varuna Devata, Vatsa Rshi) 


ahera A masma 1 ataa cum 
HRN S 
qadar aas fasàa atoa a i01 


Adityastvagasya-dityai sada ’asida. Asta-bhnad 
dyam vrsabho’ antariksamamimita varimanam 
prthivyah. Asidadvisva bhuvandni samrad 
visvettani varunasya vratani. 


Varuna, Lord of the universe and power of the 
sun and wind, you are the protective cover of the earth 
and the presiding presence of its order. Omnipotent 
Lord, you keep the heaven and the sky in position and 
maintain the excellence of life on earth. Glorious ruler 
of the world, you are the absolute centre and 
circumference of all the spheres of the universe, and all 
of them move in observance of the inexorable law of 
the divine power. 


31. (Varuna Devata, Vatsa Rshi) 


ady paket aaa ad udssferu | eg 
vnd aunt faeghs fafa vei'rraemq wirst use 


Vanesu vyantariksam tatana vajamarvatsu 
paya' usriyasu. Hrtsu kratum varuno viksvagnim 
divi suryamadadhat somamadrau. 


Varuna, Lord Supreme, put expanse into waves 
and forests, velocity in the motion (of waves and winds), 
speed in the horses, milk in the cows, vision and will in 
the hearts, heat and desire in the living creatures, sun in 
heaven, nectar of life in the cloud, juice in the soma 
plant, and the soma plant on the mountain. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


84 YAJURVEDA 


32. (Agni Devata, Vatsa Rshi) 


Wie wena: atta | 
vXdsrfarirear arstart faaeaat use 


Suryasya caksurarohagneraksnah kaninakam. 
Yatraitasebhiriyase bhrajamano vipascita. 


Ascend to the eye (light) of the sun, and enter into 
the pupil of the eye of agni (light of fire) where, self- 
illuminating with the rays of your light, you would be 
approached and pursued by the discriminative scholar of 
science. 


33. (Surya & Vidvan Devata, Vatsa Rshi) 


eme quiet gAs srgreia-t | 
weit GSMs Ter TEETH ua 1 


Usravetam dhursahau yujyethamanasru’ avira- 
hanau brahmacodanau. Svasti yajamanasya 
grhan gacchatam. 


Scholars dedicated to science and spirit in search 
of the good life should commit themselves to the study 
and application of the energy of the sun and vayu (wind 
and electricity), both treasures of scientific power and 
means of comfort, to be specifically investigated and 
used just like two bullocks bearing the burdens for life's 
comfort to the house of the master without tears or hurt 
to anybody but supporting the young and the brave. The 
scholars also, for guidance, should reach the senior man 
of knowledge who, too, silently bears the burdens of 
life for the knowledge and comfort of others. Let the 
joy and comfort of this scientific yajna, in consequence, 
reach the home of the yajamana. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IV 85 


34. (Yajamana Devata, Vatsa Rshi) 


wel tsta welaca speret favatafe arate iar 
vat ufrufiuil faam ved Rafar faam var 
gqetsataaat ferr | sep sper aud asta 
Ter tes cat Gerry ua 


Bhadro me’si pracyavasva bhuvaspate 
visvanyabhi dhamani. Ma tva pariparino vidan 
ma tva paripanthino vidan ma tva vrka’ 
aghayavo vidan. Syeno bhutva parapata 
yajamanasya grhan gaccha tannau samskrtam. 


Lord of the earth, master of knowledge, you are a 
blessing for me. With the product of your study and my 
effort and support, reach any part of all the regions of the 
world shooting to your destination as an eagle. May no 
robber, no thief, no wolfish highway man, no man of evil 
pursuit, meet you on the way. May no one rob or deceive 
you or steal anything. Let the product of your yajna and 
mine reach the house of the yajamana fast. 


35. (Surya Devata, Vatsa Rshi) 


"THE firn ature weder Wer dara dqaaedusd | 
Qat casita chet aaa weiter ree tut 


Namo mitrasya varunasya caksase maho devaya 
tadrtam saparyata. Duredrse devajataya ketave 
divasputraya suryaya samsata. 


Salutations in reverence, recognition and 
gratitude to the Sun, best friend, highest, all-seeing, 
great, brilliant, far-seeing light of the world, self- 
luminant,child of heaven. Sing in praise of him, serve 
his law of right and truth in life. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


86 YAJURVEDA 


36. (Surya Devata, Vatsa Rshi) 
ahorn mune venu t xem asus 
maddest abreasmdaadanfa atureisard 
adama sei 


Varunasyottambhanamasi varunasya skambha- 
sarjani stho varunasya' rtasadanyasi varunasya’ 
rtasadanamasi varunasya’ rtasadanamasida. 


You are the bond and ultimate pillar of the 
universe. You are the centre and sustenance of vayu's 
hold on things and the sun's two-fold power to move 
the waters in space. You are the mainstay of the world's 
phenomenal reality of Satyam and the seat and working 
of Rtam, the universal law of Right and Truth. By your 
grace only, we realize the meaning of existence and 
follow the divine law of Dharma. 


37. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
ata ara gfemm fer wr a farat ufrspiud 
Ga S PTT: uao: Yatisdital weh ara 
CIE non 


Ya te dhamani havisa yajanti ta te vi$va 
paribhurastu yajnam. Gayasphanah prataranah 
suviro 'viraha pracara soma duryan. 


Lord of the universe, whatever places are 
sanctified by the performance of yajna with oblations 
in your honour, all such places, O Soma, yajna may 
grace and sanctify for us too — yajna, promoter of the 
home, family and wealth, saviour from suffering, maker 
of the brave, redeemer of the weak, all-round generous 
and universal, may sanctify us too. Soma, scholar wise 
and dedicated, go round, speak for, propagate and 
perform yajna in every home. 


se agais: d 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-V 87 


CHAPTER-V 


1. (Vishnu Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


amer fu fasta vr arte arf fensia 
aNd ferular cat sire vem ruga 
fasta arsa car trerearae fasta vem uai 


Agnestanurasi visnave tva somasya tanurasi 
visnave tva titheratithyamasi visnave tva 
Syenaya tva somabhrte visnave tva'gnaye tva 
rayasposade visnave tva. 


Yajna (Yajna materials), you are the body of fire 
(heat and electricity) dedicated to Vishnu for the 
completion of the noble act of service. You are the body 
of Soma (life-juice of the created phenomena) dedicated 
to Vishnu, for the purification of the air and the 
environment. You are the hospitality for the chance- 
visitor, dedicated to Vishnu for the attainment of 
knowledge. I do the yajna and offer the libations for 
Vishnu, for the ‘eagle’, fastest carrier of Soma to the 
Yajamana, for rapid advancement of the science and 
power of yajna. I offer the libations to the fire for the 
development of wealth and energy, for Vishnu, the 
powerful giver of virtue, for knowledge and the ability 
for action. 


2. (Vishnu, Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


aTenitaate «quuir xersseiysvaratfa wevatssrful 
maot cer oder went Fess cat war wank 
wrest eer wur aT us 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


88 YAJURVEDA 


Agnerjanitramasi vrsanau stha’ urva$yasya- 
yurasi pururava’ asi. Gayatrena tva chandasa 
manthami traistubhena tva chandasa manthami 
jagatena tva chandasa manthami. 


Yajna (yajna materials), you are the birth-place 
of fire, source power of fire-arms. You are the food of 
the cosmic agents of rain, air and the sun. You are the 
producer and provider of various comforts of life. You 
are the secret of the knowledge of the Shastras through 
learned gatherings. I refine and kindle the fire with the 
inspiring chant of the Gayatri verses. I invigorate you 
and raise the fire with the exhilarating chant of the 
Trishtubh verses. I boost you and rouse the fire with 
the ecstatic chant of the jagati verses. 


3. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
adi a: aA aeaarearual i ar aaa 
m ad wreaseur Bret taana 4: an 
Bhavatam nah samanasau sacetasavarepasau. 
Ma yajüam him sistam ma yajnapatim 
jatavedasau Sivau bhavatamadya nah. 

May the teacher and the disciple of the science 
of yajna be of equal mind in teaching and learning, 
harmonious in knowledge and instructions, gentle and 
free from coarseness in manners and communication. 
May these two devotees of the fire of yajna be auspicious 
harbingers of peace and happiness for us. May they not 
disturb or ruin the yajna. May they not hurt the yajnapati. 


4. (Agni Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


armasha wate ssadion warsstfersrfiurati 


ao: it: Gast ase davub ganas, 
marat wen 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-V 89 


Agnavagni$carati pravista’ rsinam putro’ 
abhisastipava. Sa nah syonah suyaja yajeha 
devebhyo havyam sadamaprayucchantsvaha. 


Agni (fire) present in agni (electricity) is 
universally active and operative. Deeply involved in the 
study of agni, child of the rshis of scholarship, one with 
his subject, graceful, enlightened, serious and dedicated, 
the teacher and researcher roams around with his love. 
May he, for us here, carry on the yajna of his project 
with the libations of his special materials and create 
new knowledge and food for further yajna. 


5. (Vidyut Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


ana ver Mud Wet apie yraara 
yas Rte | styrene aS- 
Rrra shree eT- 
fura at at: ngu 


Apataye tvà paripataye grhnāmi tanunaptre 
Sakvaraya sakvana’ ojisthaya. Anadhrstam- 
asyanadhrsyam devanamojo'nabhi$asty- 
abhisastipa’ anabhisastenyamanjasa satyam- 
upagesam svite ma dhah. 


Lord/Energy and Power of the universe, 
indestructible, dauntless and undaunted, light and lustre 
of the powers of nature, faultless and protector against 
misfortune, beyond calumny and condemnation, I 
accept/take you for all-over protection from all sides, 
for a blooming body, for the gift of ability, strength and 
power, prowess and lustre, so that you help to put me in 
a state of comfort and welfare in a straight and natural 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


90 YAJURVEDA 


way and I celebrate in song the true and eternal cause 
of the good life. 


6. (Agni Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


amt eure daar ar ad dqqieeur afar at cud 
wat a watt i ae A aug sare À diem 
Aardam euerdeafer: us u 


Agne vratapastve vratapa ya tava tanuriyam sa 
mayi yo mama tanuresa sa tvayi. Saha nau 
vratapate vrtanyanu me diksam diksapati- 
rmanyatamanu tapastapaspatih. 


Agni, Lord/Power of light and energy, 
omnipresent protector and keeper of the vows of 
discipline, I take the vow of discipline and study and 
come in to you. This presence of yours is in me, and the 
same presence in me is in you. You and I are together, 
the preceptor and the disciple are together. Lord 
protector of the vows of discipline and pursuit, Lord of 
commitment and consecration, Lord of fire and 
relentless exercise of discipline, recognize and permit 
our vow of discipline and study, approve and consecrate 
my commitment, accept and bless my dedication and 
pursuit of the undertaking and programme. 


7. | (Soma Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


seeps wer Areata Rataa 1 3a 
qae: amam aga wraca | strata 
Ree aaa erat tafe d ta cur qemdyfra 
Weal Ta: WS wT setae sat AAT matga- 
szilq inel 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-V 91 


Amsuramsuste deva somapyayatamindrayaik- 
adhanavide. A tubhyamindrah pydyatama 
tvamindraya pyayasva. Apydayaydsmant- 
sakhintsannya medhaya svasti te deva soma 
sutyamasiya. Esta rayah prese bhagaya' 
rtamrtavadibhyo namo dyavaprthivibhyam. 


Soma, Lord and spirit of life, power brilliant, 
omnipresent in nature, master of unique knowledge and 
promoter of wealth, nurture the growth bit by bit, wave 
on wave, for the glory of Indra, the power of nature, 
and may Indra, the power, grow for you, the spirit. And 
may the seeker (the master and the disciple) grow for 
the joy of life. Help us grow, help our friends and 
comrades grow by virtue of your penetrating 
intelligence. Let joy and comfort grow. May success 
greet you! Man of brilliance dedicated to the spirit of 
life, joining you in your creative efforts for the 
production of food and energy, and the achievement of 
honour and prosperity, may we obtain the wanted power 
and wealth of life. To the speakers (and discoverers) of 
the Law (of nature), knowledge (of truth and law)! To 
earth and heaven, salutations (in gratefulness for fire 
and light and growth)! 


8.  (AgniDevata, Gotama Rshi) 


at dsasreiss:sprac GATS cat eT | 

su asentan aatssrataeite caret i 

a Asr TS: grat Aaa tat WEST | 

3 essere aatssrataeite caret i 
ar ssd efisrar adfer "ais | 

Sa aessa iA aatssrataeite carat uen 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


92 YAJURVEDA 


Ya te’agne’yahsaya tanurvarsistha gahvarestha. 
Ugram vaco' apavadhittvesam vaco’ apavadhit 
svaha. Ya te’ agne’ rajahSaya tanurvarsistha 
gahvarestha. Ugram vaco' apavadhittvesam 
vaco’ apavadhit svaha. Ya te’ agne hari$aya 
tanurvarsistha gahvarestha. Ugram vaco’ 
apavadhittvesam vaco’ apavadhit svaha. 


Agni, Lord of fire and speech, your presence (in 
the devotee), silent but potential as in the metals of the 
earth, generous and deep in the caverns of the mind, 
defeats the cruellest and most fearsome words of the 
opponent. Your presence (in the devotee), loud and 
powerful as in the air and waters of the sky, generous 
and deep as in the caverns of the clouds, defeats the 
strongest and most passionate words of the opponent. 
Your presence (in the devotee), clear and brilliant as in 
the rays of light, generous and deep as in the implosions 
of the sun, overwhelms the most brilliant and most 
formidable speech of the opponent. This is the voice of 
nature. This is the voice of the Veda. This is the voice 
of the Divine. 


9. (Agni Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


aardi Aste faa aseadarma arfiraracdarar 
cated | fase hast marissrfgrssmd-ar ifa 
aise dfereurufur aisateee art far aa car 
aq faai arrmtsarfgrsaretar urere at 
Rider uferearafur aasatene art erfarei aa cat 
aà aaan ammebssrfurssmdar reda 
wreqdideur great ensis art far aa 
ver xd a att wat Qadtaa ei 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-V 93 


Taptayani me'si vittayani me’syavatanma 
nathitadavatanma vyathitat. Videdagnirnabho 
namagne' angira’ ayuna namnehi yo'syam 
prthivyamasi yatte’nadhrstam nama yajniyam 
tena tva dadhe videdagnirnabho namagne’ 
angira'ayuna namnehi yo dvittyasyam 
prthivyamasi yatte’nadhrstam nama yajniyam 
tena tva dadhe videdagnirnabho namagne’ 
angira’ayuna  namnehi yastrtiyasyam 
prthivyamasi yatte’ nadhrstam nama yajniyam 
tena tva dadhe. Anu tva devavitaye. 


Agni (fire, electricity and light) is the bringer of 
home for the homeless and wealth for all. It saves from 
destitution and exploitation, and from fear and 
deprivation. Know this agni: it is water from the sky, 
lives in the body parts as vital heat and comes bearing 
the name of health and longevity. It lives in this earth 
and that is its yajnic and indestructible form. For that 
reason, we light it in the vedi, raise it and feed it for the 
attainment of noble virtues. 


Know the agni: it is in the vapours in the sky, the 
second region of space, in its yajnic and indestructible 
form. It comes bearing the name of health, longevity 
and comfort. For that reason, we light it in the vedi of 
science, raise it and feed it for the attainment of noble 
virtues. 


Know the agni: it is light which illuminates 
various regions of the universe and lives in the moving 
sun in heaven, the third region of space, in its yajnic 
and indestructible form. It comes bearing the name of 
health, logevity, prosperity, light and life. For that 
reason, we light it in the vedi of technology, raise it and 
feed it for the attainment of noble virtues. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


94 YAJURVEDA 
10. (Vak Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


fuese uen: deed: acura faesata 
oe dent: ypereer firesgrfer vrucranét aene: 
BIBT gol 


Simhyasi sapatnasahi devebhyah kalpasva 
simhyasi sapatnasahi devebhyah. Sundhasva 
simhyasi sapatnasahi devebhyah sumbhasva. 


Speech is powerful, as powerful as a lioness. 
Develop it for the good people so that they can face a 
rival and prevail. Purify it so that the noble people can 
resist an adversary and defeat him. Beautify it so that 
the holy people can fight out the enemy and win over 
darkness and evil. 


11. (Vak Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


gerer endfur: uaa wear Se: usunuldq 
Tilsen fugfildfürora: utg fasaha carfaci- 
tat: ulferaHe qui emebfzsm eumdem ure 


Indraghosastva vasubhih purastat patu 
pracetastva rudraih pa$cat pātu manojavastva 
pitrbhirdaksinatah | patu vi$vakarma 
tva 'dityairuttaratah patvi-damaham taptam 
varbahirdha yajnannih srjami. 

(Speech is a sacred trust to be developed and 
preserved.) The voice of the Divine Power, Veda, and 
the scholars of the Veda, with the observation of the 
external world of the Vasus such as the earth and work 
of the *vasu' scholars of 24 years standing may develop 
the language of science from the front, taking it forward. 
Pracheta, the man of awareness and illumination, with 
insight into the internal world of the pranas and the spirit 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-V 95 


and work of the scholars of 36 years standing may 
extend it and preserve it from behind. The man of 
judgement and valuation as fast as the mind (manojawa), 
with the senior scholars past and present, should 
maintain the clarity and acceptability of its meaning and 
refinement on the right side of it. Vishwakarma, scholar 
of the world of existence and the structure of language, 
with the work of the scholars of 48 years standing, 
should maintain the overall beauty and effectiveness of 
it. (This is the yajna of creative speech.) With the 
fragrance of this yajna I breathe out the vapours of Vak 
(universal language) to be crystallized into the objective 
speech of communication. 


12. (Vak Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


Ragai veret faresgrearfacratt: taret esata 
waar: eaafa: caret asai guai 
Wanda: tet fuei3upemedg demembrTS caret 


qd UII 


Simhyasi svaha siinhyasyadityavanih svaha 
simhyasi brahmavanih ksatravanih svaha 
simhyasi suprajavani rayasposavanih svaha 
simhyasyavaha devan yajamanaya svaha 
bhutebhyastva. 


Language is sacred and it is power. It is the 
treasure of science, science of the stars and light 
especially of the sun in the zodiacs. It is the language 
of the Veda and eliminates ignorance. It is the language 
of governance, administration and military science and 
fights out injustice and crime. It is the language of 
economics, commerce, finance and management and 
removes poverty and suffering. It is the language of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


96 YAJURVEDA 


social science and human welfare and eliminates anti- 
social forces. For the yajamana it brings spiritual 
knowledge and noble virtues. I serve and develop this 
noble language through yajna for the enlightenment and 
happiness of all the living beings. 


13. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


gaista gfe dee gafarteratte gerida 
fed are: atteafe gN 


Dhruvo'si prthivim drinha dhruvaksidasy- 
antarisam drinhacyutaksidasi divam drmha- 
agneh purisamasi. 


Yajna is firm and immovable, the centre of 
movement. It develops the earth and enriches its wealth. 
Develop yajna. It is the treasure-home of knowledge 
and prosperity. It expands the sky and increases its 
wealth and waters. Develop yajna. It is the seat of 
indestructible wealth. It expands radiation of light and 
energy from the regions of the sun and brings the light 
of knowledge. It supplements and sharpens the powers 
of nature. Develop yajna. Expand. Accelerate. Intensify. 
It is the completion, the finale. 


14. (Savita Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


Ged ssa ded frat fam fade gaat 
fatufrerd: | fa erat aà agafadassadt ded 
aad: Nefa: carat gi 

Yunjate mana’ uta yunjate dhiyo vipra viprasya 
brhato vipascitah. Vi hotra dadhe vayunavideka' 
inmahi devasya savituh paristutih svaha. 


Great are the songs of celebration in praise of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-V 97 


Savita, the Creator, Omnipresent Lord Supreme of 
infinite knowledge and Karma. Wise and dedicated men 
of multiple orders of yajna concentrate their mind and 
intelligence on that One Universal Presence. Knowing 
that language of celebration and Karma I meditate on 
the presence of the Lord all alone by myself. 


15. (Vishnu Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


ge ferurférelenir fen Fea gar d 
CAST USAT Carat use 


Idam visnurvicakrame tredha nidadhe padam. 
Samudhamasya pamsure svaha. 


Vishnu, Lord omnipresent sustainer of this 
dynamic world, visible and invisible, created it in three 
fold order — earth (prithivi), skies (antariksha) and 
heaven (dyu), or sattva (mind), rajas (motion) and matter 
(tamas) — and, alongwith the mystery that it is, set it in 
space. This is the divine voice. 


16. (Vishnu Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 
stadt saad spadsefu uda aren od 


skar teat fanaa arrest? uferefrufurat waa: 
verme ngan 


Travati dhenumati hi bhutain suyavasini manave 
dasasya. Vyaskabhna rodasi visnavete 
dadharttha prthivimabhito mayukhaih svaha. 


The earth full of grain, rich in cows, covered with 
grass and greenery so pleasing to man, this earth with 
all her creatures held fast all round in orbit by the waves 
of gravitation, and the heaven above well-sustained in 
position, Vishnu, Lord immanent of the world, you 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


98 YAJURVEDA 


maintain both of these and, of course, the divine word 
of the Veda. 


17. (Vishnu Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 
ag sted or felgen Ces tinontaad act siüssmqui 
Rade ust m Aden wet at 
OTST: ng oN 


Devaśrutau devesvaghosatam prācī pretam- 
adhvaram kalpayanti’urdhvam yajnam nayatam 
ma jihvaratam. Svam gosthamavadatam devi 
durye’ ayurma nirvadistam prajam ma 
nirvadistamatra rametham varsman prthivyah. 
Scholars well-versed in the science of yajna go 
forward to the noble people and proclaim that they 
strengthen and extend the yajna over the earth and to 
the sky so that they receive, like the two fold movements 
of prana and apana, the fragrance of the yajna of love 
and non-violence and send it onward to the heavens. 
Take the yajna high, never take it down. Pious men of 
virtue stay in their home and look after the cows fully 
well. Abuse not life. Revile not the people. Enjoy life 
on the earth under the showers of peace and joy. 


18. (Vishnu Devata, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi) 
ferri ee datr weiter a: urfsterf fermi cartesian 
itssreebumrerar deus] fanaa fereuter 
«dT URSIN 
Visnornukam viryani pravocam yah parthivani 
vimame rajamsi. Yo’ askabhayaduttaram 


sadhastham vicakramanastredhorugayo visnave 
tva. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-V 99 


Let us celebrate the wonderful exploits of Vishnu 
who makes the threefold order of the heaven, the earth 
and the sky with the original materials of nature. 
Immanent with the later forms of the dynamic universe 
which He made and makes, He sustains the world. 
Celebrated in the hymns of the Veda, Lord, we worship 
you for the sake of the universal yajna of creation and 
pray for inspiration to perform yajna in our life. 


18. (Vishnu Devata, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi) 
feat at assa at yfr wer at femurs- 
RicdRara sar fe eet agar yureat wees 
afaturata wearfgeata var usu 


Divo va visna' uta va prthivya maho va visna’ 
urorantariksat. Ubha hi hasta vasuna prnasva 
prayaccha daksinadota savyad visnave tva. 


Vishnu, Lord omnipresent of the universe, we 
worship you with yajna for the gifts of yajna. We pray: 
from the regions of heaven bless us with energy and 
light. From the vast sky and from the earth, and from 
the great womb of nature — the ‘mahat’ form of the 
creative mode — bless us and fill our life to the full 
with materials of joy and peace with both hands, from 
both sides, right and left. 


20. (Vishnu Devata, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi) 
u age ead eiraur wat a ata: rat PRT: | 
Teed fag fasndurearfzrfárafzr yeah fasano u 


Pra tadvisnu statvate viryena mrgo na bhimah 
kucaro giristhah. Yasyorusu trisu vikramane- 
svadhiksiyanti bhuvanani vi$va. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


100 YAJURVEDA 


Like an awful mountain lion that roams around in 
his sole majesty, Vishnu, the omnipresent Lord of 
tremendous power and glory rules the world and 
commands the homage of His creatures. All the regions 
of the world rest in the vast spaces of the three orders 
of His wonderful creation — the earth, the sky and the 
heavens. 


21. (Vishnu Devata, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi) 


fewil nena fawn: maA wr fawn: xeu 
taois 1 aerate fereutar cat Rg 


Visno raratamasi visnoh snaptre stho visnoh 
syurasi visnordhruvo’si. Vaisnavamasi visnave 
tva. 

The world is a manifestation of Vishnu's glory 
at two levels of existence, the animate and the inanimate. 
The elements of existence have been integrated into 
form by the presence of Vishnu. The form is one, firm, 
inviolable and organismic. The world is divine, it 
belongs to Vishnu. It is yajna. It is for yajna in 
celebration of the maker. 


22. (Vishnu Devata, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi) 


eret ear Ulad: WadsRartaigea Gor weaker 
sd merae scalar zrerssrfd aks | aed 
weder gedttgta eme aq usd 
Devasya tva savituh prsave’svinorbahubhyam 
pusno hastabhyam. A dade naryasidamaham 
raksasam griva' api krntami. Brhannasi 
brhadrava brhatimindraya vacam vada. 
In this world of Lord Savita's creation and 
blessedness, with the double strength of Ashwini's arms 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-V 101 


(nature's powers of health, prana and apana) and the 
double gifts of nourishment from Pusha (earth's powers 
of gravitation and stability), I accept and undertake to do 
yajna. Yajna is a noble work for humanity. With this, we 
can drive away the forces of evil even by the neck. It is 
great and growing. It is the voice of divinity loud and 
clear. Proclaim this great voice of truth for the glory of 
Indra, ruler of the earth. 


23. (Yajna Devata, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi) 


[p webepimdepehTenriaHe d de fi 
i À este a frenmaenenmtzufa uad 
Raksohanam | balagahanam | vaisnavim 
idamaham tam balagamutkirami yam me nistyo 
yamamatyo | nicakhanedamaham tamı 
balagamutkirami yam me samano yamasamano 
nicakhanedamaham tam balagamutkirami yam 
me sabandhuryamasabandhurnicakhaneda- 
maham tam balagamutkirami yam me sajato 
yamasajato nicakhanotkrtyam kirami. 


Just as I perform, refine and expand this yajna — 
an act that gathers strength, bestows strength of power, 
prosperity and happiness, and destroys negativity and 
evil, an act performed with the voice of the divine (Veda) 
for the divine — just as I do the yajna, you too do the 
same for advancement. 


What my dedicated friend or my chief assistant 
has done to dig up the vedi for knowledge of the earth, 
and as he has performed the yajna of research, so I do 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


102 YAJURVEDA 


the act for enlightenment and you too do the same for 
progress. 


What my equal or my unequal has done and does 
in the field of education, the same I do for development 
and you too do the same for refinement. 


What the equal of my brother or the unequal of 
my brother has done and does for the advancement of 
the science of yajna, I do the same developmental act, 
and you too do the same — for expansion. 


What my brother, colleague or another higher or 
lower has done and does regularly for heightening the 
possibilities of yajna for the advancement of knowledge, 
prosperity and happiness, I do the same inspiring act 
and you too do the same for the higher life. 


24. (Surya & Vidvan Devate, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi) 


vaste wucrer vau cahirarteret 
shridfa taitet deierdvafingr new 


Svaradasi sapatnaha satraradasyabhimatiha 
janaradasi raksoha sarvaradasyamitraha. 


You are self-disciplined, self-Iuminous, free, able 
to defeat the rivals. You are ruled by the sessions of the 
community-yajna; you shine in the community sessions 
and you suppress the proud. You are ruled by the people, 
you shine among the people, and you eliminate the 
wicked. You are ruled by all, you shine among all and 
you win over those who are not your friends. 


You are the individual, self-disciplined, self- 
enlightened, free, able to defeat the rivals. You are the 
community, autonomous, enlightened, ableto keep down 
the insidious. You are the nation, governed by the people, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-V 103 


nationally enlightened, free, able to suppress the wicked. 
You are the united nations of the world, governed by the 
united people, humanly enlightened, sovereign, able to 
win over the opposition and non-friends. 


25. (Yajna Devata, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi) 


wagt at wenTeg: urenfa awradenreut at 
ames Aoa at sends 
aeons ereuremsteire utt at sce ssda emi crure 
tdeo at acmedt udef aor dura 
dme tat ud 


Raksohano vo balagahanah proksami vaisnavan 
raksohano vo balagahano 'vanayami vaisnavan 
raksohano vo balagahano' vastrnami vaisnavan 
raksohanau vam balagahana' upa-dadhami 
vaisnavi raksohanau vam balagahanau 
paryuhami vaisnavi vaisnavamasi vaisnava stha. 


You are fighters against suffering and destroyers 
of evil while I rout the force of the enemy. You are devotees 
of Vishnu, Lord of the universe, and dedicated to yajna, 
a life of positive creative and constructive action. I bless 
and sanctify you. You are the destroyers of the wicked. I 
gauge the strength of the enemy and drive them away 
from you, friends of yajna. You are fighters against human 
poverty and misfortune. I know the powers of the 
exploiters. I shower success and prosperity on you, 
friends of social and economic well-being through yajna. 
President of the council and master of yajna, you are 
crusaders against ignorance and injustice and you face 
the power of the adversaries. By virtue of your dedication 
to Vishnu and to yajna, I take you close to me for success. 
Eliminators of sin and pollution, you break down their 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


104 YAJURVEDA 


power in the service of society. I know your faith and I 
strengthen your faith and resolve. Yajna is holy, it is a 
Godly mission. Stay firm in your dedication to yajna, to 
God, to nature and to society. 


26. (Yajna Devata, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi) 


dena ver fer: tas Raag it yoo Sena 
sida mei 'dframe «veta zirerssrfdasrfi 1 aats 
Fea gut qa a SAR ATT var uferei 
ver ype«dieemenr: fga: fugqua-afe usua 


Devasya tva savituh prasave’svinorbahubhyam 
pusno hastabhyam. A dade naryasidamaham 
raksasam grīvā’ api krntami. Yavo'si 
yavayasmad dveso yavayaratirdive tva’- 
ntariksaya tva prthivyai tva $undhantamllokah 
pitrsadanah pitrsadanamasi. 


In this world of Savita's creation, with the 
strength and vigour of prana and apana, and with the 
power and prowess of the bold and the brave I do 
homage to the man of learning and dedication and accept 
yajna as a mission so that I may catch the wicked and 
the evil by the neck and eliminate them head and foot 
from life and society. You are young and fast, speed 
itself. Drive away hate and fear from us. Eliminate 
poverty, adversity and failure. May all the people 
cooperate and join in the yajna in the search for the 
light of truth and universal Dharma, for exploration of 
the sky and space and for enrichment of the earth and 
the environment. This is the assembly of the wise and 
the learned people. May all the people join these men 
of knowledge and be enlightened. O woman, you are 
strong and bold. You too join in this venture. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-V 105 


27. (Yajna Devata, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi) 


sfgde$eaurarafisi gor gea uferem darmeat 
Tred! fig inado ger endum | srgrarfst car 
aaah waa wiles setae at qeenddee 


Wat eee gel 


Uddivam stabhanantariksam prna drmhasva 
prthivyam dyutanastva maruto minotu 
mitravarunau dhruvena dharmana. Brahmavani 
tva ksatravani rayasposavani paryuhami. 
Brahma drinha ksatram drinhayurdrinha prajam 
drinha. 

Yajna, man of knowledge, president of the 
assembly, reach the regions of light and reveal the 
secrets of knowledge. Rise to the skies and fill the space 
there for knowledge. Reach into the earth and strengthen 
it. May the wind join you and help with the light of 
energy. May the two-fold movements of wind-energy, 
prana and apana, help you with their firm and unfailing 
power. I know and appreciate your dedication to 
knowledge and education, to governance and 
organization, to the economic system and wish you well. 
Promote knowledge, strengthen the social system, enrich 
the economic system. Promote life and health. Promote 
the welfare of the people. 


28. (Yajna Devata, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi) 
gare sparsi erster irsferr-rext wsrat warfare i 
"m4 maga winter wfaifu fesesrmd 
EE URSIN 


Dhruvasi dhruvo'yam yajamano ''sminnayatane 
prajaya pasubhirbhuyat. Ghrtena dyavaprthivi 
puryetham indrasya chadirasi vi$vajanasya 
chaya. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


106 YAJURVEDA 


Lady of the house, hostess of yajna, you are firm 
and strong. May the yajamana, your husband, also be 
firm in this yajna, in this home, in this world, with his 
family, his people and his wealth. May both of you fill 
the earth and the sky with the fragrance of ghee and 
fertility. You are the protective shade of Indra, lord of 
power and prosperity. You too be the protective cover 
for all the people of the world. 


29. (Ishvara and Sabhadhyaksha Devate, Autathya 
Dirghatama Rshi) 


ufi cat firduit fizsgur she fasad: i 
"RETI Gaga wp Ver TK: ure 


Pari tva girvano gira'ima bhavantu visvatah. 
Vrddhayumanu vrddhayo justa bhavantu 
Justayah. 


Lord President, adorable in songs of praise, may 
these chants of celebration reach you whole and from 
all sides, and may these praises, ever loved, increase 
and grow in their truth and value alongwith the lord, 
first in time and oldest in wisdom. 


30. (Ishvara and Sabhadhyaksha Devate, Madhuchhanda 
Rshi) 


ser cnp gases | 
teta àsa uso 


Indrasya syurasindrasya dhruvo’si Aindramasi 
vaisvadevamasi. 


You are the life-link of the world’s beauty and 
grandeur. You are the centre-pin of the wheel of 
existence. You are the power and the glory. You are the 
ultimate rest and haven of the universe. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-V 107 


31. (Agni Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


fasta weréuit afa werares: à 
sargtsfir wetareqyista fasadat: negu 


Vibhurasi pravahano vahnirasi havyavahanah. 
Svatro'si pracetastutho’si vi$vavedah. 


Agni, you are vast as space, flowing as a river 
and rolling as the sea, the fire that carries the fragrance 
of yajna across the world. You are the lord giver of 
knowledge and awareness and promoter of wisdom, and 
you are the vision of the world. 


32. (Agni Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


sfsnifa enfemgifufu serifiraenfa ghar- 
ui aisa deat gesa gorges 
aara carafe: uu 


Usigasi kavirangharirasi bambharir-avasyurasi 
duvasvan chundhyurasi marjaliyah samradasi 
krsanuh parisadyo'si pavamano nabho'si 
pratakva-mrsto'si havyasudana' rtadhama'si 
svarjyotih. 


Agni, you are the lord of light, eternal poet of 
vision and creation, enemy of sin and evil, deliverer 
from bondage, protector from suffering, adorable, 
edifying purifier and sanctifier. Self-refulgent, you burn 
away the dirt, wash away and dry up pollution; centre- 
presence of the assembly, you emanate joy; light of the 
sky, you refine the yajna and carry it in space. Light of 
heaven and abode of the eternal law of Dharma, you 
are the spirit of patience and the power of endurance. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


108 YAJURVEDA 
33. (Agni Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


mAsa feseedurssrspscxehuraferfu peer 
antercifa sedea gui our our uediu- 
nama w at far veia Asa uf @aart 


Ja MIEEIT 


Samudro'si vi$vavyaca' ajo'syekapad ahirasi 
budhnyo vagasyaindramasi sado'si rtasya 
dvarau ma ma santaptam adhvanamadhvapate 
pra ma tira svasti me'smin pathi devayane 
bhuyat. 

Agni, vast and deep as the ocean, unfathomable 
as space, immanent and omnipresent, you are the 
original power and motion of existence. Unborn and 
eternal, spirit of all knowledge, the world is but one 
vibration of this eternal consciousness, and the Veda is 
just one Word of its articulation. 


Man of wisdom and learning, path-maker and 
guardian of advancement in knowledge, Dharma and 
science, Agni, Lord of Life, is the lord of knowledge 
and power. He opens the doors of internal and external 
knowledge. You too keep the doors open, extend the 
paths, do not cause any suffering, help us cross the 
hurdles and lead us on in this noble pilgrimage of divine 
life on earth. Lord of life, knowledge and action, bless 
us that we may succeed. 


34. (Agni Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


fre m alaaa: ur: wer eat GAR 
"me AA ura ubera: faga uber ware 
m THÉ arsed at al faster ux 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-V 109 


Mitrasya ma caksuseksadhvam agnayah 
sagarah sagara stha sagarena namna 
raudrenanikena pata ma'gnayah piprta mda’ 
gnayo gopayata ma namo vo’stu ma ma himsista. 


Men of knowledge, worthy of praise, 
broadminded as the sky, voracious as fire for knowledge 
and passionate for work, look at me favourably with 
the eye of friends. Remain broad-minded and liberal. 
Liberal and gracious as you are, protect me with the 
fiery passion for knowledge and power in growth and 
development. May the men of the fire of yajna and 
science fill and full me with plenty and let me grow in 
safety and peace. Salutations to you! Pray hurt me not, 
destroy me not. 


35. (Agni Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


seirfdrfa farasi favdet aaisa 1 eita 
agra gulvzits-rehdvzrs3n GA erisereseeret 
weiss Aq verme usua 

Jyotirasi visvarupam visvesam devanam samit. 
Tvam soma tanukrdbhyo dvesobhyo' nyakrte- 
bhya'uru yantasi varutham svaha jusano’ 
apturajyasya vetu svaha. 


Agni, you are the light of universal knowledge, a 
flame of fire for the scholars of the world to light up and 
reveal the form and structure of the world. Soma you are 
the vast power of order and control over the envious, the 
self-expansive servers of the flesh, the negative and 
uncreative people. May the lover of tecknowledge, fast 
and anxious, choose to dedicate himself to the great and 
valuable secrets and powers of agni, and know and 
confirm the divine voice of the Veda. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


110 YAJURVEDA 
36. (Agni Devata, Agastya Rshi) 


ana wa gaat wassrenbasal sa cath fasrt 
qaem srfitesr er assia ferte uas t 


Agne naya supatha raye' asmanvi$vani deva 
vayunani vidvan. Yuyodhyasmajjuhuranameno 
bhuyistham te nama’uktim vidhema. 


Agni, light of the world and treasure-home of all 
the power and wealth, lord of all the knowledge, karma 
and paths of life, lead us on by the right path, simple 
and straight, to the highest goal of life, Moksha, through 
right knowledge, right action and right wealth. Fight 
out and ward off from us all that is evil and leads to 
suffering — crookedness, deviousness, intrigue and 
deceit. We bow in thanks and surrender to you and sing 
the sweetest songs in praise of you. 


37. (Agni Devata, Agastya Rshi) 


ata aissifadRacpuircaa qe: wesdq ware | 
aa amiss anternmaasrsstad Wear: 
wrat non 


Ayam no’ agnirvarivaskrnotvayam mrdhah 


vajasatavayain Satrunjayatu jarhrsanah svaha. 


May this Agni, this fiery man of courage and 
prowess, make the way to safety, security, wealth and 
bliss. May he, breaking through the lines of the envious, 
go forward. May he defeat the enemy in battles and win 
the victories. May he, in joyous song, celebrate the 
victory for Agni. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-V 111 
38. (Vishnu Devata, Agastya Rshi) 


se fawn federe arate eeu | 
ad daar fra wo aadta fax carat gen 


Uru visno vikramasvoru ksayaya naskrdhi. 
Ghrtam ghrtayone piba prapra yajnapatim tira 
svaha. 

Vishnu, lord of life and sustenance/Man of 
knowledge, power and wealth, go far and forward in 
your exploits and enable us to expand with our homes, 
wealth, knowledge and happiness. Born of ghee and 
rising with ghee the fire devours its food and blazes. You 
too light the fire with knowledge and action and grow 
continuously in knowledge, action, wealth and happiness. 
Take the master of yajna across the fields of life, chanting 
the hymns of yajna, to a safe haven of joy. 


39. (Soma & Savita Devate, Agastya Rshi) 


ad afaate d drrencterea aT cat a9 | ug 
da un dat Gare ssabisgane deme qeeuniur 
Fatal freieurer UIST uas 


Deva savitaresa te somastam raksasva ma tva 
dabhan. Etattvam deva soma devo devām 
upaga' idamaham manusyantsaha rayasposena 
svaha nirvarunasya pasan muchye. 


Savita, lord of life and growth, Head of the 
people, this is your Soma, honour, strength and power. 
Protect it. Don't be cowed down. Let none injure, 
deceive or destroy you. Soma, man of energy and 
inspiration, shining with strength and intelligence, 
bright as you are, go to the men of virtue and wisdom. I 
too approach them to be with them. Thus with the wise 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


112 YAJURVEDA 


and the virtuous people, with friends and comrades, with 
wealth and growth, I get free of the chains of Varuna, 
the powers of worldly bondage. 


40. (Agni Devata, Agastya Rshi) 


art eraured daar m ad a qesdaur ar cata ar 


TH weaetease aft | qa at erus erar 
*p dram dlardharaescany aveqdenta: iso 


Agne vratapaste vratapa ya tava tanurmayya- 
bhudesa sa tvayi yo mama tanustvayyabhudiyam 
sa mayi. Yathayatham nau vratapate vratanyanu 
me diksam diksapati-ramamstanu tapastapa- 
spatih. 


Agni, man of light and brilliance, man of truth, 
man of knowledge, teacher, man of discipline on oath 
as you are, so may I be as your disciple. Your body of 
knowledge, truth and faith may be in me too. And my 
body of growing knowledge may be in you. Man of 
discipline and commitment, you and I both shall observe 
common vows corresponding to each other. May my 
initiation and dedication on oath be accepted and 
approved by my master of initiation. May my discipline 
and austerity be in accord with the discipline and 
austerity of the master of tapas, austere discipline. 


41. (Vishnu Devata, Agastya Rshi) 


se fep fahu arate apie | 
"rd daar fra ud dada far caret ise 


Uru visno vikramasvoru ksayaya naskrdhi. 
Ghrtam ghrtayone piba prapra yajnapatim tira 
svaha. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-V 113 


Vishnu, man of courage and knowledge wide 
expansive asthe wind, equip yourself with the knowledge 
of science and technology and expand our comfort and 
happiness. Man sipping holy water just as fire consumes 
ghee and electricity in the sky consumes water in the 
clouds, drink deep at the fount of knowledge. Help the 
master of yajnato overcome the hurdles and swim across 
the seas with the chant of the Veda. 


42. (Agni Devata, Agastya Rshi) 


STAT SST Aa ussabiaate cr urszirsfela 
wirst: (od wat Ware @a enr eren 
dara eaqraret werd fata car 1 side) area 
verfi Afa: nes ui 


Atyanyam' agam nanyam' upagamarvak tva 
parebhyo'vidam paro'varebhyah. Tam tva 
jusamahe deva vanaspate devayajyayai devastva 
devayajyayai jusantam visnave tva. Osadhe 
trayasva svadhite mainam himsth. 


Agni/Master of knowledge, I won't go to the 
fools. I would go to the others, to the wise, yes, to the 
wise only. You are higher than the highest (in 
knowledge), and closer than the closest (in love). I 
would be with you, know you, attain to you. 


Lord/Master of herbs, brilliant and generous, we 
love you and adore you for the sake of gifts of knowledge 
and life's inspiration. May all the devas, noble ones, 
love you and adore you for the same gifts of knowledge 
and blessings for the sake of Vishnu, lord of yajna. 


Life-giving herbs, power of the lord, save this 
man, save this yajna, hurt not, kill not. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


114 YAJURVEDA 


43. (Yajna Devata, Agastya Rshi) 


an ur ehdreaftar ur feat: given ata | arate 
ver verfétfererfebsmra: uf veo Aha | 270 
da eeu ymado fate aeda fa aa 
SOA Wal 


Dyam ma lekhirantariksam ma himsth prthivya 
sambhava. Ayam hi tva svadhitistetijanah 
praninaya mahate saubhagaya. Atastvam deva 
vanaspate Satavalso viroha sahasravalsa vi 
vayam ruhema. 


Don't breach the regions of light, let the heavens 
be. Hurt not the skies, pollute them not. Be with the 
earth and the environment. This yajna is a great power, 
a weapon sharp and tempered, come to you for a great 
good fortune. Lord of herbs/Greenery of the earth, 
generous power of the Divine, grow from a hundred 
roots, spread and rise. We too may, by the grace of the 
Lord of yajna, grow and rise from a thousand roots, 
from a thousand shoots, through a hundred years, 
through a thousand years. 


sta aseratseara: d 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


115 


CHAPTER-VI 


1.  (Savita Devata, Agastya Rshi) 


gaet ver nRa: wersfveritsteseit your evatvemi 
sida arRidiane: tater narsaga | aatsta 
aama gat aaantd faa waster car 
"fere car srek«itecirenr: fdqua-r: faqua-aufuus u 


Devasya tva savituh prasave' $vinorbahubhyarmn 
pusno hastabhyam. A dade naryasidamahain 
raksasam griva’ api krntami. Yavo'si 
yavayasmad dveso yavayaratir-dive tva’ 
ntariksaya tva prthivyai tva Sundhantamllokah 
pitrsadanah | pitrsadanamasi. 


In this world of lord Savita's creation, with both 
the arms of Ashwinis (the wind's energy of prana and 
udana) and both the hands of Pusha (the earth's gift of 
strength and prowess), I accept you and consecrate you, 
Head of the people and President of the assembly and 
your life-partner, in this social yajna. With this 
acceptance and investiture, I catch the evil and the 
wicked by the neck and destroy them. You are the power 
to join and disjoin. Remove the envious from us. Drive 
out all poverty and suffering from here. This is the 
august assembly of the noble people. May the noble 
people sitting in this assembly accept and consecrate 
you for the heavens (the light of knowledge), for the 
skies (internal purity of conduct), and for the earth 
(earthly prosperity and well-being). You are the centre- 
seat of the great and the noble ones. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


116 YAJURVEDA 


2.  (Savita Devata, Shakalya Rshi) 


axel: MRU 


Agrenirasi svavesa’ unnetrnametasya vittadadhi 
tva sthasyati devastva savita madhvanaktu 
supippalabhyastvausadhibhyah. | Dyam- 
agrenasprksa' antariksam madhyenaprah 
prthivimuparenadrmhih. 

You are the leader on top of all those taking this 
polity high. Settled with confidence in your Dharma, 
know well this polity, this economy, and the people. 
Savita, blazing lord of power, light and generosity, 
would shower His blessings and protection from above. 
May the Lord anoint you with honey and bless you with 
nectarious herbs. With top initiative, touch the heaven 
(in matters of justice and enlightenment). At the middle 
level, fill the sky with peace, security and Dharmic 
conduct. At the ground level, strengthen the earth (with 
food, planning and employment). 


3. (Vishnu Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


ata aratagata weed aa rat aft-ystsstard: 
state deems fast: ut uade E | 
sre cm aaah vendre uda od 
axe aa qearddse wsm drm dai 

Ya te dhamanyusmasi gamadhyai yatra gavo 
bhurisrnga’ ayasah. Atraha tadurugayasya 
visnoh paramam padamava bhari bhuri. 
Brahmavani tva ksatravani rayasposavani 
paryuhami. Brahma |. drmha | ksatram 
drnihayurdrmha prajam drinha. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VI 117 


The houses of the government we would wish to 
visit are those which are bright with the light of Lord 
Vishnu's glory of human art and awareness so that we 
exclaim spontaneously: *Ah! here is the place where 
the highest offices in Vishnu's dispensation are wholly 
and exclusively held by learned and meritorious people". 
I know your Brahma system of education and research, 
your Kshatra system of defence, justice and peace, your 
economic system of production and distribution. 
Strengthen and extend education and enlightenment, 
consolidate and advance governance and administration, 
improve and promote health and age, strengthen and 
expand the welfare of the people. 


4. (Vishnu Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 
ferui: endifer usa adt aar wert | 
zw usu: erat owe 


Visnoh karmani pa$yata yato vratani paspase 
indrasya yujyah sakha. 


Watch the divine acts of Vishnu, omnipresent lord 
of the universe, acts of creation, sustenance and 
annihilation of the world, wherein are manifested the 
inviolable laws of His dominion operative in nature. 
Therein I see the sacred rules of conduct and 
administration of my dominion too and I bind myself 
irrevocably as a friend of the lord of universal power 
and as an instrument of His will. Watch, meditate, learn 
and bind yourselves too to the rules of this dominion 
and His. 


5. (Vishnu Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 
aga: ur vataat usatu wd: 
Ria aada nei 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


118 YAJURVEDA 


Tadvisnoh paramam padaim sada pasyanti 
surayah. Diviva caksuratatam. 


Men of courage and divine knowledge, the Veda, 
always have a vision of that highest glory of Vishnu 
manifested everywhere and blazing like the light of the 
sun in heaven, which you too should see. 


6.  (Vidvans Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 
ua ufi car ceifastt erat wits aaaea 
mE | fea: rrr d uferegieettenssTicuen«d 
USE: NGN 


Parivirasi pari tva daivirviso vyayantam 
parimam yajamanam rayo manusyanam. Divah 
sunurasyesa te prthivyamlloka’ aranyaste pasuh. 


You are the centre of attraction, reverence and 
homage. You are the child of heaven like the sun. May 
the brilliant in knowledge and merit come to you in 
reverence. Yajamana as you are of the social yajna of 
this dominion, may the people of wealth all round be at 
your command in homage. The people of this land and 
the foresters are yours, so is the animal wealth of the 
land. 


7. (Twashta Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 
sude tarda: urban afar i 
ed aedd xu gem d aq eu 


Upavirasyupa devan daivirvisah pragurusijo 
vahnitaman. Deva tvastarvasu rama havya te 
svadantam. 


Close to the people, you are their protector. 
Brilliant in power and virtue, you are the destroyer of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VI 119 


suffering. Just as meritorious people of quality and 
character approach the most lovable benefactors, so may 
they come to you. Abide in delight by your dominion 
and may the people enjoy what they offer for the social 
yajna and what they receive from it. 


8.  (Brihaspati Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 
Yat uted adeaad amar adh | 
vere var aaefa: usta ufdasenfa smt arte: uz u 


Revati ramadhvam brhaspate dharaya vasuni. 
Rtasya tva devahavih pasena prati muncami 
dharsa manusah. 

(People of the land), happy and prosperous, abide 
(by the law) and enjoy the good life. Brihaspati, master 
of knowledge and wisdom, teacher, accept the gifts 
offered by us. Take the brahmacharis. 

You are an oblation for the Divine and the laws 
of universal truth in the yajna of education. I invest you 
with the bond of truth and the law of Dharma. Be a full 
man and be strong. 


9. (Savita, Aswinau, Pushacha Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


dena var frg: tasata t Gout Sena 
armiha ure Faas 1 aeaee 
ver Are Hara fuer Mra TAS] AT A: | 
ariaa war we Wrath usu 


Devasya tva savituh prasave '$vinorbahubhyam 
pusno hastabhyam. Agnisomabhyam justam 
niyunajmi. Adbhyastvausadhibhyo nu tva mata 
manyatamanu pitanu bhrata sagarbhyo'nu 
sakha sayuthyah. Agnisomabhyam tva justam 
proksami. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


120 YAJURVEDA 


In this yajna of the creation of the refulgent and 
generous Lord Savita, with the arms of Ashvinis (powers 
and virtues of the sun and moon), and with the generous 
hands of Pusha (the fertility and sustenance of the earth's 
gravitation and stability), I accept you, favoured as you 
are as a child by Agni, lord of light and heat, and Soma, 
lord of life and peace. I enjoin you to the discipline of 
brahmacharya with waters and herbs to enjoy and 
consecrate you, loved as you are by Agni and Soma. 
May your mother agree, your father approve, your 
brother support and your friends of the group cooperate. 


10. (Apah Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


ama Wercurdi det: thar tard aada fa: 1a 
d wont ards ræ cast att: Gt aardfa- 
wt ngon 


Apam perurasyapo devih svadantu svattam 
citsaddevahavih. Sam te prano vatena 
gacchatam | samangani yajatraih sam 
yajnapatirasisa. 
You are a protector of the waters (through yajna). 
May all the living beings taste and enjoy the sweet and 
celestial waters and other things of their own like the 
blessed gifts from yajna. May you, with all your body 
and will, and by my blessings (i.e., the teacher’s 
blessings) help and cooperate with those who are 
dedicated to yajna. May your very breath rise with the 
wind carrying the fragrance. Be a master of yajna. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VI 121 


11. (Vatah Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 
y usat Yelfer erster firi emsamfelsri 
Riera arcane gferreerat erst ST 
wat va a aut rient aa aadfa sm: aet 
east Saez: Carat ngeu 


Ghrtenaktau pasunstrayetham revati yajamane 
priyam dha' a visa. Urorantariksat sajurdevena 
vatenasya havisastmana yaja samasya tanva 
bhava. Varso varsiyasi yajne yajnapatim dhah 
svaha devebhyo devebhyah svaha. 

Anointed with ghee, both of you, the priest and 
the yajaka, protect and promote the animals. Betake 
yourself to the prosperous yajamana, perform yajna with 
oblations of rich materials and, joining the celestial wind 
like a friend, bring from the vast skies all that is loved 
and wanted by the yajamana. With your very heart and 
soul, be one with the body of yajna. You are the shower 
of joy through yajna, establish the yajamana in yajna, a 
very shower and treasure-house of joy. This is the divine 
voice. Chant the divine voice with the generous and the 
wise for the attainment of divine virtues. 


12. (Vidvans Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 
"wrfésiut yat ihast we | 
Geet epeurssd SETA TASA NRN 
Mahirbhurma prdakur namasta' atananarva 
prehi. Ghrtasya kulya' upa’ rtasya pathya' anu. 


Man of knowledge, promoter of joy, never be like 
a snake or violent as a hunter or tiger. Come irresistibly 
like a stream of ghee close by the path of truth and the 
law of Dharma. Salutations to you. Gifts of food and 
hospitality for you in plenty. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


122 
13. 


YAJURVEDA 
(Apah Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 
adha: spar dias quitter den 
wudRfemer e ukaert spem nes 


Devirapah $uddha voddhvain suparivista devesu 
suparivista vayam parivestaro bhuyasma. 


Women, pure and cool as celestial waters, marry 


by choice and settle with noble men in security and 
protection all round. So should we, men, settled and 
secure with the women, be their guardians and all-round 
protectors, in love and duty. 


14. 


(Vidvans Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


are a vpenfa uri d vpenfa arated ventu sitet 
a spent aft a sper ad a vperfa urn d 
spate efe spemfa ues 

Vacam te $undhami pranam te sundhami 
caksuste Sundhami $rotram te $undhami nabhim 
te Sundhami medhram te $undhami payum te 
Sundhami caritranste Sundhami. 


I purify your speech, I purify your breath, I purify 


your eye, I purify your ear, I purify your navel, I purify 
your organ of generation, I purify your organs of 
excretion, I purify all your character and conduct. (Be a 
pure and complete person by education.) 


15. 


(Vidvans Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 

maserati emen asserat wroradsatrentarat 
agassa A asemaa | ad HT 
waked masarata Aea ad wea 
ymaa: street area cafeta Peiefee ueuu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VI 123 
Manasta’ apyayatam vak ta’ apyayatam 
pranasta’ apyayatam caksusta’ apyayatam 
Srotram ta’ apyayatam. Yatte kruram 
yadasthitam tatta’ apyayatam nistyayatam tatte 
Sudhyatu $amahobhyah. Osadhe trayasva 
svadhite mainam hiinsih. 


(Through education, study and practice) may your 
mind grow full and strong. May your speech be pure 
and perfect. May your breath be full and strong May 
your eye be clear and perfect. May your ear be strong 
and sensitive. Whatever be wrong and hurtful, that be 
cast out. Whatever be decided for sure that be 
accomplished. May everything be pure and strong and 
ever grow stronger. May all be peace and blessed day 
by day. Man of knowledge and science, save and 
strengthen this disciple. Spirit of knowledge, power and 
nourishment, save the inmate of the school, hurt not 
her/him. Save, strengthen, perfect. 


16. (Dyava prithivi Devate, Medhatithi Rshi) 


Tater smirsía esgan AS Nerang 
Tatsdorasganetansaa am wat a cup 
meagre wrotarat emt a xdrenraufi-mrder 
ad Talel | xemeigdsseeb TH Hred esa ULSI 
Raksasam bhago’si nirastam raksa’ idamaham 
rakso’bhi tisthamidamaham rakso’vabadha’ 
idamaham rakso’dhamam tamo nayami. 
Ghrtena dyavaprthivi prornuvatham vayo ve 
stokanamagnirajyasya vetu svaha | svahakrte' 
urdhvanabhasam marutam gacchatam. 


Young man of education, the evil and the wicked, 
want, poverty, injustice and ignorance fall to your lot 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


124 YAJURVEDA 


of responsibility. Say this and do this: *You are of the 
party of the devil. Off you go." Be determined: Here I 
confront the anti-social devils. I neutralize them, drive 
them off and eliminate them. I send them to the lowest 
dungeons of the dark. 


Seeker of discriminative knowledge, know the 
properties and behaviour of the finest materials and, 
with refined and rarefied vapours of ghee, fill the earth 
and the sky with waters. Let the scholars of science know 
the processes and results of your oblations in the yajna. 
Let the earth and the sky, replete with the vapours of 
ghee and waters sent up with the chant of vedic verses, 
send them onward to the winds (for the completion of 


yajna). 
17. (Apah Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


gana: udea a Act at ad | aealfiagrenta 
red NAs eT | amt ur regatta: ueiarger 


Weg uel 


Idamapah pravahatavadyam ca malam ca yat. 
Yaccabhidudrohanrtam yacca $epe 'abhirunam. 
Apo ma tasmadenasah pavamanasca muncatu. 


Whatever is despicable (in me), whatever is dirty 
(such as ignorance and illusion), whatever is wrong, 
false or anti-social, whatever execrable (I have uttered) 
toward the innocent, these waters may wash off that sin 
from me, the purifying wind may dry that off from me, 
the holy men of wisdom may absolve me of that and 
release me from self-bondage. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VI 125 


18. (Agni Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


dod Fat ate cu WoT: Wert maaa, | tera 
stomata aiiora vem art got 
watss afrad gu: ngen 


Sam te mano manasa sam pranah pranena 
gacchatam. Redasyagnistva srinatvapastva 
samarinanvatasya tva dhrajyai pusno raimhya' 
usmano vyathisat prayutam dvesah. 


Young warrior, may your mind be full of strength 
and knowledge, and your spirit full of courage and high 
morale. You are a destroyer of the enemy. May the fire 
season and temper you, may the waters inspire you to 
the speed of the winds and the velocity of the sun-rays. 
Full of ardour and passion, send the enemy-army of 
crores into disarray. 


19. (Vishvedeva Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


yi daar: foa eret errare: füerar-afiareg 
fert fur caret | fast: ufestssnfast fafastsstestt 
farsa: carat een 


Ghrtam | ghrtapavanah  pibata vasam 
vasapavanah pibatantarksasya havirasi svaha. 
Disah pradisa’adiso vidi$a' uddiso digbhyah 
svaha. 

Protectors and lovers of waters, protect and drink 
of the nectar of the waters. Protectors of homes and 
policy, protect the homes, and protect and benefit from 
the policy. Commander of the forces, you are the 
oblation of the defence-yajna rising to the sky for every 
warrior. Command the forces in the language of power 
for the defence of all the directions, interdirections, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


126 YAJURVEDA 


directions in front and back, and the directions of the 
target. Command others too so that they may also plan 
and conduct the defence with similar language and 
action. 


20. (Twashta Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 

we: Ru m Adada 
fusfla: mel credit a mea acer afsted 

vata | tant aaa wars car curar fud 

maq URN 

Aindrah prano'ange' ange nididhyadaindra’ 

udano’ange’ange nidhitah. Deva tvastarbhuri te 

sam sametu salaksma yadvisurupam bhavati. 


Devatra yantamavase sakhayo'nu tva mata 
pitaro madantu. 

Commander, you are the breath and spirit of 
divine power (Indra) throbbing in every part of the army. 
You are the current of passion and enthusiasm 
overflowing in every section of the force. Twashta, 
router of the enemy, brilliant and powerful, may your 
army of various form and formation march on as one 
body with one mark and one target. And while you 
march on your noble mission of defence, may your 
mother, father and other seniors, and your friends exhort 
you on your way and wish you all success. 


21. (Senapati Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 
wag thes verereiish Tres caret deredfenari res 
rat firareróuir tres verelenri thes verer wales fa 
Tes toatl Margit bes verd Ua bes ver 
thes ver Hub Hour aes fad a gat tg 
aft: uferdt do carat usc 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VI 127 


Samudram gaccha svahantariksam gaccha 
svaha devam savitaram gaccha svaha 
mitravarunau gaccha svahahoratre gaccha 
svaha chandainsi gaccha svaha dyavaprthivi 
gaccha svaha yajnam gaccha svaha somam 
gaccha svaha divyam nabho gaccha svaha’- 
gnim vai$vanaram gaccha svaha mano me 
harddi yaccha divam te dhumo gacchatu 
svarjyotih prthivim bhasmana 'prna svaha. 


Man of knowledge, in service of the government, 
with the knowledge of navigation and ship-building, 
go to explore the seas. With the knowledge of aviation, 
fly to the skies. With the knowledge of space and space 
dynamics, go to the brilliant regions of light. With the 
knowledge of yoga, explore the secret of the pranic 
energy of breath and vitality of the inner spirit. With 
the knowledge of astronomy, know the motions of the 
sun and planets and the formation of day and night. With 
the knowledge of grammar and versification, study, 
interpret and apply in practice the four Vedas. With the 
knowledge of geology and astrophysics, go deep into 
earth and space. With the science of yajna, know and 
practice the yajna of science and technology in the socio- 
practical economic and spiritual fields. With the 
knowledge of herbs, pursue the science of health and 
life. With the knowledge of water and gases, explore 
their celestial presence and formation of water and rain. 
With the science of energy, study heat, light, electricity 
and all-pervasive agni (fire), and harness it for use in 
life. Know all this, do all this, follow up all this and 
justify all that I have taught, to my heart-felt joy and 
satisfaction. Let the fumes and vapours of your yajna 
rise to the sky. Let the light of it reach the sun. Fill and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


128 YAJURVEDA 


cover the earth with the essence and alchemy of your 
yajna for valuable products. This is the divine voice. 


22. (Varuna Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


ara dete tated eme vrsieaat Gear «ir qr 
ergreurszfkr aeutta vraag dat aeur At Wen 
gie asaras: ux ufüfrenendib ay 
aise, sft a dt aa fü: nee 


Mapo mausadhirhimsirdhamno dhamno 
rajamstato varuna no munca. Yadahuraghnya iti 
varuneti $apamahe tato varuna no munca. 
Sumitriya na’apa’osadhayah santu durmitriya- 
stasmai santu yo'sman dvesti yam ca vayam 
dvismah. 


Head of the republic, pollute not the waters, 
destroy not herbs and trees: From this, from any other 
place, leave us not out, except no one from this. Let 
things like water and refreshment be available anywhere, 
everywhere. 


Lord of justice, water, herbs and trees, cows are 
sacred, they are not to be destroyed: This you vouchsafe, 
we too take the oath. Back not out. We too will not 
back out. Under your governance, may waters and herbs 
be like friends to us. And they would be unfriendly to 
those elements which injure us and our sanctity, and to 
those ailments which we oppose, they would be enemies. 


23. (Ap-yajna Surya Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


gfastitRarsarat efaeare ussmfelerafeai 
wfereut-darssisent rae sang Wa: URBU 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VI 129 


Havismatirima’ apo havisman’ avivasati. 
Havisman devo’ adhvaro havisman' astu suryah. 


The waters are a blessing carrying the purity and 
joy of yajna. May the wind too bless us with the gifts of 
yajna. May yajna, non-violent, a very god of love and 
peace, overflow with life-giving fragrance. May the sun 
be replete and generous with the light and life of yajna. 


24. (Apah Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


srieisdznTecu Geta maaier hA car 
froraturaruineet ca fasdat carat arat Feri 
amguissu yà miat usd: ae i a at fecere 
AA URS 


Agnervo'pannagrhasya sadasi sadayami- 
ndragnyor-bhagadheyi stha mitravaruna- 
yorbhagadheyi stha visvesam devanam 
bhagadheyi stha. Amurya' upa surye yabhirva 
suryah saha ta no hinvantvadhvaram. 


Brahmacharini/s, unmarried graduands, I settle 
you in the home/s (refined and cultured with education 
and learning) of the unmarried graduate/s bright as Agni 
in marriage according to your own choice. You know 
the virtues and advantages of sun and fire. You know 
the properties of prana and udana (forms of pranic 
energy). You know the nature and learning of the 
scholars and you know the properties of the powers of 
nature such as earth and others. Be partners in their 
blessings in your life. And those who imbibe the virtues 
of the sun and whom the light and life of the sun has 
already blessed, we invite to grace this marital yajna of 
ours. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


130 YAJURVEDA 


25. (Soma Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


ES at ada vem fad ver oue cm a 
saia fafa dag erat mes Re 


Hrde tva manase tva dive tva suryaya tva. 
Urdhvamimamadhvaram divi devesu hotra 
yaccha. 


Brahmacharini, just as we perform the yajna in 
the company of our noble and learned men, so you too 
perform yajna with your man after marriage. We have 
taught you and we teach you for joy of the heart, for 
clarity of the mind, for the value of happiness and peace, 
and for the life and light from the sun, so you too, in the 
company of your man, send up your invocations and 
oblations of this auspicious yajna, so peaceful and 
lovely, for the sake of joy and enlightenment. 


26. (Soma Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 
"rd maasar ustssuretts fasarcat wsm- 
ssureire«g | spun: ufus ed A goara 
Raosa get: iret mao ferat a aax sur 
aa: daa ed À carat ren 


Soma rajan vi$vastvam praja' upavaroha 
visvastvam praja’ upavarohantu. Srnotvagnih 
samidha havam me $rnvantvapo dhisanasca 
devih. Srota gravano viduso na yajnam &rnotu 
devah savita havam me svaha. 


Soma (ruler of the republic), lord of majesty, stay 
close to the entire people and rule like a father. So should 
the entire people be close to you and grow like children 
of the father. Like the fire of yajna grown by samidha 
fuel, listen to my prayer, listen to the people. So may 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VI 131 


intelligent, educated and cool-minded women listen, like 
mothers, to the prayers of women. Man of reverence 
and wisdom, listen to our prayers like the yajnic chants 
of learned and faithful devotees. May Savita, lord of 
power and light, listen to my prayers and words of praise. 


27. (Apah Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


seitvarssraraurei asa fereasgfrarat-a naa: 
«i demit den dx shave Sat In ee wena! 


Devirapo 'apamnapadyo va’ urmirhavisya’ 
indriyavan madintamah. Tam devebhyo devatra 
datta sukrapebhyo yesam bhaga stha svaha. 


Noble and intelligent people, to one who, among 
you, is of good and constant character, strong of sense 
and will, happiest and most inspiring, like a wave on 
the ocean of existence, worthy of reverence and homage, 
defender and supporter of the virtuous, to him, for the 
gods among men, the noblest preservers, protectors and 
promoters of life's vitalities, give your share of the social 
yajnic offering. You too are a part of the noble ones. 
Accept him in good grace with words of love and 
reverence — the one of you and for all of you. 


28. (Praja Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 
aN wee var fessi i 
wurndlsasrzgirma wurneüfenrWef ure 
Karsirasi samudrasya tva ksitya’ unnayami. 
Samapo’ adbhiragmata samosdhibhirosadhih. 


You are the farmer. I exhort you to fill the sky 
with the vapours of water for the enrichment of the earth 
and the sea. With the oblations of herbs into the fire, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


132 YAJURVEDA 


get the herbs. With the oblations of water into the sky 
(through the fire) get the waters. 


29. (Agni Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


wart og Ata emet x GAT: | 
" ur smddifiu: carat usu 


Yamagne prtsu martyamava vajesu yam junah. 
Sa yanta Sasvatirisah svaha. 


Agni, lord of power and virtue, the man you 
protect in battles and the man you send to the fields for 
farming, such a man gets lasting food and progeny. 


30. (Savita Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


eret ear fer: tasata velt qui seater 
stad waite mimea peice aad | 
sat uate ued uzbeernd Prosar et 
eased AT R01 


Devasya tva savituh prasave '$vinorbahubhyam 
pusno hastabhyam. Adade ravasi gabhiramima- 
madhvaram krdhindraya susutamam. Uttamena 
pavinorjjasvantam madhumantam payasvantam 
nigrabhya stha devasrutastarpayata ma. 


In this world of Lord Savita's creation, with both 
the arms of Ashvinis (power and vitality of sun and 
moon) and with both the hands of Pusha (the nourishing 
virtues of mother earth's herbs), I accept you. You are 
the giver. In the service of Indra, lord and ruler of this 
land, with the best and most graceful words of piety, 
enrich and expand this non-violent social yajna of love 
and good fellowship, so deep and full with blessings, 
so generous with milk and honey, health and energy 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VI 133 


and the joy of life. You have heard the words of the 
wise. Worthy you are of acceptance and welcome. Come 
and give me the pleasure of fulfilment. 


31. (Praja, Sabhyas, Raja Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


Wb d adaa ard À adaa woi d adaa weld À 
adaa smi à adaa À adaa wat H adaa 
uÀ adaa worst adaa wor À ar faga i32 


Mano me tarpayata vacam me tarpayata pranam 
me tarpayata caksurme tarpayata $rotram me 
tarpayatatmanam me tarpayata prajam me 
tarpayata pa$unme tarpayata gananme 
tarpayata gana me ma vitrsan. 


People of the land, with your character and 
performance satisfy my mind with a sense of fulfilment. 
Satisfy me with your response to my words. Satisfy and 
fulfil my energy and ambition. Satisfy my eye that I see 
no wrong. Satisfy my ear that I hear nothing evil. Satisfy 
my soul. Satisfy my people. Satisfy my animals. Keep 
my subordinates happy. Let them not suffer any hardship 
and frustration. 


32. (President-Raja Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 
sala cal agua esddsssla verfaerdass-hu 
rarrarfaer à saad cer Grayasma cr wa 
wares i22! 
Indraya tva vasumate rudravata’ indraya tva- 


dityavata’ indraya tva’bhimatighne. Syendaya tva 
somabhrte'gnaye tva rayasposade. 


We elect and appoint you for Indra, honour and 
glory of the land, for the creation of Vasus, young men 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


134 YAJURVEDA 


of 24 years standing of education, and for Rudras, young 
men of 44 years education who can rout the enemy. We 
appoint you for the honour and glory of education and 
creation of Adityas, heroes of 48 years education and 
training who can shatter the pride of the enemies of the 
land. We accept and appoint you for the force of eagle- 
like commandos of defence, for the lovers of peace and 
good health, for the development of energy and 
electricity and for the producers of wealth and 
prosperity. 


33. (Soma Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


re etr fafa ratte eat SETA à 
ware mA wa cpeafet arx ata: 1330 


Yatte soma divi jyotiryatprthivyam yadurav- 
antarikse. Tenasmai yajamanayoru raye 
krdhyadhi datre vocah. 


Soma, blessed lord of the land, the light of your 
power and glory shines over the earth, in the sky and in 
the heaven above. By virtue of that, and for the sake of 
this generous man of yajna of the social order, make it 
richer, expand it further, and proclaim: He shall grow 
happier and more prosperous. 


34. (Yajna Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 
yam vet aaa wethratssrader uei: 1 
a edidaad ag dudrdzgar: ares fra usw 


Svatra stha vrtraturo ràdhogurtta' amrtasya 
patnih. Ta devirdevatremam yajnam 
nayatopahutah somasya pibata. 


Women, brilliant and virtuous, quick to learn and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VI 135 


instant in action like thunder in the clouds, life-partners 
of your men, be strong, join the men in this holy yajna 
and take it forward to the heights. Invited to the vedi, 
have your fill of the immortal drink of soma, the nectar 
of life and joy. 


35. (Dyava-prithivi Devate, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 
m wat dfdaasast aca firdur Ae udi 
essemqsi «smemq | area dp AY: BG 


Ma bherma samviktha’urjam dhatsva dhisane 
vidvi satt vidayethamurjam dadhatham. Papma 
hato na somah. 


Woman, wise and intelligent, fear not, nor 
tremble; take heart and be bold of heart and soul. You 
being strong and standing by your husband, both of you 
collect strength and firmness of body, mind and soul. 
Eliminate evil and sin, and shine happy and blessed like 
the moon. 


36. (Soma Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


umare dear fasanta | 
arp fr 9d mafi ae 


Prāgapāgudagadharāksarvatastvā disa’ 
adhavantu. Amba nispara samarirvidam. 


Mother, all your children and others, keen to make 
you feel happy and comfortable, may run to you eagerly 
from east, west, north and south and all round. Love 
them, protect them, and may they too know you, be with 
you, and love you well. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


136 YAJURVEDA 


37. (Indra Devata, Gautama Rshi) 


wane usefeut s: gifs ciu i 
"- car dues ufedqe adit ue: sion 


Tvamanga prasamsiso devah $avistha martyam. 
Na tvadanyo maghavannasti marditendra 
bravuni te vacah. 


Dearest Indra, brilliant and generous, lord 
mightiest of power and wealth, truth, honour and glory, 
there is no one else other than you to love, appreciate 
and approve the human being, no one more 
compassionate and more gracious than you to vouchsafe 
for man. I say this for truth — it is the very word of 
yours ! 


sta wssrseume: d 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


137 


CHAPTER- VII 


1.  (PranaDevata, Gotama Rshi) 


*renuds vara quissrspem efus: | 
wer east: vara reb wmmsfd ngu 


Vacaspataye pavasva vrsno' amsubhyam 
gabhastiputah. Devo devebhyah pavasva yesam 
bhago'si. 

Be pure for the Lord of Divine speech, purged as 
you are by the rays of the sun and the moon, two arms 
of the Creator whereby He showers life with vitality 
and purity. You are a part of the brilliant and the 
generous, a darling of the gods. Be pure for them. 


2. (Soma Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
agaidh ad arated arse: acil qq 
ae arate wemer aA aR aAA usu 


Madhumatirna’ isaskrdhi yatte somadabhyam 
nama jagrvi tasmai te soma somaya svaha 
svahorvantariksamanvemi. 


Soma, Lord of knowledge and vitality, bless us 
with honey-sweet food and energy. Lord of inspiration, 
great, universal and imperishable is your name. To that 
name, to the Divine Word, to the universal acts of the 
Divine, and for the sake of knowledge, good action and 
honour, I dedicate myself to the universal presence of 
the Divine. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


138 YAJURVEDA 


3. (Vidvans Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
xereschatsfa fascsassieenat fereirozr: urftarszir 
Tans vemet cat uper gea senate nA 


Sateigt ae we dereudufruai aes xdi 
we Wore vem curare vem dai 


Svankrto'si visvebhya’ indriyebhyo divyebhyah 
parthivebhyo manastvastu svaha tva subhava 
suryaya devebhyastva maricipebhyo devamso 
yasmai tvede tatsatyamuparipruta bhangena 
hato'sau phat pranaya tva vyanaya tva. 

Man, bright and virtuous, with all your earthly 
but excellent and celestial senses, you are self-made, 
self-existent and autonomous. Bless you with a pious 
mind and the voice of divinity, the Veda. Light of the 
Spirit, of auspicious birth, your life is dedicated to the 
Lord of Light, mother-powers of nature, and all the noble 
servants of the life-divine. This is why I praise you. 
May this praise come true. With one blow of truth from 
above, the evil is destroyed. You are for the breath of 
life, for vitality, joy and virtue. 


4.  (Maghava Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


Tami series sss urfz unu i 


seer Tasu uum qe 


Upayamagrhito'syantaryaccha maghavan pahi 
somam. Urusya raya’ eso yajasva. 

Man, you are the power and the glory of the self, 
placed and accepted in the law of existence. Preserve 
and promote the inner life and dedicate the innermost 
self to the Law of the Divine. With yoga, eliminate 
suffering and grow, and obtain the higher wealth and 
power of the soul. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VII 139 


5. (Ishvara Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
ated matga d emer emeritis | 
medard]: Weare dues ree uu 


Antaste dyavaprthivi dadhamyantardadha- 
myurvantariksam. Sajurdevebhiravaraih 
paraiscantaryame maghavan madayasva. 


Man of power and glory of the self, in pursuit of 
yoga, I place the heaven and the earth within you, and 
the vast intervening spaces of the sky too. Friends with 
the noblest powers of nature and humanity, rejoice 
within by yourself in a state of divine bliss and spread 
the joy around. 


6. (Yogi Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


xerechdrsfa faycsasstgavat facer: urfslarszir 
mierea cr Gua Tala deber atta 
sserie car ei 


Svankrto’si visvebhya’ indriyebhyo divyebhyah 
parthivebhyo manastvastu svaha. Tva subhava 
suryaya devebhyastva maricipebhya’ udanaya 
tva. 


Man of yoga, of noble birth and noble life, self- 
existent and self-made, endowed with all the wonderful 
powers of sense, blessed be your mind with the voice 
of the divine, the Veda. I consecrate you and dedicate 
you to the love and service of all the noblest powers of 
earth and heaven, to the lord of light and the protectors 
and servants of the light and life divine for the attainment 
of the higher life. 


Man of yoga, self-existent and free with excellent 
powers of sense, of noble birth and noble living, blessed 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


140 YAJURVEDA 


be your mind with the divine voice, the Veda. I 
consecrate and dedicate you to the love and service of 
all the noblest powers of earth and heaven, to the lord 
of light, and the servants and protectors of the light and 
life divine, for the attainment of the higher life. 


7. (Vayu Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


am atar ye srPerarsad 4: Hec d feudi fava 
sul Asore mear «e xa afin deus end 


cat Il 


A vayo bhisa $ucipá' upa nah sahasram te 
niyuto vi$vavara. Upo te' andho madyamayami 
yasya deva dadhise purvapeyam vayave tva. 


Vayu, preserver, protector and promoter of purity, 
yogin, versatile master of all virtue, loved, adored and 
cherished by all, strengthen and edify us with a thousand 
noble virtues. I come up to you for the sumptuous food 
of yoga with insatiable appetite — for the gift of that 
power and vision of the spirit which our forefathers 
attained and which you have attained and preserved. 


8.  (Indra-Vayu Devate, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


zdrgsgH uarssu Watts | Saat ergeríz 
fe seiis ereeisg-rereert wae qt ath: 
eats vem ue 

Indravayu' ime suta’ upa prayobhiragatam. 
Indavo vamusanti hi. Upayamagrhito’si vayava’ 
indravayubhyam tvaisa te yonih sajosobhyam 
tva. 


Indra and Vayu (teacher and student of yoga), 
you are like the sun and pranic energy. These essences, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VII 141 


joys of spiritual experience, distilled from the soma of 
yoga, are anxious to reach you. Come by these, come to 
us. Disciple of yoga, accepted you are in the discipline 
of yoga for success like the wind. Yoga is your home 
alongwith Indra and Vayu (power of the mind and purity 
of the soul). You are the favourite of both Indra and 
Vayu. With the love and power of these two, I love you 
too with reverence. 


9.  (Mitra-Varuna Devate, Gritsamada Rshi) 
aa at taae ya: dhiswager 1 aafee 
stared, | saarddidista firarereurezr vam t 


Ayam vam mitravaruna sutah soma’ rtavrdha. 
Mamediha $rutain havam. Upayamagrhito’ si 
mitravarunabhyam tva. 


Mitra and Varuna, practitioners of yoga, seekers 
of the law of universal truth and the existence of the 
Universal Spirit, both of you dynamic in action like 
prana and udana energies of the breath of life, the Soma 
of your search, the joy of successful yoga, is realized. 
Here, then, listen to my praise and accept the homage 
of an admirer. 


Yajamana, master of the yajna of yoga, accepted 
and sanctified you are in yoga in the discipline of yama 
and niyama (social and personal ethics of purity). With 
your realization of the powers of prana and udana, I do 
reverence and homage to you. 


10. (Mitra-Varuna Devate, Trisadasyu Rshi) 
Ta aadaaesal wen ger dar ada md: | 
ai af araeo get at fasat eee 
a ahha vm gon 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


142 YAJURVEDA 


Raya vayam sasavamso madema havyena deva 
yavasena gavah. Tam dhenum mitravaruna 
yuvam no vi$vaha dhattamanapasphurantun-esa 
te yonirrtayubhyam tva. 


Noble men of discriminative knowledge and 
wisdom, let us rejoice on wealth fit to be offered to the 
gods for food, rejoice just as cows enjoy the green grass. 


Teachers and students of yoga, friends like pranic 
energies, both of you attain and preserve for us the voice 
of divine knowledge, Veda, versatile and eternal giver 
of universal knowledge, revealed in the state of 
Samadhi. 


Yajamana, this knowledge is your element, your 
very home of existence. We do homage to you alongwith 
the seekers of divine law through yoga. 


11. (Ashvinav Devate, Medhatithi Rshi) 


a at am refers qadadt a dat aa 
fifa suarrtérarsearfyerszit cnr a Natea 


«eT 09 9 Il 


Ya vam ka$a madhumatyasvina sunrtavati. Taya 
yajnam | mimiksatam. Upayamagrhito’ 
syasvibhyam tvaisa te yonirmadhvibhyam tva. 


Teacher and seeker of yoga, bright as Ashwins 
(sun and moon), advance your yajna of yoga in the light 
of the divine voice of the Veda, so sweet, so true, so 
inspiring. 

Seeker of yoga, sanctified in the discipline of 
yama and niyama (social and personal ethics of purity), 
this yoga is your element, your very home of existence. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VII 143 


Teacher and seeker, with your control over the 
vital energies of prana and apana, and for the sweetness 
and light of your spiritual awareness, we do reverence 
and homage to you. 


12. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi) 


d yout yä fasadat versati eféwa «vafer 
Wists ersr-t alee ars, weary arg eru | 
samida yosha wae a Ait urendue: 
yus Sarat srhur: woate A gR 


Tam pratntha purvatha visvathematha 

Jyesthatatim barhisadam svarvidam. Praticinam 
vrjanam dohase dhunimasum jayantamanu yasu 
vardhase. Upayamagrhito’si $andaya tvaisa te 
yonirviratam pahyapamrstah $ando | devastva 
Sukrapah pranayantvanadhrsta 'si. 


Yogi, established you are in the rules of yamas 
and niyamas, the discipline of social and personal purity. 
This is your natural element, a very home and blessed 
state of being. 


Cleansed of ignorance and suffering, peaceful at 
heart, you explore, follow and advance in that state of 
yoga which, like that of the ancient Rshis and yogis old 
and new, is supreme, powerful, instant and victorious, 
remover of negativities, shaker of sin and giver of 
strength, and which is the light residing in the deepest 
cave of the heart. Man of love and peace, protect this 
state of strength and purity invincible for yourself. And 
may the powers of the divine, saviours and protectors 
of life and energy, be with you and lead you on. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


144 YAJURVEDA 


13. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi) 


Want eire trey atta vreedrdur ersiam i 
wresrurir fear dferesr pon: wphsitferw fux: 


BUS: VHC ug 30 


Suviro viran  prajanayan  parihyabhi 
rayasposena yajamanam. Sanjagmano diva 
prthivya $ukrah sukrasocisa nirastah $andah 
Sukrasyadhisthanamasi. 


You are good and bold, make others good and 
bold, and come to the yajamana with all the wealth and 
honour. Going forward in harmony with the earth and 
heaven, shining bright and virtuous as by the light of 
the sun, drive out the dark, attain peace of mind, and be 
the haven and life-support of the creative and purifying 
energy of humanity. 


14. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi) 


aame d de ur eise venurden afadn: 
waa (CHI tm dehfafasaatr wr daa eruit 
fasaa: un 


Acchinnasya te deva soma suviryasya raya- 
sposasya daditarah syama. Sa prathama 
sainskrtirvi$vavara sa prathamo varuno mitro' 
agnih. 


Seeker of yoga, cool and excellent, bright and 
brave, we are the generous source, givers of continuous 
undisturbed stream of the wealth of life and yoga to 
you. May that first original and universal culture of life 
bless you. May the teacher, bright as Agni, deep as the 
ocean, and benevolent as the sun be your foremost 
friend. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VII 145 


15. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi) 


a tam smgeafdfserfenciiuenrsg-iu «aurea 
vate) Gard ETAT Heat ar: feeder wr: quia: 
"qedr eereraber Ua 


Sa prathamo brhaspatiscikitvanstasma’indraya 
sutamajuhota svaha. Trmpantu hotra madhvo 
yah svista yah supritah suhuta yatsvaha’- 
yadagnit. 


The first friend, master of knowledge, worshipper 
of the Divine Voice, Veda, is Brihaspati, lord of the 
power and vision of yoga. For him and in his honour, 
speak the most sacred words and offer him the sweetest 
distilled soma. Go to him as you approach agni, the 
sacred fire, and in the spirit of yajna treat him with the 
most wanted, most loved, most cherished offering with 
the utmost courtesy and respect in words of the highest 
reverence. 


16. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi) 


ord acelera qfechrret ifesi voler famrh 
guuureidu uer fore a faut ufasit Refa a 
suanmiértrsfa wee vm ues 


Ayam vena$codayat prsnigarbha jyotirjarayu 
rajaso vimane. Imamapam sangame suryasya 
sisum na vipra matibhi rihanti. Upayama- 
grhito'si markaya tva. 


This ruler of the republic, like the bright moon in 
the womb of the vast space covering other lights in the 
celestial regions, inspires and moves about in orbit 
majestically, powerful as the sun in the battle of the 
waters. Men of knowledge and wisdom advise him with 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


146 YAJURVEDA 


the gift of knowledge and policy just as freely as a 
teacher teaches the disciple. Accepted (by will), 
consecrated (through yajna), positioned in the laws and 
structure of the republic, we accept and honour you for 
the defence of the society and elimination of the 
enemies. 


17. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi) 


"rip ag dg fara feu: great engem wee og 
att a: qosan soia WAEATAT 
lAN: ust: wadge vet gaeat afer: 
wirage ue 


Mano na yesu havanesu tigmam vipah $acya 
vanutho dravanta. A yah $aryabhistuvinrmno' 
asyaSsrinitadisam gabhastavesa te yonih prajah 
pahyapamrsto marko devastva manthipah 
pranayantva-nadhrstasi. 


Ruler and Head of the republic, lord of power 
and wealth, this land and its governance is your haven, 
the very meaning of your existence. 


The enlightened ruler and the people, both 
dynamic and intelligent, working at the speed of the 
mind, sharp as an arrow and strong as adamant, think 
hard and plan for the nation. In the light of his glory 
shining in all directions and under the protection of the 
fighters of this man of a mighty host working at his 
command, they shine in peace and burn in war. 


Protect and serve the people. Free of the enemies 
as you are, may the divine powers who protect the brave 
help and lead you on. Be invincible. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VII 147 


18. (Prajapati Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi) 


ST: UST: Wurm Ute vreredrdur star i 
ware fear dífsreur me uf-ersitferar Fea 
Went uferilsfirerdufu nge 


Suprajah prajah prajanayan parihyabhi 
rayasposena yajamanam. Sanjagmano diva 
prthivya manthi manthisocisa nirasto marko 
manthino 'dhisthanamasi. 


Just and enlightened head of the nation, enlighten 
the people as reborn, and shower the yajamanas of this 
social and development yajna with all-round wealth and 
nourishment. Dynamic and inspiring, going along with 
earth and heaven in harmony, with the light of 
discrimination, you are the ideal and ultimate resort of 
the enlightened. And by the dazzling brilliance of your 
discrimination, the enemies are overthrown. 


19. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi) 


a dart aaaea ca díeregraedeniasr er | 
aragfaral nR tag ver vr Sarat zrafimi spserque o t 


Ye devaso divyekadas$a stha prthivyam- 
adhyekadasa stha. Apsuksito mahinaikadasa 
stha te devaso yajnamimam jusadhvam. 


Eleven vital powers are there above, existing by 
their own virtue (prana, apana, vyana, udana and 
samana, naga, kurma, krikala, devadatta and 
dhananjaya: these are the vital pranic energies, and the 
eleventh is the soul). There are eleven on the earth 
existing by their own virtue (earth, water, fire, air and 
space: these are the elements; sun, moon, nakshatra 
ahankara, mahat and prakriti: these are objects and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


148 YAJURVEDA 


modes of nature). There are eleven in the vital energy 
(prana), existing by their own virtue (ear, skin, eye, 
tongue, nose, speech, hands, legs, two organs of 
excretion, and mind: these are organs of perception and 
volition). May all these powers of life and nature join 
and contribute to this common yajna of the ruler and 
the people. 


20. (Yajna Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi) 


suanmférdrscanrauirsfa carat: 1 arfe ei arte 


adie aropa gnt org ferent ci atear veteri 
urf& mon 


Upayamagrhito' syagrayano’si svagrayanah. 
Pahi yajnam pahi yajnapatim visnustvam- 
indriyena patu visnum tvam pahyabhi savanani 
pahi. 

You are accepted, sanctified and positioned in the 
laws and structure of this social yajna of the nation. 
(By virtue of your political wisdom and humility) you 
are the first and best oblation of this social yajna, self- 
sacrificing promoter of thought, science and economy. 
Protect and advance this yajna. Support and advance 
the yajnapati, men of law and justice, polity and 
economy. Protect and advance Vishnu, man of science 
and spiritual knowledge, and may Vishnu strengthen 
you with the virtues of mind and character and advance 
you in social and economic progress. Protect and 
promote all the creative, constructive and productive 
activities of this national yajna. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VII 149 


21. (Soma Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi) 


"rd: vad art: was es spare tad 
aama uedsgusssi dasqa dei: werd 
araia cat a ad fender 
gaisu dq Aara dem: RN 


Somah pavate somah pavate'smai brahmane’ 
smai ksatrayasmai sunvate yajamanaya pavata’ 
isa’ urje pavate’dbhya’ osadhibhyah pavate 
dyava prthivibhyam pavate subhutaya pavate 
visvebhyastva devebhya’ esa te yonirvi$ve- 
bhyastva devebhyah. 


Soma flows. Soma flows and is purified. Soma 
is purified and is offered for sacrifice. So does the ruler 
flow, issues in action, and, through action, is purified, 
sanctified, self-sacrificed. 


The ruler is sanctified and dedicated to the 
Brahamana sub-system (learning, education and 
research), to the Kshatra sub-system (defence and 
governance), to the devoted yajamana, participant in 
the creative activities of the system, for food and energy, 
for waters, herbs and vegetation, for earth and heaven, 
for good life and conduct, for all the noble people of 
the land. 


Ruler of the nation, this life, this land, this socio- 
political system is your haven and your justification. 
You are accepted, sanctified and honoured for all the 
noble people. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


150 YAJURVEDA 


22. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi) 


Tara erdsg- segs co fasta cae a art 
zakar Aaa Fart aaa Warf ux 


Upayamagrhito’sindraya tva brhadvate 
vayasvata’ ukthavyam grhnami. Yatta’ indra 
brhadvayastasmai tva visnave tvaisa te yoni- 
rukthebhyastva devebhyastva devavyam yajna- 
syayuse grhnami. 


Indra, meritorious man of arms, self-controlled 
and established in the rules of law, good conduct and 
service of the nation, I appoint you as commander of 
the army in the service of Indra, lord of the land — 
great is he, long-lived he be! Great is your work, a life- 
time undertaking. For that you are appointed. For 
Vishnu, lord supreme, for yajana, for the nation you are 
consecrated. For the lord’s songs of praise, to the noble 
people, to the health and continuance of the social yajna 
of the land, to the defence and advancement of the noble 
powers, you are dedicated. This is now your haven, your 
very being, the meaning and justification of your 
existence. 


23. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi) 


efe em Revel uut erie 
geen cr cared urere arrest 
ver deed canem ufu urs 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VII 151 


Mitravarunabhyam tva devavyam yajnasyayuse 
grhnamindraya tva devavyam yajnasyayuse 
grhnamindragnibhyam tva devavyam yajnasy- 
ayuse grhnamindravarunabhyam tva devavyam 
yajnasyayuse grhnamindrabrhaspatibhyam tva 
devavyam yajnasyayuse grhnamindravisnu- 
bhyam tva devavyam yajfiasyayuse grhnami. 


Head of the council, protector of the good and 
the noble people, I select you for the progress of this 
social yajna (from agnihotra upto the governance of the 
land) for the noble people of love, friendship and 
knowledge. 


Protector of the men of knowledge, I appoint you 
in the service of Indra, the ruler, man of power, majesty 
and grace, for the advancement of this social yajna of 
unity and cooperation. 


Man of science and technology, protector of 
higher and astral sciences, I welcome you for the 
progress of this technological yajna for the realization 
of the power of heat and light. 


Man of science and industry, protector of the men 
of scientific and industrial enterprise, I sanctify you for 
the promotion of the yajnic realisation of electric and 
water power. 


Teacher and man of education, promoter of 
education and yoga-vidya, I consecrate you for the 
promotion of social and ethical education as a yajna for 
the improvement of administration and the collective 
yoga of ethical governance of the land. 


Man of knowledge, friend of the spiritual people, 
I dedicate you to the advancement of the sacred yajna 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


152 YAJURVEDA 


of moral and spiritual values for the realization of 
Divinity and knowledge of the shastras. 


24. (Vishvedeva Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi) 


"gt faseh dire dsermassmsmautin 
maarama rat-arreram uri rre SAT: ust 


Murddhanam divo’ aratim prthivya vaisvanara- 
mrta’ a jatamagnim. Kavim samrajamatithim 
jananamasanna patram janayanta devah. 


Men of knowledge (of defence science) study and 
light the fire — refulgent and universal presence, 
forehead of the light of heaven come down to join the 
earth with its properties, born of the truth and force of 
the universal law and reality, given to the comfort and 
joy of the world, a guest of honour for all the people, 
source of power for industrial enterprises, the light that 
reveals everything to man. (Light the fire, use it for 
defence and progress). 


25. (Vaishwanara Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi) 


suarmiérirsfa gatsta spafatfesieruit garants- 
wjarmaeprfardusus a crhidvernr vem | 
ga S OUT HT aren arandaanre | stent Ass 
ssigsitsaquet: wA RGU 


Upayamagrhito’si dhruvo’si dhruvaksitir- 
dhruvanam dhruvatamo’cyutanamacyut- 
aksittama' esa te yonirvaisvanaraya tva. 
Dhruvam dhruvena manasa vaca somamava- 
nayami. Atha na’ indra’ idvi$o'sapatnah 
samanasaskarat. 


Vaishwanara, Lord Supreme of the world, Indra, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VII 153 


Lord of power and glory, Soma, Lord Creator and giver 
of peace and joy, you can be reached through the 
discipline of *yamas' and ‘niyamas’, rules of social and 
personal ethics ranging from love and non-violence to 
total surrender to you. You are firm, inviolable base of 
the stability of the stars and planets, firmest of the firm, 
most imperishable of the imperishables (i.e., above the 
original prakrti and the souls). This universe and the 
laws of existence are pervaded by you — they are like 
your universal home. Life and light of the world, Lord 
of peace and joy, firm and eternal, to you, with a mind 
of inviolable faith, in words of sincerity, we surrender 
in obedience and homage. Lord of power and glory, let 
our people be free of all enemies, let our nation be of 
one and equal mind. 


26. (Yajna Devata, Devashrava Rshi) 


aed ga cene aesaremideqa feraotat- 
wuwerq | aada aR em a: ufeard d were 


"rur adeat CaAMIASHAUTAT REM 


Yaste drapsa skandati yaste’ ain$urgravacyuto 
dhisanayorupasthat. Adhvaryorva pari va yah 
pavitrattam te juhomi manasa vasatkrtam svaha 
devanamutkramanamasi. 


Host and master of yajna, whatever part of yajna 
offerings goes over the earth and to the sky with the 
wind, and whatever part gone up from the sacred lap of 
the earth and the womb of space is released from the 
clouds, and whatever part goes up from the hota and 
the adhvaryu (the priests) and proclaims the virtues of 
the performance, all that, in words of truth, with sincerity 
of mind and honest conviction, I say, comes to bless 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


154 YAJURVEDA 


you. All the devotees of yajna and men of learning and 
wisdom rise in lustre and look up to you. 


27. (Yajnapati Devata, Devashrava Rshi) 


wore Gp aaar ada uen curd A esr 
ada vader À adler ada vaca ere d 
acia ade wen maaha A delat ada 
uaa stata A ener ada uara reden À 
ade eeu usemm usen 


Pranaya me varcoda varcase pavasva vyanaya 
me varcoda varcase pavasvodanaya me varcoda 
varcase pavasva vace me varcoda varcase 
pavasva kratudaksabhyam me varcoda varcase 
pavasva S$rotraya me varcoda varcase pavasva 
caksurbhyam me varcodasau varcase pavetham. 


Lord and giver of the light of life, bless me with 
the light of knowledge and sanctify the pranic energy 
of my heart. Lord and giver of lustre, bless me with the 
glow of health and nourishment and energize the vyana 
vitality of my body. Lord and giver of vigour, bless me 
with the passion for action through the udana energy in 
my mind. Lord and giver of the force of truth and 
conviction, bless me with the courage of conviction and 
the power of speech. Lord and giver of the ambition of 
enlightenment and strength of the spirit, bless me with 
the light of self-knowledge and brilliance of intelligence. 
Lord of omniscience and giver of speech, bless me with 
the revelation of the voice divine and consecrate my 
ear. Lord and giver of light and beauty (like the sun and 
moon), venerable teacher of the teachers, bless me with 
the celestial vision of the eyes to see and reveal the 
beauty of the mystery of existence. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VII 155 


28. (Yajnapati Devata, Devashrava Rshi) 


arat À wear ada vaste À cenar ada 
werceredür A acter ata vara favatsat À wsmrezil 
adem ecu wae usn 


Atmane me varcodà varcase pavasvaujase me 
varcoda varcase pavasvayuse me varcoda 
varcase pavasva visvabhyo me prajabhyo 
varcodasau varcase pavetham. 


Lord and giver of the light of the soul, bless me 
with the light of the soul and awareness of the self. Lord 
and giver of the brilliance of personality, bless me with 
the light of knowledge and power of yoga. Lord and 
giver of life, bless me with the glow of health and gift 
of longevity. Lord and giver of brilliance, and you, 
teacher and seeker of brilliance, both of you, bless the 
entire people with the strength and ambition to be great 
and glorious. 


29. (Prajapati Devata, Devashrava Rshi) 
atsa cnaursfar meta enr araifa i wed a 


mara a car HERIdÓQUrS 1 asta: ta: Gust: 
wert: erigit ait: Gara: urü: usu 


Ko’si katamo’si kasyasi ko namasi. Yasya te 
namamanmahi yam tva somenatitrpama. 
Bhurbhuvah svah suprajah prajabhih syain 
suviro viraih suposah posaih. 


Who are you? Which one (in rank/position) are 
you? Whose (son/appointee) are you? What name are 
you, the name by which we would know you, and the 
one we would serve with sumptuous entertainment on 
soma? 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


156 YAJURVEDA 


I love and want the beauty of the earth, the 
vastness of the sky and the light of heaven. I want to 
have many noble people by the people. I want to be a 
great hero of heroes by the heroes. I want to be well- 
provided, with nourishments (of the land). 


(I am none by myself alone, I am one and many 
at once, by virtue of the people.) 


30. (Prajapati Devata, Devashrava Rshi) 


suardérdrsfa wee verueanmiérdisfir metara 
vruarmdérisfu sper cdruundérasfa vreb 
veiraammdétrarsfar ate ceiraammdétarsfar erem 
vdruarnnjérisur cirdanmeiérüsep cu- 
amissa ata veruarmdérdrsfur area 
was ade veraemrdétarsfar regm 
THUAN SSAA vem UBM 


Upayamagrhito’ si madhave tvopayamagrhito ’- 
si madhavaya tvopayamagrhito’si Sukraya tvo- 
payamagrhito'si Sucaye tvopayamagrhito'si 
nabhase tvopayamagrhito'si nabhasyaya tvo- 
payamagrhito’sise tvo-payamagrhito 'syurjje 
tvo-payamagrhito’si sahase tvopayamagrhito 'si 
sahasyaya tvopayamagrhito'si tapase tvo- 
payamagrhito’si tapasyaya tvopayamagrhito '- 
syainhasaspataye tva. 


Lord/People of the land, accepted, sanctified and 
positioned you are in the laws and the structure of the 
land. Therefore I/we accept you for the month of Chaitra, 
for the month of Vaishakha, for the month of Jyeshtha, 
for the month of Ashadha, for the month of Shravana, 
for the month fo Bhadra, for the month of Ashwina, for 
the month of Kartika, for the month of Marga-shirsha, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VII 157 


for the month of Pausha, for the month of Magha, for 
the month of Phalguna for the defence and security of 
the power and safety of all (within the laws of the state 
through monthly meetings of the Head of the state and 
the representatives of the people). 


31. (Indragni Devate, Vishwamitra Rshi) 
wbeftsmdasqd What ava | ster uid 
Baam | suarriétatseit-urfirent exu a att 
feast car use 


Indragni' agatam sutam girbhirnabho 
varenyam. Asya patam dhiyesita. Upayama- 
grhito 'sindragnibhyam tvai-sa te yonirindragni- 
bhyam tva. 


Ruler and the Councillors, both brilliant and 
powerful as Indra and Agni (power and fire), come and, 
with words of enlightenment, create for us the wanted 
joy and prosperity. With your knowledge and mind, and 
our suggestions and request, guard this land and protect 
the prosperity of the people. 


People of the land/Ruler and the Councillors, 
accepted and positioned you are in the laws and 
constitution of the state. You (the people) are dedicated 
to Indra and Agni (the ruler and the council), and 
accepted in law. You, the ruler and the councillors, are 
dedicated to Indra and Agni, Lord of Power and 
knowledge, and Lord of the people and the land. This 
constitution and this land is your mainstay, the meaning 
and justification of your being and position. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


158 YAJURVEDA 


32. (Vishvedeva Devata, Trishoka Rshi) 


ST at Asaa xqurfst afer | caries 
qa wat | susnmebérdsueü--ne wae a 
Aiert car 3201 


A gha ye’ agnimindhate strnanti barhiranusak. 
Yesamindro yuva sakha. Upayamagrhito’ 
syagnindrabhyam tvaisa te yoniragnindra- 
bhyam tva. 


The scholar councillors light the fire of scientific 
yajna and, working in proper form, cover the sky with 
fragrance (machines and missiles). Youthful and friendly 
is their ruler who is accepted and honoured in the land 
for his qualities of Dharma, knowledge and man- 
management. President and ruler, this land and its 
governance is your mainstay and you are here for the 
service of Indra and Agni, power and enlightenment of 
the people. 


33. (Vishvedeva Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


afmuiuserduits faye serussmid | argem$ut 
WISI: ue i saanet fA farce donelsuw 
a urbrfésdszmer AA: 133i 


Omasascarsanidhrto vi$ve devasa’ agata. 
Dasvanso dasusah sutam. Upayamagrhito’ si 
visvebhyastva devebhya’ esa te yonirvisvebhya- 
stva devebhyah. 


Men and women of learning and wisdom, best 
minds of the land, supporters and protectors of the 
people, generous benefactors of the generous givers, 
come to this yajna of education and receive this child 
for instruction. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VII 159 


Young learner, you are initiated and consecrated 
in the discipline of this sacred institution by the 
venerable teachers. This institution, these teachers, this 
programme, this now is your home and life. You are 
dedicated and committed to the service and support of 
the good and the enlightened people with reverence. 


34. (Vishvedeva Devata, Gritsamada Rshi) 
fasd @arassmta qor do gada 1 us 
sféfrdtaci swarrétarsfar fayd satan gaszisug 
a aafasdsarcar zem: usw 


Visve devasa’ agata $rnuta ma imam havam. 
Edam barhirnisidata. Upayamagrhito’si 
visvebhyastva devebhya’ esa te yonirvisvebhya- 
stva devebhyah. 
Learned and wise people, come and sit on this 
seat, and listen to my prayer. 


Young learner, you are accepted and consecrated 
in the rules of this institution by the learned teachers. 
This is now your home. You are dedicated to the support 
and service of the good and the wise in faith and 
reverence. 


35. (Prajapati Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 
vd masgg ulfz ara at smaiassrifdar: T 
qa uuftdr ad sp yafaa fa ene: us: 
sadist wal wechsuu d AR 
vem Hec usa 


Indra marutva’iha pāhi somam yatha $aryate" 
apibah sutasya. Tava praniti tava Sura $arm- 
annavivasanti kavayah suyajnah. Upayama- 
egrhito’ sindraya tva marutvata’ esa te yoni- 
rindraya tva marutvate. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


160 YAJURVEDA 


Glorious ruler of this noble and powerful people, 
support, protect and advance this yajna of education in 
this world as you have already tasted the sweets of your 
efforts in this field. Hero of the land, dedicated people 
of vision, poets and scholars of yajna, follow your 
policies and enjoy your protection under your 
benevolent rule. Accepted and consecrated you are in 
the laws of this land for the glory of the nation and the 
welfare of the people. We dedicate you to the glory of 
the nation and welfare of the people. 


36. (Prajapati Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 
Tedd gua ataacha faeremafresu | 
fasararenear deardnredzrarfig ada | suumm- 
Tiasa ver Fectasuy er age car Tata 
sahis edt ashe 16 1 


Marutvantam vrsabham vavrdhanamakavarim 
divyam $asamindram. Visvasahamavase 
nutanayogram sahodamiha tam huvema. 
Upayamagrhito’ sindraya tva marutvata’esa te 
yonirindraya tva marutvate. Upayamagrhito’ si 
marutam tvaujase. 


We, men of vision, poets and scholars, call upon 
and praise you for new modes of defence and protection, 
Indra, glorious ruler of the land, leader of a great people, 
first and best of all, dynamic and progressive saviour 
against suffering and evil, celestially virtuous, able 
administrator, formidably patient, nobly passionate, 
inspiringly courageous. 


Ruler, you are accepted and consecrated in the 
rules and structure of the state for the glory of Indra 
and Maruts, glory of the land and welfare of the people. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VII 161 


This land and its protection, now, is your home and 
justification. We dedicate you to the glory of the land 
and the welfare of its people. We accept and honour 
you, a man of law, discipline and commitment as you 
are, for the strength and glory of the people. 


37. (Prajapati Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 


atsa mio dete: at fra aer vp femur 
we ieus yA anam que favadt 
ma samisi ver wecdasus s eirfafisla 
ver Hecdd isi 


Sajosa’ indra sagano marudbhih somam piba 
vrtraha Sura vidvan. Jahi satrun’ rapa mrdho 
nudasvathabhayam krnuhi vi$vato nah. 
Upayamagrhito’ sindraya tva marutvata’ esa te 
yonirindraya tva marutvate. 


Man of love for all, joy and power, Indra, 
commander of the army, attended with forces swift as 
the wind, scholarly, fearless and brave, destroyer of the 
enemy, wipe out the enemy host, eliminate those who 
destroy happiness and cause suffering to mankind, and 
make us free and fearless from all sides. And, just as 
the sun pours out the waters when it breaks the cloud 
Vritra with the winds and drinks to the health of the 
earth and her people, so do you drink with your friends 
and allies to the joy of Soma and success. 


Accepted and consecrated you are in the rules of 
the army and the laws of the land. I appoint you in the 
service of the lord of the land and head of her people. 
Now the rules, the law, the army, defence of the land 
and freedom of the people: this is your home and haven, 
the very meaning and purpose of your life. You are 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


162 YAJURVEDA 


consecrated and dedicated to the people and the lord of 
the land. 


38. (Prajapati Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 


Tee sz quer wore frat induere water à 
stored sto nsa caste ufducrgrtui 
Setters cm wecehsuw d ruf 


ver Hecdq use 


Marutvan' indra vrsabho ranaya piba soma- 
manusvadham madaàya. Asificasva jathare 
madhva' urmim tvam raja’ si pratipatsutanam. 
Upayamagrhito’ sindraya tva marutvata’ esa te 
yonirindraya tva marutvate. 


Indra, head of the council/commander of the 
army, leader of the people/army, first and best among 
all, you are a man of honour and power. For joy and for 
the battles, drink soma according to your taste and 
capacity with every meal. Stimulate your appetite with 
draughts of the best and the choicest sweets of juices. 
You are intelligent and brilliant for every occasion of 
importance. 


Accepted and consecrated you are in the laws of 
the land and rules of the council/army. We honour and 
celebrate you in the service of the lord of the land and 
head of the people. You are dedicated and committed to 
the honour of the land and the welfare of the people for 
the development of airy weapons and missiles (marut- 
weapons). This commitment, this dedication, now is 
your haven, the very meaning and purpose of your 
existence. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VII 163 


39. (Prajapati Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi) 
FE lisg-al Terareiifurussa feasts: agt: 
wears datas: uer qed: edits | 
suardérirsfar ats cn a ater veris N 


Mahan’ indro nrvada carsanipra’ uta dvibarha’ 
aminah | sahobhih. ^ Asmadryagvavrdhe 
viryayoruh prthuh sukrtah kartrbhirbhut. 
Upayamagrhito'si mahendraya tvaisa te 
yonirmahendraya tva. 

Lord of the universe, you are great and adorable, 
compassionate and so close to humans, giver of bliss to 
the people, lord of knowledge secular and sacred, of 
unique power, infinite, more expansive than space, 
omniscient knower of us all, just and kind with those 
who do good. We grow and rise in strength, power and 
prowess and honour only with His grace. 


Lord of light, you can be realised only through 
the rules of yama and niyama and the discipline of yoga. 
He resides in the light of the heart. For the realisation 
of the glory of that light we worship Him. For His 
Greatness we worship Him. 


40. (Prajapati Devata, Vatsa Rshi) 
agug assist usi afent nsa | 
miae age | swandéritsfer agar ae d 
ade cm nson 


Mahan’ indro ya'ojasa parjanyo vrstiman'iva. 
Stomairvatsasya vavrdhe. Upayamagrhito'si 
mahendraya tvaisa te yonirmahendraya tva. 


The Lord is great, Lord of power and glory who, 
like the cloud laden with rain, showers the worshipper— 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


164 YAJURVEDA 


who sends up his songs of praise natural as a child's— 
with light and lustre. In the light of that glory, we grow 
in body, mind and soul. 


Lord of us all, you can be reached only through 
the discipline of yoga. You reside in the light of your 
glory revealed in the heart. We worship you for the 
realization of that glory, for the attainment of that infinite 
love and compassion. 


41. (Surya Devata, Praskanva Rshi) 
3q a Ulddad dd deta Fad: | 
qo favata yirt ise 


Udu tyam jatavedasam devam vahanti ketavah. 
Dr$e vi$vaya suryam svaha. 

Just as the rays of the sun carry the light of the 
sun to the world to reveal the glory of the sun for all to 
see and realise, so do the manifestation of the Supreme 
Light and Spirit reveal the glory of the Lord for all to 
see and realise the presence of the power and the spirit. 


So also do the words of the Rishi reveal the truth 
of existence and the glory of the creator to help us realise 
the presence of the Lord of Creation. 


42. (Surya Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 


faa ame maie relfirren ature: | 37 
ur matya seraa ssr sata 
Carat wx 


Citram devanamudagadanikam caksurmitrasya 
varunasyagneh. A pra dyavaprthivi’ antariksain 
surya’ atma jagatasthusasca svaha. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VII 165 


There arises the sun, wonderful splendour of the 
gods, the light and eye of Mitra, Varuna and Agni, filling 
the earth, the sky and the heaven with its glory, and 
soul of the world moving and unmoving. This is the 
divine voice. This is the oblation for him. 


So is the Lord Creator and Supreme Spirit of the 
universe, the light of lights, life of life and the real power 
of the gods. That alone is the object of worship. 


43. (Antaryami jagadeeshwara Devata, Angirasa Rshi) 
Tp aa Guat wassrentavatft ea aga fasrt 


reggie whet a ssf fada 
gtz ut 


Agne naya supatha raye' asman visvani deva 
vayunani vidvan. Yuyodhyasmajjuhuranameno 
bhuyistham te nama uktim vidhema svaha. 


Agni, Lord of light and knowledge, you know 
all the paths of the world into the treasures of wealth, 
(the science of yoga also). Take us, lead us on by the 
right path to the wealth of life, and remove from our 
heart all the sin and evil. We sing in praise of divine 
glory in all humility from the core of our heart. Bless us 
with success in Dharma, artha, kama and moksha 
through yoga and the divine voice, the Veda. 


44. (Prajapati Devata, Angirasa Rshi) 
aa ilssrfireifierenuiicers get: arstg war à 
aa amiss antago wear: 
ratne 


Ayam no 'agnirvarivaskrnotvayam mrdhah pura’ 


etu prabhindan. Ayam  vajanjayatu 
vajasatavayain Satrunjayatu jarhrsanah svaha. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


166 YAJURVEDA 


May this warrior, agni, clear the path for us. May 
this warrior, breaking through the enemy lines in front, 
advance on and on. May this one, fighting in the thick 
of battle, win the battles one after another. And may 
this one win the victory over the enemies and rejoice. 
(May one look after the wounded and treat them with 
medicine.) 


45. (Prajapati Devata, Angirasa Rshi) 
wun ar Rua qem al feeder faving | 
sud uem Ud agate fa ve usa aR 
deg we nsyi 


Rupena vo rupamabhyagam tutho vo visvaveda 
vibhajatu. Rtasya patha preta candradaksina vi 
svah pa$ya vyantariksam yatasva sadasyaih. 


With a descerning eye, I see the various grades 
of ability among you. The one who knows you all and 
knows the world may form you into different classes 
and councils for appropriate jobs. The highest in 
intelligence may touch the skies — realise the divine 
presence and the eternal values of life and action. Ruler 
of the people, with the members of the council, by the 
path of truth, act and move on. Men of golden 
generosity, go ahead on the path of Dharma with charity. 
(The ruler should constitute three councils: The Council 
of Education, Vidyarya Sabha, The Council of 
Governance, Rajarya Sabha, and the Council of Dharma, 
Dharmarya Sabha, to assist and advise him in the 
governance and administration of the country.) 


46. (Vidvans Devata, Angirasa Rshi) 
meme fede ag ügucrnjfüurissqend- 
afarorg 1 regarder these wararmfetsraines u 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VII 167 


Brahmanamadya | videyam  pitrmantam 
paitrmatyamrsimarseyam sudhatudaksinam. 
Asmadrata devatra gacchata pradatarm- 
avisata. 

I go and meet a Brahmana, a virtuous man of 
divinity and divine knowledge, of illustrious parentage 
with a heart of parental love, venerable man of vision 
and discrimination who has realized the soul of the 
Veda-mantras, a man of real gifts of gold — generous, 
obliging, giving, redeeming all those who reach him. 


Go to the generous man of knowledge, wisdom 
and virtue, give freely, and the gifts will turn to blessings 
and come back to you to enrich your soul. 


47. (Varuna Devata, Angirasa Rshi) 


ata A Ha ToT Garg ursaeaendsirargdatasu fer 
wat Het RAA wert vr ub atu ard 
qsad wruit qasa erdt wel ufenéra 
geeda ver oui mo aag Asyada 
veram fer wet wel wfenépr «ure cat gi erui 
war ursueaerdsite vat qasdi aat vet wfu- 
"mb wee 


Agnaye tva mahyam varuno dadatu so’- 
mrtatvamastyayurdatra’ edhi mayo mahyam 
pratigrahitre rudraya tva mahyam varuno 
dadatu so’mrtattvamasiya prano datra' edhi 
vayo mahyam pratigrahitre brhaspataye tva 
mahvam varuno dadatu so' mrtattvamastya 
tvagdatra’ edhi mayo mahyam pratigrahitre 
yamaya tva mahyam varuno dadatu so’ 
mrtatvamasriya hayo datra' edhi vayo mahyam 
pratigrahitre. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


168 YAJURVEDA 


May Varuna, man of knowledge and 
discrimination, assign me to a teacher of Vasu's standing 
of 24 years so that I become a Vasu brahmachari 
(graduate) of agni's brilliance and have the joy of 
scientific truth and reality. May health and longevity 
come to the giver, the teacher. May comfort and 
prosperity come to the receiver, the disciple. 


May Varuna, man of knowledge and 
discrimination, assign me to a teacher of Rudra's 
standing of 44 years so that I become a Rudra 
brahmachari (graduate) of Rudra's justice and power 
and have the joy of eternal knowledge of the world and 
heaven. May the strength of pranic vitality come to the 
giver, the teacher, and a life-time of health and 
prosperity to the receiver, the disciple. 


May Varuna assign me to a teacher of the Aditya 
order of 48 years standing so that I become an Aditya 
graduate of Brihaspati's knowledge of the Vedas and 
have the bliss of eternal vision of life. May the sensitivity 
of tactual and all other senses come to the giver, and 
the eternal joy of life and vision come to the receiver, 
to me. 


May Varuna assign me to a preceptor who has, 
through yoga practice, transcended the ups and downs 
of worldly existence so that I realise in practice the 
pleasures of home-life and their value against a 
comprehensive picture of life and death and attain, 
through living, the eternal ananda of Moksha. May 
divine realisation come to the giver, the preceptor, and 
the joy of life and ultimate bliss of eternity come to the 
receiver, to me. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VII 169 


48. (Atma Devata, Angirasa Rshi) 


cal Satchel Satara SaTebTHISTSTd | 
carat am card: ufandtat eBre ecd 


Ko’datkasma’adatkamo 'datkamayadat. Kamo 
data kamah pratigrahita kamaitatte. 
Who gives? For whom ....? Desire gives. Gives 


for desire. Desire is the giver. Desire is the receiver. It 
is all desire. Love for you! For fulfilment. 


Who gives the fruit of karma? To whom does the 
giver give the fruit of karma? Ishwara, Divine love and 
desire, gives the fruit of karma. He gives the fruit of 
karma to the jiva, the soul, who desires and acts the 
karma. Ishwara is the object of love and desire for the 
yogis. He is the giver. The jiva desires and acts out of 
desire. He is the receiver of the fruit. It is all desire. 
This is for you — the knowledge. It is for you to know. 
(You cannot live without desire, and you cannot survive 
only with desire. Integrate desire (kama) with Dharma 
and Artha, and you’ll have both life and freedom 
(moksha). 


sta auaaiseara: di 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


170 YAJURVEDA 


CHAPTER-VIII 


1.  (Brihaspati-Soma Devate, Angirasa Rshi) 


suarmdératsearfecrnzis i 


fautssemas à areata ur cat esr eu 


Upayamagrhito'syadityebhyastva. Visna’ 
urgayaisa te somastam raksasva ma tva dabhan. 


Young man, Brahmachari of the Aditya order, 
selected and accepted by me for marriage, you are now 
bonded and consecrated in the sacred code of marriage 
for a life-time. Observe the rules and discipline of 
wedlock according to the Dharma-shastras meticulously 
like the sun through the zodiacs in the year. Noble in 
nature, culture, habit and conduct, this home, the life of 
grihastha, is your paradise to live in and grow. Preserve 
it, protect it, and let nothing violate or destroy this sweet 
life and home. 


2.  (Grihapati Maghava Devate, Angirasa Rshi) 


eat at ante rs aa age 1 surda 
taansa a art ue veaassmfacherea4 udi 


Kada cana starirasi nendra sascasi dasuse. 
Upopennu maghavan bhuya' innu te danam 
devasya prcyata’  adityebhyastva. 


Dear husband, man of excellence and power, 
wealth and generosity, you are never dry or stingy or 
non-obliging. You are always and readily with the 
generous Giver. Your gifts in cash and kind, instruction 
or advice, multiply and mature in no time and may they 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VIII 171 


come to me too! I dedicate myself to you for a life-time 
year after year. 


3. (Aditya Grihapati Devate, Angirasa Rshi) 


oat rp ween fuif wert o) qüerfacr 
adi asstgaurdearand faeurfecizieer i3 1 


Kada cana prayucchasyubhe nipasi janmani. 
Turiyaditya savanam ta’ indriyamatasthava- 
mrtam divyadityebhyastva. 


Aditya, man of brilliance and discipline, you are 
never funny or neglectful. Bright, generous and holy, 
superior in wisdom and character, you are doing full 
and fair justice to your life both present and future, just 
as you would do to the transcendent state of your mind 
and consciousness. If your sex-life and your mind and 
senses are stable under control, free from indulgence, 
you will enjoy the supreme bliss of happiness in a state 
of enlightenment. Man of light and virtue, I accept you 
and dedicate myself to you for a lifetime. 


4. (Aditya Grihapati Devate, Kutsa Rshi) 
ad cart uif uerrfacmer crar gga: | 
ar disatet quidtqearaeteaen «ifvarfereri- 
warfare wet 


Yajno devanam pratyeti sumnamadityaso 
bhavata mrdayantah. A vo'rvaci sumatirvavrtya- 
damhoscidya varivovittarasada-dityebhyastva. 


The home-yajna of a noble husband and noble 
wife brings joy and grace of the gods to the family. 
Noble and brilliant people of wisdom and virtue, be 
kind and and bless the home with peace and happiness. 
May your wisdom, auspicious and blissful, which gives 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


172 YAJURVEDA 


the knowledge of right conduct and behaviour, come 
hither and always abide with us to guide us and protect 
us from sin and evil. I accept you for dedication to the 
noble and the brilliant people for a life-time. 


5. — (Grihapatis Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 


fackaatfacts t diately naea 1 sett ut 
ade amaa aasia quit asqa: | qa 
Wat wad fera emere favaretasterd We gu 


Vivasvannadityaisa te somapithastasmin matsva. 
Sradasmai naro vacase dadhátana yadasirda 
dampati vamamasnutah. Puman putro jayate 
vindate vasvadha visvaharapa’ edhate grhe. 


Brilliant young man, settled in this new home 
with your wife, after leaving the ‘gurukul’, the school- 
home, this family home is the yajna-vedi of your 
grihastha where you will drink the ‘soma’ of joy for a 
long long time. Man in this home life should observe 
truth of word and conduct to make the married life happy 
and successful. The home in which the husband and 
wife observe the ethics and discipline (Dharma) of 
marriage is blessed with wealth, growing prosperity and 
the birth of a noble and virtuous son who helps and 
protects his parents and fulfills their wishes. 


6.  (Grihapatis Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi) 


amma ferrem vat feafea enmmansteardt:i 
erue fe smi xe saver farm edu: ums 
Vamamadya savitarvamamu $vo dive-dive 


vamamasmabhyain savih. Vamasya hi ksayasya 
deva bhureraya dhiya vamabhajah syama. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VIII 173 


Lord Savita, creator of this wonderful world of 
joy and beauty, create for us a life of joy, joy today, joy 
to morrow, and joy from day to day so that, doing good 
actions, with our intelligence we may enjoy a happy 
and prosperous family life in this home. 


7. (Savita Grihapati Devate, Bharadwaja Rshi) 


sumida arash rirempei-remsad far er 
aft af 1 Red ag Red aadft ene xard c 
"feu wen 


Upayamagrhito’si savitro’si canodhascanodha’ 
asi cano mayi dhehi jinva yajnam jinva 
yajnapatim bhagaya devaya tva savitre. 


Accepted you are (as me) and consecrated in the 
ethics and discipline of matrimony (grihastha dharma). 
A devotee you are of Savita, creator of the universe, 
and so gracious a giver of food and the wealth of life. 
Give me the food for life and joy. Promote yajna, 
promote the master devotee of yajna, for wealth, for 
honour and generosity, for the grace of Savita, lord of 
generation — for health, wealth and procreation — for 
you and me. 


8. (Vishwedeva Grihapatis Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi) 
summissa xperdifu qufacsrt gedara 
mn fasdsaear xmenmxisuw a alfafasdezrear 
xe: uci 
Upayamagrhito'si su$arma'si supratisthano 


brhaduksaya namah. Visvebhyastva devebhya’ 
esa te yonirvisvebhyastva devebhyah. 


Dear husband, accepted you are (by me) and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


174 YAJURVEDA 


consecrated in the sacramental law and discipline of 
marriage and firmly settled in a beautiful home. Healthy, 
virile and handsome, salutations to you and good food 
and drink. This home, this family, is now your haven 
for life, the meaning and purpose of grihastha. I dedicate 
you to all the noble people of the world and to all the 
godly powers of nature, yes to all the great and noble 
people. 


9.  (Grihapatis Vishvedevas Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi) 


samia gears da IW asgat- 
Risada: uciteritr vate usse | até urcalagu- 
amaaa ag À ard | aega «aste 
art Ut Wer c ue 


Upayamagrhito’si brhaspatisutasya deva soma 
ta’ indorindriyavatah patnivato grahan’ 
rdhyasam. Aham parastadahamavastadyad- 
antariksam tadu me pitabhut. Aham surya- 
mubhayato dadarsaham devanam paramam 
guha yat. 


Accepted and consecrated you are (along with 
me) in the matrimonial Dharma. Noble man of peace 
and brilliance, happy at heart, blest with wealth of men 
and material, son of a mighty vaidic scholar, and blest 
with a noble wife, I pray I (we) abide by the vows and 
promises of wedlock and grow stronger and more and 
more dedicated. And may all that is upfront and present 
and may come hereafter and all the knowledge and 
wisdom and all the mysteries hidden deep in the mind 
of the saints and sages, may all this, like a father, nourish 
my mind and soul. And with all this knowledge and all 
their blessings, may I, both of us together, realise the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VIII 175 


presence of the light of life, the Supreme Soul of the 
universe, here and hereafter. 


10. (Grihapatis Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi) 


asma iss uetan daa waver und fra caret à 
Xadrerat xaremdsitar ngon 


Agna'i patnivantsajurdevena tvastra somam 
piba svaha. Prajapatirvrsasi retodha reto mayi 
dhehi prajapateste vrsno retodhaso retodham- 
astya. 

Manly man of a darling wife, lord of brilliance 
and joy, come and, with the inspiring poetry of Veda in 
honour and praise of the Creator, and eliminater of 
suffering, Twashta, drink the elixir of life with me. 
Husband of an admirable wife, virile and generous like 
the rain-god cloud, lover and guardian of people and 
children, rain the shower of life and joy on me. Replete 
with the seeds of life, sow the seed in me. Would-be 
father of your child, virile and lustrous, I shall receive 
and hold the seed and bear your son and spirit — the 
Lord bless him — as brave and lustrous as you. 


11. (Grihapatis Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi) 
suariérisfa eRe erar eet cm ag 
edi cat geasa ue] 
Upayamagrhito’si harirasi hariyojano hari- 
bhyam tva. Haryordhana stha sahasoma' 
indraya. 


Accepted and consecrated you are in the 
sacramental dharma of marriage and the household, 
carry on the business of the home like a leader, using 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


176 YAJURVEDA 


all the resources with joy and satisfaction to everybody. 
Drive on this chariot of grihastha with the steeds of Indra 
(i.e., men and materials) for the glory of Indra, Head of 
the universal family. Manage your horses (resources) 
and ever be strong, drinking the joy of life to the honour 
and glory of the Lord of Bliss (Soma). 


12. (Grihapatis Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi) 
saraan at Mmaa dsztedsp 
qaia vediareardgaecardgat STEPS ug 3i 


Yaste' a$vasanirbhakso yo gosanistasya ta' 
istayajusa stutastomasya $astokthasyopa- 
hutasyopahuto bhaksayami. 


Invited by you, blessed soul, to the celebration 
of your power of horses, your wealth of land and cows, 
and your culture of the divine voice, the Veda, admirer 
of the Rks, lover of the Yajus and singer of the Samans, 
I am delighted to enjoy what you have so generously 
offered. 


13. (Grihapatis Vishvedeva Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi) 


—— areren iue e- 
fdgreren uda saaa A est 


Devakrtasyainaso'vayajanamasi | manusya- 
krtasyainaso 'vayajanamasi pitrkrtasyainaso’ 
vayajanamasyatmakrtasyainaso 'vayaja- 
namasye nasa 'enaso'vayajanamasi. Yaccaha- 
meno vidvanscakara yacca-vidvanstasya 
sarvasyainaso 'vayajanamasi. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VIII 177 


You are the redeemer from the sin committed by 
the generous superman; you are the saviour from the 
sin committed by the ordinary person; you are the 
redeemer from the sins committed by the forefathers; you 
are the redeemer from the sin committed by one's own 
self; you are the redeemer from the sins begotten of sin. 
Whatever the sin I have committed in a state of 
knowledge, or I have committed in a state of ignorance 
(or I might commit in future), you are the saviour from 
all that. 


14. (Grihapatis Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi) 
dada wea «i erste Ata acter 
wet Gent fader warsdare cat ag ieterquye sii 


Sam varcasa payasa sam tanubhiraganmahi 
manasa sain sivena. Tvasta sudatro vidadhatu 
rayo' numarstu tanvo yadvilistam. 


Twashta, refiner of manners, behaviour, method, 
and culture and generous giver of health, wealth and 
knowledge, let us go forward with a noble mind, able 
body, plenty of food and drink and the vigour and lustre 
of life. Give us all-round wealth of life, and whatever is 
wanting in us in health of body and mind, be gracious 
to make up and complete. 


15. (Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi) 
afths vir acter 3f ifr: eregfefihirereerecerecam 
i saturn dace ra fis ei lamg arae 
mt uu 
Samindra no manasa nesi gobhih sam 
suribhirmaghavant sain svastya. Sam brahmana 


devakrtam yadasti sam devanam sumatau 
yajniyanam svaha. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


178 YAJURVEDA 


Indra, Lord of power and honour, Maghavan, 
Lord of wealth and knowledge, take us forward in a 
healthy state of mind and sense at peace, comfortably, 
with men of wisdom and brilliant intelligence, with the 
vaidic voice of universal knowledge, and with our cows, 
into the way of whatever is nobly done in the vaidic 
tradition of universal values, and whatever is good 
according to the noble genius of the superior people of 
yajnic dedication and culture. 


16. (Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi) 
dada wea i aerate wur ase 
whet Yaar adag mAs cat afafeterqe s u 


Sam varcasa payasa sam tanubhiraganmahi 
manasa sain sivena. Tvasta sudatro vidadhatu 
rayo' numarstu tanvo yadvilistam. 


Follow as we do the noble genius of superior 
people among us, bless us Twashta, remover of the veils 
of ignorance and giver of knowledge. By the bright day 
and in the night, with the help and guidance of healthy 
and intelligent scholars and sages, and with the gift of a 
noble mind and concentration, bless us with the wealth 
of life, knowledge, wisdom, health and culture, and 
cleanse us of all the negativities and impurities of body 
and mind. 


17. (Vishvedeva Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi) 
erat Ufa: dade ert wsmdfefiferar AAs: 
water faat: Gara aan ebur gfo asma 
arzt ngon 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VIII 179 


Dhata ratih savitedam jusantam praja- 
patirnidhipa devo' agnih. Tvasta visnuh prajaya 
samrarana yajamanaya dravinam dadhata 
svaha. 

Men and women of household, maintain the culture 
and institutions of the family, give peace and comfort to 
all, produce wealth for prosperity, look after your children 
and others, protect and promote wealth and knowledge, 
be brilliant and victorious, eliminate darkness with light, 
create joy and happiness around, expand your noble 
presence through noble works, and, through charity and 
generosity, through good manners and good deeds, enjoy 
life with your family and friends. Create wealth with good 
work and keep it for the yajamana, the host-organizer of 
yajna. 


18. (Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi) 


gmr at aar: adsatt saisir uel FAUT: | 
wma agar gA esa nut ad 
wet gen 


Suga vo devah sadana' akarma ya’ ajagmedam 
savanam jusanah. Bharamana vahamana 
havimsyasme dhatta vasavo vasuni svaha. 


Auspicious powers of nature/ Noble men of 
brilliance, wisdom and generosity, efficient in creation, 
production and management, conducting, maintaining 
and enjoying this social yajna of production and 
prosperity, we have created and obtained these 
comfortable homes and valuable materials for you. Take 
these and hold these for us for onward creation and 
comfort. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


180 YAJURVEDA 


19. (Vishvedeva Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi) 
wisussmedesssrir ta garam wa ASAA 
art | asd: uftanidea faràs atk 
venrfdesarT vemet ues 


Yan’ avaha usato deva devanstan preraya sve’ 
agne sadhasthe. Jaksivamsah papivamsasca 
visve’sum gharmam svaratisthatanu svaha. 


O brilliant and generous Lord of yajna, Agni/man 
of knowledge, inspire to high acts of dharma and yajna 
all those who come to your house anxious to receive 
higher wealth and virtue. 


Men of the household, all of you, eating and 
drinking, enjoy the sacred voice of divinity, the food of 
yajna and Dharma, the spirit of life and the bliss of 
heaven on earth. 


20. (Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi) 
aac wat wafa aasstRaam drakaduindte | 


ehes: WI GaAs fagre 
wt uon 


Vayafn hi tva prayati yajne’ asminnagne 
hotaramavrnimahiha. Rdhagaya rdhagutasa- 
misthah prajanan yajnam upayahi vidvantsvaha. 


Agni, man of knowledge and brilliance, we, the 
house-holders in this family yajna of the household 
going on here, we select and accept you as the priest (to 
conduct and guide it). Expert man of yajna, knowing 
the spirit and essence of it, come close, join and enrich 
this yajna which is the creator and giver of prosperity. 
And not only join and conduct, but also come again 
and be blest with peace and prosperity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VIII 181 


21. (Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi) 


dat maA cmd faror "mafia i 
uurnszH de ageng ard ST: NN 


Deva gatuvido gatum vittva gatumita. Mana- 
saspata' imam deva yajnam svaha vate dhah. 


Man of the household, brilliant and generous, 
knowing the nature, properties and movements of the 
dynamic earth, having known the movements, know 
further and go further, and deeper inside it know the 
wealth and attain prosperity. 


Man of the household, brilliant and generous, 
master of your sense and mind, with the voice of the 
Veda and virtuous action, bring yajna into the practical 
scientific acts of life and hold on to the yajnic way of 
living. 

22. (Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi) 
at aa thes aad wes xem wf wes coat | 


wa d gat uud uedskremen: wddite Weed 
vere Ru 


Yajna yajnam gaccha yajnapatim gaccha svam 
yonim gaccha svaha. Esa te yajno yajnapate 
sahasuktvakah sarvavirastam jusasva svaha. 


House-holder, man of yajna, with the voice of 
the Veda and virtuous acts of dharma, do the yajna of 
hospitality to the learned. Observe the collective yajna 
of loyalty and reverence to the head of the nation. Be 
true to your inner self. 


House-holder, observer of the ritual and the social 
yajna, this household yajna of yours, performed with 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


182 YAJURVEDA 


the hymns of the Veda, inspiring to the young heroes of 
the nation, is for the safety and education of the people. 
Observe it with the voice of truth and justice in the 
business of the nation. 


23. (Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi) 


mR at gate: | sexe tet ature gate 
weardaarss | stage urar ufdemaesenedrdererr 
gafada | aA ceurerfurfeddt asoret 
urst: Nest 


Mahirbhurma prdakuh. Uruin hi raja varuna- 
Scakara suryaya panthamanve-tava'u. Apade 
pada pratidhatave'karutapavakta hrdaya- 
vidhascit. Namo varunayabhisthito varunasya 
pasah. 

Ruler and President of the Council, be not angry 
and poisonous as a snake, nor ferocious as a serpent. 
Be not false, hurtful and heart-breaking in speech. Be a 
ruler shining brilliant, supreme in virtue. Do excellently 
as behoves your chosen status. Make the highways of 
justice broad in honour and worship to the sun, the 
supreme light of the world, for all to see and follow the 
light so that none may stray into the paths of evil. Let 
the rule of law and the penal code be as firm and 
inviolable as the chains of Varuna and the thunderbolt 
of Indra. 


24. (Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi) 


ammeitesmusasmfalasmarauta ufecebasreia vadat 
fast ae ufer a Bran gare vad verat usi 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VIII 183 


Agneranikamapa' a vive$apam-napat prati- 
raksannasuryam. Damedame samidham 
yaksyagne prati te jihva ghrtamuccaranyat 
svaha. 

Agni, brilliant and generous house-holder, enter 
the flames of fire and the depth of waters and know 
their secrets of power. Protector of the waters, digging 
into and protecting the material wealth of the earth and 
ocean, go from house to house, and light the fire of 
material knowledge of energy and its applications. Let 
the tongue of the truthful man taste the sweets of life 
and proclaim. 


25. (Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi) 


IHE d wane: cd cal femreeirdsireard: (and 
ver cru Gere watarer faery ae wemelusu N 


Samudre te hrdayamapsvantah sam tva 
visantvosadhirutapah. Yajnasya tva yajnapate 
suktoktau’ namovake vidhema yat svaha. 
Yajnapati, pursuant of yajna, we put your heart 
and mind in touch with vital energies and dynamic 
modes of social conduct and behaviour revealed in the 
hymns of the Vedas dealing with foods, source 
materials, and yajnic cooperation of the community. Let 
your searching mind go deep down into the ocean and 
rise up into the waters of space. And then celestial waters 
and rejuvenating herbs would emerge into your mind's 
eye of discovery (for common good). 


26. (Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi) 


efhusus eir viereqdlaenuid faye 1a utro 
ad vireerdfursecw wes ut a ES nee 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


184 YAJURVEDA 


Devirapa' esa vo garbhastam supritam subh- 
rtam bibhrta. Deva somaisa te lokastasmin- 
chamca vaksva pari ca vaksva. 


Women, bright, educated and meritorious, this 
grihasthashram, sacred family-home, is your real world 
of existence. Keep it, maintain it, manage it well with 
love and competence. 


Noble man of peace, love and honour, this family- 
home is your intimate world of existence. Find peace 
and fulfilment here. Keep it, maintain it. Guard it. Guard 
it all-round. 


27. (Dampati Devate, Atri Rshi) 


adya Frag freretfar fragor: | ord dárdar- 
ors ueticigd weerit ea Reece 
seratesefiafa non 


Avabhrtha nicumpuna nicerurasi nicumpunah. 
Ava devairdevakrtameno'  yasisamava 
martyairmartyakrtam pururavno deva risaspahi. 
Devanam samidasi. 
Initiated and consecrated couple in grihastha, 
gentle, noble and lovable virtuous producers of wealth, 


you are one of the bright, meritorious and generous 
community. You are an instrument of the devas. 


Deva, lord of the bright and the generous, living 
with the noble ones and the ordinary people, I pray, 
that I keep away from any sin or misconduct or 
misbehaviour committed with the mind and senses, or 
with the body, or by the ordinary people or even by the 
superior ones. Save me from violence to Dharma — 
such violence is the root of all sin and crime. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VIII 185 


28. (Dampati Devata, Atri Rshi) 


wig astern wat rdo ue | ae emus 
wer wuesusifa | werd astare sareno 
"E lI 

Ejatu dasamasyo garbho jarayuna saha. Yatha’- 
yam vayurejati yatha samudra' ejati. Evayam 
das$amasyo' asrajjarayuna saha. 

May the foetus of the tenth month stir with its 
membrane-cover just as this wind moves, just as the 
sea moves. And may this foetus of the tenth month be 
born (safe and alive) with the membrane cover. 


29. (Dampati Devata, Atri Rshi) 


TA a ufa ust nex wriérese i 
agaga set d Wrap aeae Us 


Yasyai te yajniyo garbho yasyai yonirhiranyayt. 
Anganyahruta yasya tam matra samajigamam 
svaha. 

Dear wife, for whom your sacred foetus is meant, 
for whom the pure and perfect womb of yours is meant, 
by that mother — you partner — may I beget a child 
with full and perfect limbs of the body through the 
sacred procreative yajna. 


30. (Dampati Devata, Atri Rshi) 


West ferie usg«cad fenriarost eli: | webudt 
minon 

Purudasmo vişurupa’ indurantarmahimana- 
mananja dhirah. Ekapadim dvipadim tripadim 
catuspadimastapadim bhuvananu prathantam 
svaha. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


186 YAJURVEDA 


The man of mighty deeds, who eliminates 
suffering and creates joy, of versatile attainments, bright 
and honourable, constant and resolute, should wait for 
the great new arrival. 


Men of the household, cultivate the vaidic culture 
of one, two, three, four and eight steps of attainment: 
one: Aum; two: worldly fulfilment and the freedom of 
moksha; three: the joy of the truth of word and the health 
of body and mind; four: the attainment of Dharma, 
wealth, fulfilment of desire, and moksha; eight: the joy 
of all the four classes and all the four stages of life 
(Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra, 
Brahmacharya, Grihastha, Vanaprastha and Sanyasa). 
Build homes for the people and advance in life. 


31. (Dampati Devate, Gotama Rshi) 
"adr ure fe era urem fear fauea: | 
a gard st: use 


Maruto yasya hi ksaye patha divo vimahasah. 
Sa sugopatamo janah. 

Married couples, brilliant and great in many ways, 
blest with beauty, wealth, yajna and knowledge, 
wherever in a home you find superior people of noble 
nature, character and action, that family is most 
dedicated to mother earth and the Veda. 


32. (Dampati Devate, Medhatithi Rshi) 
Wet at: det b asset ag Haaa, | 
Rai ar atta: uae 


Mahi dyauh prthivi ca na’ imam yajnam 
mimiksatam. Piprtam no bharimabhih. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VIII 187 


Married couples, you are like the vast and brilliant 
sky and the rich, fertile and forbearing earth. Bless this 
home-yajna of our grihastha with all the joys and fill 
this home with nourishment and familial support of the 
community. 


33. (Grihapatis Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


atts qagadt «per a water ett | atateitaca a 
wt mat Hurd art isuanmiérsutu car 
wrefsrisus urere car owrefsnt ussü 


A tistha vrtrahan ratham yuktà te brahmaná hari. 
Arvacinain su te mano grava krnotu vagnuna. 
Upayamagrhito' sindraya tva sodasina’ esa te 
yonirindraya tva sodasine. 


Man of the household, destroyer of the enemy, 
come and sit in this chariot of grihastha in which are 
yoked two ‘horses’, Draw and Hold (attraction and 
preservation or yoga and kshema). And if your mind 
sometime is down, then, with the voice of the Veda bring 
it up to peace, stand as a rock, and shower like a cloud 
with joy. You are accepted and consecrated in the 
matrimonial dharma for the sixteenfold honour and 
glory of life. This grihastha is now your haven. You are 
given up and dedicated to this sixteenfold programme 
of the family life. 


34. (Grihapati Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


gem fe ern ett quum enar | stat Assa 
"rur fuego) susnmérdseibuie car 
Agsu a aise em owrefsrt usw 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


188 YAJURVEDA 


Yuksva hi kesina hari vrsana kaksyapra. Atha 
na’ indra somapa giramupasrutim cara. 
Upayamagrhito’ sindraya tva sodasina’ esa te 
yonirindraya tva sodasine. 


Indra, hero of the household, man of honour and 
protector of your happy home, yoke your horses of 
beautiful hair, strong and fast, shooting to the destination 
And then listen to our voice and act accordingly. 


You are accepted and consecrated in the sacred 
discipline of marriage for the sixteenfold honour and 
sanctity of life in marriage. This grihastha is now your 
haven of existence. You are dedicated and given up to 
the sixteenfold programme of family honour. 


35. (Grihapati Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


sufnaflegdrsufesresreum istum cr vqdred 
"b cup mimm | saemnidtdtsdtata ver 
wrefsrisus urere vm owrefsnt usua 


Indramiddhari vahato' pratidhrsta$avasam. 
Rsinam ca stutirupa yajnam ca manusanam. 
Upayamagrhito 'sindraya tva Sodasina’ esa te 
yonirindraya tva sodasine. 


Two horses (yoga and kshema) carry Indra, hero 
of inviolable honour and power and head of the nation- 
family. Indra, protector of the honour of the land, listen 
to the Rishis' songs of the praise of the heroes, go close 
to the yajna-assemblies of the people, listen and act 
accordingly. 


You are anointed and consecrated in the sacred 
law and constitution of the land for the sixteenfold 
honour and glory of the nation: This honour and glory 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VIII 189 


now is your haven of life, the very purpose and meaning 
of your office and existence. The people look up to you 
for the sixteen-fold honour and prosperity of the nation. 


36. (Parameshwara Devata, Vivaswan Rshi) 


Tea WIR: uibssredssrfur asatar yaar 
fasat | wsmdfea: wer weuneur Sardites fr 
wud a aise nau 


Yasmanna jatah paro’ anyo’ asti ya’ avivesa 
bhuvanani vi$va. Prajapatih prajaya sam- 
raranastrini jyotiinsi sacate sa sodast. 

None other ever existent is beyond Him, Him who 
pervades and transcends all the worlds of the universe. 
Father of His creation, ever rejoicing with His children, 
Lord of sixteen powers, full and complete, He 
illuminates the three lights of the world and reigns — 
the One sole and absolute Lord existent, omniscient and 
blissful. (The three lights are fire, electricity and the 
sun. The sixteen powers are: will, energy, faith, earth, 
water, fire, air, space, sense, mind, food, vitality, 
austerity, Word, life (jiva) and language). 


37. (Samrat & Mandalika Devate, Vivaswan Rshi) 


Fars HHIS ahora Wat at at sei HAASTE 
wakeat vet terri areet Seren are aera 
ae worst caret non 
Indrasca samrad varunasca raja tau te bhaksam 
cakraturagra’ etam. Tayorahamanu bhaksam 
bhaksayami vagdevi jusana somasya trpyatu 
saha pranena svaha. 
Indra, the sovereign, reigns supreme over all. 
Varuna, the ruler, rules in specific areas. Those two first 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


190 YAJURVEDA 


provide this food for you. 


I eat my share of the food after those two. Both 
of you, the people and the government, with the sacred 
voice of the Veda which reveals the secrets of living 
together in love and cooperation, be happy and 
prosperous with full vigour. 


38. (Raja, Grihapati Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi) 

arà uda matsa at: yatta vada ufa 
Grey | SUS case a STS ASTT qc AAS 
ver ada | att adtaacitaicd cauafa acicare 
HTA Yaa URC 

Agne pavasva svapa' asme varcah suviryam. 
Dadhadrayim mayi posam. Upayamagrhito’- 
syagnaye tva varcasa’ esa te yoniragnaye tva 
varcase. Agne varcasvinvarcasvanstvam deve- 
svasi varcasvanaham manusyesu bhuyasam. 


Agni/Ruler, lord of knowledge and power, you 
are noble with noble actions, first among all of noble 
achievement. Purify us, and bless us with lustre, noble 
vitality and prowess, wealth and good health with 
nourishments of body and mind. 


Noble ruler, accepted you are and consecrated in 
the laws and constitution of the nation for the honour 
and brilliance of the people and the land. This honour 
and prestige, the nation, is now your haven, the reason 
and justification of your being. We dedicate you to the 
achievement of honour and glory. 

Agni, lord of light and brilliance of action, you 
are lustrous and honourable among the brilliant and the 
generous rulers. I pray I be brilliant and honourable 
among the people. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VIII 191 


39. (Raja, Grihapati Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi) 
sfvresirstar ue dict Prsa: burdfirg cw 
pru I seisata Atase e atts 
waite | gdifiisiftecd daereanhtsise ta 
Jaa BVI 
Uttisthannojasa saha pitvi Sipre’ avepayah. 
Somamindra camu sutam. Upayamagrhito’ - 
sindraya tvaujasa’ esa te yonirindraya tvaujase. 
Indraujisthaujisthastvam devesvasyojistho’ham 
manusyesu bhuyasam. 

Indra, ruler of the land, lover and achiever of 
honour, rising in lustre (with the strength of body, mind 
and soul and the power of the council and the army), 
having drunk the soma of victory over the enemies, 
shake the visors of your helmet with joy and self-esteem. 


Accepted you are by us for the governance and 
administration of the nation, and consecrated you are 
in the laws and constitution for the achievement of light 
and glory like that of the sun. This consecration now is 
the home and haven of your life, the very meaning of 
your existence. We dedicate you to the light of the world, 
the sun, and the glory of the nation. 


Lord of the land, brilliant in knowledge and 
justice, most shining you are among the noble and the 
generous personalities of the country. I pray that I may 
be brilliant and most shining among the people. 


40. (Grihapati, Raja Devata, Praskanva Rshi) 
sTdspTHp chaal fa waar waresart 1 amie 
ardt aan | soarerétarstea geile car arse a 
ata: gate <r aat 1 at aires urfsitsred 
carats urfsistse ART STHTHUH dno! 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


192 YAJURVEDA 


Adrsramasya ketavo vi ra$mayo janan' anu. 
Bhrajanto agnayo yatha. Upayamagrhito’ si 
suryaya tva bhrajayaisa te yonih suryaya tva 
bhrajaya. Surya bhrajistha bhrajisthastvam 
devesvasi 'bhrajistho'ham manusyesu bhuya- 
sam. 


Just as the bright rays of light (fire, sun, and 
electricity) shine on things to show them to the world, 
similarly, I pray, I may see the people and other things 
in the divine light of the Lord. 


Accepted and sanctified you are in the rules and 
laws of the land to shine in the business of the nation 
like the sun. This is now your haven and home. You are 
dedicated to the Sun, Lord Supreme of the universe, to 
shine in life. 


Ruler of the land, bright and sunny in knowledge 
and justice, you are the brightest among the brilliant. I 
pray I may shine the brightest among the people. 


41. (Surya Devata, Praskanva Rshi) 
3g wi adad da deta chad: 1 get farata 
Waa vsuaresérdrsfar gata car arse qt area: 
Gata vem aat ise 


Udu tyam jatavedasam devam vahanti ketvah. 
Drse visvaya suryam. Upayamagrhito’si suryaya 
tva bhrajayaisa te yonih suryaya tva bhrajaya. 


Just as the rays of the sun carry the light of the 
sun for the world to see the sun, surely so the lights of 
creation and the eyes of the seers reveal the light of the 
Lord Creator, refulgent and omniscient of all that is born, 
for the world to see. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VIII 193 


Lord of the universe, you are acceptable, and 
perceiveable through the discipline of yama and niyama 
and the inner eye, for the realisation of your glory and 
universal presence. This universe is your home of 
presence and we dedicate ourselves to you for the 
attainment of your glory and the Light of Life. 


42. (Patni Devata, Kusuruvindu Rshi) 


artar mast mm ved fagtixada: 1 yeaa? 
Rata m +: dea seres uhai yant- 
fasrarafa: inu 


Ajighra kalasam mahya tvà visantvindavah. 
Punarurja nivarttasva sa nah sahasram 
dhuksvorudhara payasvati punarma visatad- 
rayih. 

Generous and venerable as mother earth, come, 
fill the pitcher and smell it to taste. May sweet juices 
come to you in plenty and fill the home. Versatile in 
virtue, rich in food and overflowing with milk, come 
again and fill us with vigour and energy. And then, 
again, with your love and grace, may I be enriched with 
the wealth of life. 


43. (Patni Devata, Kusuruvindu Rshi) 
$$ m wal em cna Vaiasiea eae ufa 
fastfa 1 wat dsarea amit Gab at and 
SET I3 


Ide rante havye kamye candre jyote' dite 
sarasvati mahi vi$ruti. Eta te'aghnye namani 
devebhyo mam sukrtam brutat. 


Blessed woman, mistress of the home: Voice of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


194 YAJURVEDA 


the divine worthy of praise, love abiding in the heart, 
libation for the gods and fragrance of yajna, love and 
desire incarnate, beauty of the moon, brilliance of virtue, 
unbreakable and boundless, inexhaustible stream of 
knowledge and generosity, forbearance of mother earth, 
celebrity of the world: these are your names, dear wife, 
inviolable, which describe woman's nature and 
character. Speak to me of the good things I ought to do. 


44. (Indra Devata, Shasa Rshi) 


fa "sgg get wife "irem des uacua: i12 531883 NS- 
Arara werent qud: 1 saadetest cer 
fagesus d AAR eta cm feus nsx 


Vi na indra mrdho jahi nica yaccha prtanyatah. 
Yo’asman’abhidasatyadharam gamaya tamah. 
Upayamagrhito’sindraya tva vimrdha’esa te 
yonirindraya tva vimrdhe. 


Indra, commander of the army, destroy our 
enemies, keep the enemy hoards down. Him who wants 
to beat us into slavery, throw down into the dark. 


Accepted you are by the people and consecrated 
in the rules and tactics of the army for the defence of 
the land and destruction of the enemy. This is now your 
haven and home, the sole purpose of your office. We 
dedicate you to the defence and security of the land and 
to the honour of the nation. 


45. (Ishwara, President/Raja Devata, Shasa Rshi) 


=n faverchchit ISG I 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VIII 195 


Vacaspatim vi$évakarmmanamutaye manojuvam 
vaje’ adya huvema. Sa no visvani havanani 
josadvisvasambhuravase sadhukarmma. 
Upayamagrhito 'sindraya tva visvakarmana’ esa 
te yonirindraya tva vi$vakarmane. 


To-day, for our defence and advancement in yajna 
(and battles of life), we invoke (call upon) Vishwakarma, 
lord of speech and knowledge, lord of all actions and 
dharmas, universal benefactor and lord of noble 
performance, in action, hitting the mark fast as the mind. 
May he listen and accept all our prayers and offerings 
and come for our protection and support. 


President of the council/commander of the army/ 
man of yajna/head of the family, accepted and 
consecrated you are in the rules and discipline of life in 
the service of the lord of action and lord of glory, for 
the people and the land. This service, this yajna, this 
action, is now your haven and home, the very meaning 
and purpose of your life. We dedicate you to the service 
of the lord of glory, the lord of action and progress. 


46. (Vishvakarma Indra Devate, Shasa Rshi) 


farda zfeur esr uranfnenesmeemm | 
we fas: we: udiaqur facet garda | 
Sites cat fayakun «t AAR ata 


ver fasach ines 


Visvakarman havisa vardhanena tratara- 
mindram-akrnoravadhyam. Tasmai visah 
samanamanta purvirayamugro vihavyo 
yathasat. Upayamagrhito'sindraya tva 
visvakarmana’ esa te yoniridraya tva visva- 
karmane. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


196 YAJURVEDA 


Vishvakarma, lord of all actions and dharmas, 
with vitalizing materials of yajna, strengthen the ruler 
and make him an invincible protector of the people. 
Let him grow mighty with ample means and materials. 
To him, the people, as taught by the forefathers, bow in 
homage. 


Ruler, president of the council, accepted you are 
by the people, and consecrated in the laws of the land 
for service to the lord of action, Vishwakarma, and 
honour of the nation (Indra). This service and this 
honour now is your haven and home. You are dedicated 
to the lord of action and dharma and the honour and 
glory of the nation. 


47. (Vishvakarma Indra Devate, Shasa Rshi) 


STE seas A Waa Tea cT 


TEATS ATR: Isat 


Upayamagrhito’syagnaye tva gayatra- 
cchandasam grhnami-ndraya tva tristup- 
chandasam grhnami vi$vebhyastva devebhyo 
jagacchandasam grhnamyanustupte 'bhigarah. 


Vishvakarman : Accepted and honoured you are 
in reverence as a teacher. Enlightening are your songs 
of praise in the Anushtubh metre. Scholar of Gayatri 
verses, I come to you to learn the science of fire. Master 
of Trishtubh verses, I come to you for the secrets of 
life's glory and prosperity. Scholar of Jagati verses, I 
come to you to learn the nature, character and actions 
of the noble, brilliant and generous leaders of the world. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VIII 197 


48. (Prajapatis Devata, Devas Rshis) 


Asii cat eae enpep-ratat cat uerareiifir 
Wet vem cease afadarmt car AAT- 


Aaa | depart cor aaa A spon cal srh5- 
ammat BA user TAT wu 


Vresinam tva patnannadhunomi kukunananam 
tva patmanna dhunomi. Bhandananam tva 
patmannadhunomi  madintamanam tva 
patmannadhunomi. Madhuntamanam tva 
patmannadhunomi $ukram tva $ukra' adhuno- 
myahno rupe suryasya rasmisu. 


Dear husband, if amongst the pure and spotless 
people, you ever happen to waver, I shake you out of 
that fickleness. 


If amongst the gentle folk in speech and language, 
love and manners, you happen to falter, I shake you out 
of that embarrassment. 


If amongst the graceful and the beatifying, you 
happen to err toward roughness, I shake you out back 
into self-awareness. 


If in the company of the rejoicing folks in 
festivity, you waver from self-control, I shake you out 
back to temperance. 


If amongst the sweetest and the most lovable folks 
you waver from decency, I shake you back to civility. 


You are pure and immaculate. I would always 
warn you against going astray and urge upon you to 
stay untainted in character as the day in the rays of the 
sun. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


198 YAJURVEDA 


49. (Vishvedeva Prajapatis Devata, Devas Rshis) 


Spm dyed tread Geum: wot Wir 
aa: rep ate: | ad Aa TH wre 
wet cor Tart eub wow arate creat ise 


Kakubham rupam  vrsabhasya rocate 
brhacchukrah $ukrasya purogah somah 
somasya purogah. Yatte somadabhyam nama 
jagrvi tasmai tva grhnami tasmai te soma 
somaya svaha. 


The excellence of the man’s image shines 
everywhere. Bright and generous, purest of the pure on 
top, noblest of the kind and beneficent, first among the 
great leaders of men, joyous and gracious, the glory of 
your name and reputation is irresistible. It is for that I 
accept and elect you. For that dedication of yours to the 
Lord of light and grandeur, blessed man, all hail and 
success to you! This is the divine voice. 


50. (Prajapatis Devata, Devas Rshis) 
site a da arr: fus ureisdifz agit a aa 
aides fra uritsdtererckar at da dra fasaat 
zarit firi masè uou 


Usik tvam deva somagneh priyam patho’ pthi 
vasi tvam deva somendrasya priyam patho’ 
pihyasmatsakha tvam deva soma visvesam 
devanam priyam patho 'pihi. 

(Ruler and president of the council), brilliant man 
of peace and honour, loving and lovable, be sure you 
follow the path of love and greatness shown by the 
learned and the wise leaders. 


Brilliant man of generosity and grandeur, self- 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VIII 199 


controlled, be sure you follow the path of love and 
greatness shown by the leaders of power and prosperity. 


Brilliant man of knowledge and grace, friend of 
ours, be sure you follow the path of goodness and virtue 
loved by the noblest and the wisest men of the world. 


51. (Prajapatis Grihasthas Devata, Devas Rshis) 


ge tke tneafie afte ada: caret | oo 
geet at ereutt curar eta | venurdsennd 
dem wemel uu 


Iha ratiriha ramadhvamiha dhrtiriha svadhrtih 

svaha. Upasrjan dharunam matre dharuno 

mataram dhayan. Rayasposamasmasu didharat 
svaha. 

Here in the home is love and joy. Live and rejoice. 

Here is constancy and autonomy. Be here with self- 

control and self-dependency in truth of word and deed. 


Beget a child for the mother, and may the child 
sucking the mother, growing up among us, create wealth 
and provide nourishment and hold it for us all in truth 
of word and action. 


52. (Prajapati Devata, Devas Rshis) 


mesa aenta wdrdiaissmng i 

fed uferearssreurégrrfelara der«eersdifd: ust 
Satrasya’ rddhirasyaganma jyotiramrta’ 
abhuma. Divam prthivya’ adhya ruhamavidama 
devantsvarjyotih. 


You are the wealth and abundance of yajna- 
session. Let us, through this session of yajna, expand 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


200 YAJURVEDA 


over the earth and rise above to reach the lights of 
heaven and attain to immortality. Let us arise and reach 
the regions of space to get super-terrestrial knowledge 
and bring the joys of heaven on earth. 


53. (Grihapatis Devata, Devas Rshis) 


qa aenda uirum at 4: ugemau ahead 
asta maia | gt rare coena Ted erfactanti 
ste eT ufi vp fasadi aui ddie feved: i 
asta: ta: Gust: went: care gant ei: Gara: 
urd: uu 


Yuvam tamindraparvata puroyudha yo nah 
prtanyadapa tantamiddhatam. | Vajrena 
tantamiddhatam. Dure cattaya chantsad 
gahanam yadinaksat. Asmakam $atrunpari Sura 
visvato darma darsista vi$vatah. Bhurbhuvah 
svah suprajah prajabhih syama suvira  viraih 
suposah posaih. 


You two, commander and personnel of the forces, 
front-line fighters, attacking as lighting and defending 
as rock, whosoever attack us with his army, destroy him 
with the thunderbolt. And if the enemy force happen to 
contact us, arise with force and drive them off. Valiant 
hero, all round destroyer of the enemy, eliminate our 
enemies totally from the face of the earth. On the earth, 
in the sky, in heaven, anywhere, let us be strong in 
manpower with brave people, heroic with noble heroes 
rich in food, energy and materials, with plenty of good 
food, energy and materials. (Let us be well-provided: 
justify our existence, defend our self-awareness and 
culture, and work for universal happiness.) 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VIII 201 


54. (Parameshthi Prajapati Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


urmegfseia: wsmdfeenfer euréaramresirsasresd: i 
"ferar ten faraha daret gar Aaa% N 


Paramesthyabhidhitah prajapatirvaci 
vyahrtayamandho' acchetah. Savita sanyam 
visvakarma diksayam pusa somakrayanyam. 


(What is the secret of happiness?) Prajapati, father 
of His creatures, self-existent in eternal bliss, and self- 
revealed in the divine voice of the Veda, worshipped in 
meditation, good food honestly and amply obtained, 
Savita, creator of life realized in truth, Vishwakarma, 
maker of the world and lord giver of science and 
technology, at heart, through all our commitments to life 
and dedication to duty, and Pusha, giver of health and 
vitality thanked in herbal treatment, all this with you, 
and happiness is assured. 


55. (Indra & others Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


serdr fart: fyrfaferz sacremedar faafe: usui 


Indrasca marutasca krayayopotthito'surah 
panyamano mitrah krito visnuh Sipivista’ 
uravasanno visnurnarandhisah. 


(Know the powers of nature, what has been 
realized or ought to be realized by learned men) for 
practical projects : Electricity, earth power, wind, steam 
and cloud so close, magnetic energy that sustains the 
worlds together, universal pranic energy, the unifying 
universal soul immanent in humans and other creatures 
enveloping the whole creation — all to be researched 
and realized with reverence, faith, love, and the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


202 YAJURVEDA 


investment of mind, energy and money — (powers for 
power, and soul for value). 


56. (Vishvedeva Grihasthas Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 
mantr: Grassi ereurssmacemmdsirsfimitz- 
Sool tlasitsdatarafeaatar: is N 


Prohyamanah soma’ agato varuna’ asandya- 
masanno 'gniragnidhra'indro havirddhane’- 
tharvopavahriyamanah. 


Conducted by scientific logic, carried through 
special experiments, and seated in special cars, Soma, 
wealth of energy, power and prosperity, has arrived. 
Varuna, mighty water power, is here. Agni, heat energy, 
is come in special fuels. Indra, electricity, is here potent 
in yajna materials. Atharva, special energy, has arrived. 


57. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


faved qasar ed ferertenfierurssrivareerart-it 
aa: gaat ferui: aaao arg: Waa: vpn: 
ya: | Wpe: geie dadqsit: ino 


Visve deva' am$usu nyupto visnurapritapa’ 
apyayyamano yamah suyamano visnuh 
sambhriyamano vayuh puyamanah sukrah 
putah. sukrah ksira $rir-manthi saktusrih. 


Learned and wise scholars of the world, the energy 
stored in particles and radiated in the sunrays, which is a 
preservative power and source of comfort (Vishnu), the 
explosion of energy from the sun (Yama), the cosmic 
energy being created constantly (Vishnu), the vibrations 
of pranic vitality (Vayu), generative particles of matter 
and energy (shukra), and the pure seeds of life (shukra), 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VIII 203 


anyone who explores and analyses these is blest with 
the secrets of life's existence and nourishment. 


58. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


asad Term: afke srait sraerdur: fiet 
ARTIST: dic di 


Visve deva$camasesunnito 'surhomayodyato 
rudro huyamano vato 'bhyavrto nrcaksah 
pratikhyato bhakso bhaksyamanah pitaro 
narasamsah. 

Learned, wise and generous people of the world, 
those who raised the libations in the ladles for the fire 
and sent up the fragrance to the clouds, who dedicated 
and raised their mind's energy for sacrifice and service, 
who respected and served life as sacred, who spoke in 
praise of the divine omnipresence of the all-seeing eye 
of the Lord of existence, who enjoyed the soothing touch 
of the air around and received the food sanctified by 
yajna, they are the noble and brilliant ‘devas’, learned 
and parental seniors, and reverential friends of humanity. 


59. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 
aa: Respeengerarela: euerssererfaerrur: feret: 
west canister xenfurar wundeifu dreifadiedar 
siter iar uàs sider welfarféreu]sarTerGutr 


yigt us 


Sannah sindhuravabhrthayodyatah samudro'- 
bhyavahriyamanah salilah prapluto yayorojasa 
skabhita rajansi viryebhirviratama Savistha. Ya 
patyete' apratita sahobhirvisnu'aganvaruna 
purvahutau. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


204 YAJURVEDA 


Hosts and participants of yajna who dig, design 
and construct canals for sacramental bath, who launch 
upon the sea for voyaging, who fill the sky with yajna 
vapour, who stabilize people and their regions with their 
power and lustre, who are most heroic with exploits of 
their superior prowess, who are men of constancy and 
forbearance, who are unostentatiously social and 
universally friendly : these venerables are invited and 
welcomed by people. Meet them. Those who do so are 
happy and fortunate. 


60. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


wer adima ur gfdurre aera 
Ramaga ur gfaturme Taq dízreirdsrerareaat 
"qr sieve ei ch ot Ceara ea tr Ta ST o N 


Devan divamagan yajnastato ma dravinamastu 
manusyanantariksamaganyajhtastato ma 
dravinamastu pitrn prthivimaganyajnastato ma 
dravinamastu yam kam ca lokamagan yajnastato 
me bhadramabhut. 


Yajna rises to the heights of heaven and reaches 
the *devas', the powers of light, and may I, from there, 
receive the light and wealth of knowledge. 


Yajna rises to middle regions of the clouds and 
reaches humanity, and may I, from there, receive the 
gifts of material wealth. 


Yajna goes over across the earth and the seasons 
of nature through the year and reaches the senior and 
fatherly people, and may I, from there, receive the 
comforts of the seasons and the blessings of the seniors. 


Whichever region yajna reaches, from there, I 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-VIII 205 


pray, I may receive the gifts of the true, the good and 
the beautiful. 


61. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


adayda à felafert asset engresvererar ad 
cat foma carat qHtssrat Wem use 


Catustrim$attantavo ye vitatnire ya’ imam 
yajnam svadhaya dadante. Tesam chinnam 
samvetaddadhami svaha gharmo’ apyetu devan. 


Thirty four fibres (eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, 
twelve Adityas, Indra, Prajapati and Nature) join, weave 
and extend this yajnic web of creation, and feed it with 
materials. And where nature leaves off, there, surely, I 
take it on with the truth of word and action. And, I pray, 
this yajna reach the devas, the learned and the wise. 


62. (Yajna Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


mu diet feda: yen dissteen fadada | 
a da yea fe A usratescaene farany 
Carat eeu 


Yajnasya doho vitatah purutra so’ astadha 
divamanvatatana. Sa yajna dhuksva mahi me 
prajayam rayasposam visvamayuraStya svaha. 


The gifts of yajna spread out in many ways. They 
expand in all the eight directions and reach the heights 
of heaven. 


That same yajna may bless my people with great 
wealth and nourishments. And may I, with sacred speech 
and good acts of Dharma, enjoy the blessing of a full and 
happy life. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


206 YAJURVEDA 


63. (Yajna Devata, Kashyapa Rshi) 


am derer feXusreasdecdi edad i 
art miam xem e301 


A pavasva hiranyavadasvavatsoma viravat. 
Vajam gomantamabhara svaha. 


Soma, man desirous of the honour and joy of life, 
man of gold, speed and brave heroes, dedicate yourself 
to yajna, treasure-home of universal nourishment, cows 
and self-control over mind and senses. Cleanse yourself, 
cleanse the environment, and enrich the world. 


sta ateutseara: di 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IX 207 


CHAPTER-IX 
1.  (Savita Devata, Indra & Brihaspati Rshis) 


ad ufaa: wda ua weder aadi ante 1 fee 
tread: cag: end ouem arereutdalst a: taad 
azt ngu 


Deva savitah prasuva yajnam prasuva yajna- 
patim bhagaya. Divyo gandharvah ketapuh 
ketam nah. punatu vacaspatirvajam nah svadatu 
svaha. 

Deva Savita, lord of life, light the yajna (of Raj 
Dharma), consecrate and promote yajna, inspire, 
consecrate and promote the yajnapati (ruler of the land) 
for honour and prosperity. Brilliant sustainer of the earth, 
lord of the divine voice, purifier of intelligence, purify 
and inspire our intelligence with the divine voice of Veda. 
Generous purifier of food, purify and consecrate our 
yajnic food and taste it with favour and pleasure. 


2. (Indra Devata, Brihaspati Rshi) 


gaad ver Ted maada Asah var sm 
pg tw a ated war wpedu | sTUgHd war 
aud einmadquandétirszir-ier car red rare 
a diate car aay uferferad. carssafvaraad 
fafererd serae ARRAS ASH AT var sped 
Teas a ELE LE ECL car aS Rt 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


208 YAJURVEDA 


Dhruvasadam tva nrsadam manahsadam- 
upayamagrhito 'sindraya tva justam grhnamye- 
sa te yonirindraya tva justatamam. Apsusadam 
tva ghrtasadam vyomasadam-upayamagrhito’- 
sindraya tva justam grhnamyesa te yanirindraya 
tva justatamam. Prthivisadam tva’ntariksa- 
sadam divisadam devasadam nakasadam- 
upayamagrhito’ sindraya tva justam grhnamye- 
sa te yonirindraya tva justatamam. 


Ruler of the land, firmly settled (with knowledge, 
humility, yoga and Dharma) among the people, in their 
heart and awareness, you are accepted and consecrated 
in the rules and discipline of the state for the honour 
and prosperity of the people. Loved and thus accepted, 
I accept and elect you. This office now is your very life 
and purpose. Most highly loved and respected, you are 
now dedicated to Indra, honour and prosperity of the 
people. 


Ruler of the country, saddled with the 
management of water, food (milk, ghee and other 
nourishments), and aviation, you are accepted by the 
people by virtue of your discipline and respect for law 
and constitution of the nation for the defence and honour 
of the people. Loved and respected thus, I accept and 
elect you. This office now is your very life and existence. 
Most highly loved and respected, you are now 
committed to the honour and glory of the nation. 


President of the nations of the world, committed 
as you are to the earth and its environment, to the skies, 
to exploration of space, powers of nature and the brilliant 
people, and the freedom and happiness of humanity, 
you are accepted and consecrated by the people of the 
world in the universal Dharma and nation's law for 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IX 209 


absolute freedom and prosperity of the people of the 
world. Accepted, loved and respected thus, I accept and 
elect you. This office and its Dharma now is the very 
meaning and purpose of your existence. Most highly 
loved, respected and elected, we commit and dedicate 
you to the honour and prosperity of humanity and to 
the glory of the Lord of the universe. 


3. (Indra Devata, Brihaspati Rshi) 


amagang webeuurfédu | arae 
a vere at aeaa sata car ud 
Taras cp AAR cam wea usd 


Apam rasamudvayasam surye santam sama- 
hitam. Apam rasasya yo rasastam vo grhna- 
myuttamamupayamagrhito 'sindraya tva justam 
grhnamyesa te yonirindraya tva justatamam. 


For the sake of Indra, lord of glory, and for you, 
I take the life-giving essence of the waters (juices) 
collected and ripened in the sun. And I take the finest 
essence of the essences of waters and hold the 
quintessence of vitality for the glow of health and life. 


By virtue of your discipline and values and the 
means at your command, you are accepted and 
consecrated for the sake of honour and prosperity of 
the nation. Loved and respected as you are, I accept 
and elect you. This choice and consecration is now your 
haven and home. Most loved and respected, you are 
now committed and dedicated to the glory of Indra and 
his people. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


210 YAJURVEDA 


4. (Raja, Rajadharma Devata, Brihaspati Rshi) 
metssiga cmt fanta wferg i orari fatto 
ascarid seiates ver wr 
"grew c amigas ver wa | wget ta: E 
at «Gub wx fagat eet fa at ert gs isu 


Graha' urjahutayo vyanto vipraya matim. Tesam 
visipriyanam vo'hamisamurjain samagrabham 
upayamagrhito'sindraya tva justam grhnamye- 
sa te yonirindraya tva justatamam. Samprcau 
sthah sam ma bhadrena prnktam viprcau stho 
vi ma papmana prnktam. 


Men and women of the land, who have collected 
strength and energy from yajna-ahutis and knowledge 
from the Vedas, communicate with the intelligent and 
the inspired people and share with them the common 
wisdom. For you and the dear members of their 
community, I have procured ample food and energy. 


With means and materials for the nation, you are 
accepted and consecrated in the laws and values of the 
nation for the honour and prosperity of the people. 
Loved of the people and favourite of the Lord as you 
are, I accept and elect you. This nation and this choice 
now is your haven and home. Most loved and honoured, 
you are now totally committed and dedicated to Indra, 
lord of the people, the land and the world. 


Ruler and the people, remain united for good 
work. Join me to goodness and prosperity. Stay away 
from evil, both of you. Keep us away from the evil- 
minded. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IX 211 


5. (Savita Devata, Brihaspati Rshi) 
weg aa ste asrareaaisa asta | arsteat 4 
Wee urat adie ara acter eni bif 
fave yihad ade at da: dam at 
Sree tus t 


Indrasya vajro’si vajasastvaya 'yam vajam set. 
Vajasya nu prasave mataram mahimaditim 
nama vacasa karamahe. Yasyamidam visvam 
bhuvanamavivesa tasyam no devah savita 
dharma savisat. 


You are the thunder-bolt of lightning for the enemy. 
This man, the commander/ruler would plan and win the 
battle with you, the thunderous hero. In the business of 
the battle we sing songs of praise, in noble words, in 
honour of the mother, the great earth, one and indivisible. 
On the earth where this whole world finds its haven and 
home, on that same earth, we pray, Lord Savita, creator 
of the world, may establish the rule of universal Dharma 
for us. 


6.  (Ashva Devata, Brihaspati Rshi) 


aaar Aara ustiiqerger seta arise: 
ah at dsafa: wdfd: wapata 
ars GN 


Apsvantaramrtamapsu bhesajamapamuta 
prasastisvas$va bhavata vajinah. Devirapo yo va’ 
urmih praturtih kakunman vajasastenayam 
vajam set. 
There is nectar in the waters, there is vitality of 
health and longevity in the pranas. There is magical drug 
power in the waters, top efficacy by which horses 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


212 YAJURVEDA 


become coursers flying like feathered arrows. Sacred 
waters, may this man, ruler of the land, by virtue of 
your fertile waves, moving fast and lofty, provide the 
land and people with wanted food and energy. Men and 
women of the land, with your power and prowess, fast, 
lofty and tempestuous like the waves of the sea, with 
the vitality of your pranic energy, and the fertility and 
efficacy of the waters, be fast, passionate and ambitious 
for the honour and progress of the land in war and peace 
both. 


7. (Senapati Devata, Brihaspati Rshi) 
arat ar wat at rere: aeafeteorfa: od 
ASsTISVe TSS ATS FT: WOU 
Vato va mano va gandharvah saptavimsatih. Te’ 
agre’ Svamayunjamste’ asmin javamadadhuh. 


Twenty-seven gandharvas (universal wind, the 
mind and five main pranas, five subpranas, five organs 
of sense, five organs of volition, and five subtle 
elements) these possess and operate with speed in nature. 
May these bless this man, commander of the forces, 
with speed. 


8. (Prajapati Devata, Brihaspati Rshi) 


adie wa ahr qonasa afao: 
faraft | qos wat eal fasadausen a ret 


Ug we Sarg ud 


Vataramha bhava vajinyujyamana 'indrasyeva 
daksinah $riyaidhi. Yunjantu tva maruto 
visvavedasa’ a te tvasta patsu javam dadhatu. 


Ruler, swift in response and action, be as fast as 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IX 213 


the speed of wind, be efficient and expert, concentrative 
in the service of the nation, move and achieve honour 
and glory as that of Indra, lord of the world. May the 
Maruts, universal winds (men of encyclopaedic 
knowledge), and Twashta, lord of refinement and 
sophistication (the specialist) inspire your feet with 
instant speed of motion. 


9. (Vira Devata, Brihaspati Rshi) 


ret ud emfsrfafedr per a: var udludrssrebtet 
ad iat a ai aca ach emefsres va 
ee a ore: verfstar aria arstcafiterar 
seeadubrmdisrrag us u 


Javo yaste vajinnihito guha yah $yene paritto’ 
acaracca vate. Tena no vajin balavan balena 
vajajicca bhava samane ca parayisnuh. Vajino 
vajajito vajam sarisyanto brhaspater- 
bhagamavajighrata. 


Man of power and speed (Vajin), man of 
knowledge and ruler of the land, the speed and passion 
that’s deep in your heart, that’s entered in the wings of 
the eagle and in the velocity of the wind, by that speed 
and passion, man of power and prowess, be the victor 
of battles, and through fight and struggle, cross the 
sufferings of life and the land. 


Warriors of the land, fighting and doing your duty 
in the service of the protector of a great people, winning 
battles and achieving plenty and prosperity, taste the 
fragrance of the sweets of life. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


214 YAJURVEDA 


10. (Indra and Brihaspati Devate, Brihaspati Rshi) 
wear na a pee 
aeea | gaene: wat uada 
qeurdiwdH aneza | aeea: ue 
enueuszseluWw ATHASSA oN 


Devasyaham savituh save satyasavaso 
brhaspateruttamam nākam | ruheyam. 
Devasyaham savituh save satyasavasa 'indra- 
syottamam nakam ruheyam. Devasyaham 
savituh save satyaprasavaso brhaspateruttamam 
nakamaruham. Devasyaham savituh save 
satyaprasavasa’ indrasyottamam nakama- 
ruham. 


In this yajnic creation of glorious Savita, Lord of 
light and life, may I ascend to the highest heaven of 
freedom, knowledge and divine realization by the grace 
of Brihaspati, great and inviolable lord of truth and 
existence. 


In this yajnic creation of glorious Savita, Lord of 
light and life, may I ascend to the highest heaven of 
freedom, justice and prosperity by the grace of Indra, 
inexorable lord of truth, justice and magnificence. 


In this yajnic creation of glorious Savita, Lord of 
light and life, I have risen to the highest realization of 
freedom, knowledge and divine presence by the grace 
of Brihaspati, great and generous lord promoter of truth 
and existence. 


In this yajnic creation of glorious Savita, Lord of 
light and life, I have risen to the highest realization of 
freedom, justice and prosperity by the grace of Indra, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IX 215 


generous and unfailing Lord promoter of truth, justice 
and magnificence. 


11. (Indra and Brihaspati Devate, Brihaspati Rshi) 


gad ast wa ggeda art cad agafà 
ant saad | sg ant wera art ede ant 
STATA Nl I 


Brhaspate vajam jaya brhaspataye vacam 
vadata brhaspatim vajam japayata. Indra vajam 
jayendraya vacam vadatendram vajam japayata. 


Brihaspati, leader and master of knowledge and 
enlightenment, fight and win the battle for knowledge 
and education. Teachers and scholars, proclaim, speak 
and teach the language of knowledge for the ruler, and 
help him to fight and win the battle. 


Indra, ruler, leader and admirer of knowledge and 
enlightenment, fight the battle against ignorance. 
Scholars and teachers, proclaim, speak and teach the 
language of enlightenment for the ruler and make him 
win the battle for education. 


12. (Indra and Brihaspati Devate, Brihaspati Rshi) 
TIT a: HT Gat Gary sre ets erermsttsraarstt- 
wad sexui ani ateraat febrem] d WaT a: 
a Gen dari”, emermitsrqarsttsradeg ars 
wien: feniersenmp 12 211 


Esa vah sa satya samvagabhudyaya brhaspatim 
vajamajijapatajijapata brhaspatim vajam 
vanaspatayo vimucyadhvam. Esa vah sa satya 
samvagabhudyayendram vajamajijapatajija- 
patendram vajam vanaspatayo vimucyadhvam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


216 YAJURVEDA 


Men bright as sunbeams, this national language 
of yours should be true, good, common and one by 
which Brihaspati, ruler of the great land and leader of 
education and enlightenment may win the battle of unity 
and education. Men of plenty and abundance, cooperate 
and help Brihaspati win the battle and free the nation 
from ignorance, disunity and suffering. 

Men bright as sunbeams, the language of yours 
should be true, good, common and one by which Indra, 
lord of national glory, may win his battle. Men of plenty 
and abundance, cooperate and help Indra win the battle 
and free the nation from ignorance and suffering. 


13. (Savita Devata, Brihaspati Rshi) 


serere dad: wer ueniunt ageadatarar erst 
wr d aR arstistdised Ghee Isr 
feat: mret esa 231 

Devasyaham savituh save satyaprasavaso 
brhaspatervajajito vajam jesam. Vajino vajajito '- 
dhvana skabhnuvanto yojana mimanah kastham 
gacchata. 

In the world, the cosmic yajna of Savita, Lord of 
light and life, the great lord creator and promoter of 
truth, Brihaspati, victor of wars I wish and pray I may 
win the battles of life. 

Great warriors, winners of battles, stem the routes 
of the enemy's advance, and, crossing leagues of virgin 
territory, spread over the directions. 


14. (Brihaspati Devata, Dadhikrava Rshi) 
wq ee esit fataftr quate wrarat srarsatfüensrs- 
start | wd aesa mafaa 
erature carat ues 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IX 217 


Esa sya vaji ksipanim turanyati grivayam 
baddho' apikaksa' asani. Kratum dadhikra' anu 
samsanisyadatpathamankams yanvapani-phanat 
svaha. 

Just as that horse, tied neck, flanks and mouth, 
still galloping past the distance-marks and hurdles on 
its course, carries the rider to the battle, similarly this 
warrior, in spite of all the hurdles in his path, passionate 
and impetuous in the business (yajna) of battle, 
commands his soldiers in the sacred voice of truth, to 
pounce upon the enemy. 


15. (Brihaspati Devata, Dadhikrava Rshi) 
Sq ue giau: uut ardarfa wate: à 
vated sarga ufi aint: were did: 
mgt ngun " 


Uta smasya dravatasturanyatah parnam na 
veranuvati pragardhinah. Syenasyeva dhrajato’ 
ankasam pari dadhikravnah sahorja taritratah 
svaha. 

The warrior who, like a bird on the wing, eager, 
hastening, pressing on, sweeping, and pouncing upon 
its prey like an eagle, presses on the flanks of his flying 
horse, and sweeping on and closing upon the enemy, 
exhorts his cohorts with passion in the true voice, wins 
the battle. 


16. (Brihaspati Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 
wat aq ast esu gaala fraga: wee: | 
mma gatas vrherereireramíter: ugs 


Sanno bhavantu vajino havesu devatata 
mitadravah svarkah. Jambhayanto him vrkam’ 
raksamsi sanemyasmadyuyavannamivah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


218 YAJURVEDA 


Passionate but controlled, brilliant, esteemed and 
well-maintained warriors with their horses, swift in 
action, seizing by the neck the serpents, wolves and 
demons of the society, be good and auspicious to us, 
saving us from social pollution and giving us lasting 
peace and security in the noble men's yajnas and battles 
of life for development and progress. 


17. (Brihaspati Devata, Nabhanedishtha Rshi) 


X Asada wars we fed sag art 
facta: ierra Herat aera wer 3r erteufird 
wT ngon 


Te no’arvanto havanasruto havam visve 
Srnvantu vajino mitadravah. Sahasrasa 
medhasata sanisyavo maho ye dhanam 
samithesu jabhrire. 


Men of knowledge, wisdom and vision, dynamic 
and self-disciplined, expert men of a thousand themes 
and subjects, who have heard and meditated on the 
shastras, who deserve,desire, offer and receive their 
share in the national yajna, may all listen to our 
suggestions and prayers in national projects and may 
promote and maintain our great wealth and honour. 


18. (Brihaspati Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 
antamisad ast at ty femmssTHaTscEuT: | 
am Hed: fuer mada qum ata ufafiida- 
art: ngen 


Vaje-vaje' vata vajino no dhanesu vipra' amrta’ 
rtajnah. Asya madhvah pibata madayadhvam 
trpta yata pathibhirdevayanaih. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IX 219 


Heroes of the land, defend us in battle after battle. 
Men of virtue and wisdom, free and immortal in nature 
and character, visionaries of eternal truth and universal 
law, protect and promote us in our wealth and honour, 
drink of the nectar sweets of this life to your heart's 
content, rejoice, and, by the paths of the noble and the 
great men of the world, go forward. 


19. (Prajapati Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 
3T Hr ante wert shreres eretufe2ret fasa 
am Hb wet faat ura or our Asera 
Tard Maths astral ankaganresa sreud- 
wahrditga Fast: 990 


A mà vájasya prasavo jagamyademe dyava- 
prthivi vi$évaruüpe. A mà gantam pitara mātarā 
ca ma somo’ amrtattvena gamyat. Vajino 
vajajito vajam sasrvanso brhaspaterbhagama- 
vajighrata nimrjanah. 

May the knowledge of the Vedas and shastras 
come to me. May the knowledge and wealth of the 
boundless forms of earth and heaven come to me. May 
the fatherly and motherly seniors bless me. May the 
secrets of soma herb with the gift of health and longevity 
open to me. Heroes of the land, victors of wars, tempered 
and purified, fight the battles and do your part of service 
and honour to Prajapati, great lord and guardian spirit 
of this earth. 


20. (Prajapati Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


saa rgt veru caretfrsra tare sade Carer 
ada caretsedda ee preme caret et 
evra tet fearertssirereara AETS- 
blu sirena emer Yee uda vermersfiluau 
vera mon 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


220 YAJURVEDA 


Apaye svaha svapaye svaha'pijaya svaha 
kratave svaha vasave svaha’harpataye svaha'- 
hne mugdhaya svaha mugdhaya vainamSinaya 
svaha vinamsina’ antyayanaya svaha"ntyaya 
bhauvanaya svaha bhuvanasya pataye svaha'- 
dhipataye svaha. 


For comprehensive knowledge, honest work; for 
universal happiness, virtuous action ; for sure success, 
relentless effort; for creative intelligence, ceaseless 
study; for the expression of knowledge, living language; 
for lord of the day, sun, astronomy; for the glorious 
dawn of the day, science; for the self-deluded fool, words 
of warning; for the self-destructive mean, reformative 
advice; for the earthly born eternal soul, vision of reality; 
for vision of the Lord ofthe universe, divine intelligence; 
for honour to the President, language and manners of 
protocol. 


21. (Yajna Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


aiit acer wort cud acum umida 
wat aera | ward: wsisstsya TAFTS TTA- 
"HalssTSpH 03? 


Ayuryajnena kalpatam prano yajnena kalpatam- 
caksuryajnena kalpataim $rotram yajnena 
kalpatam prstham yajnena kalpatam yajno 
yajnena kalpatam. Prajapateh praja’ abhuma 
svardeva’ aganmamrta’abhuma. 


May your life grow strong and stable by yajna, 
obedience to Ishwara; may your vitality grow stronger 
by yajna, pursuit of knowledge; may your eye grow in 
vision by yajna, right seeing; may your ear grow in 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IX 221 


hearing by yajna, hearing the sacred voice; may your 
faculty of enquiry grow efficient by yajna, mutual 
dialogue; may your yajna — reverence, society and 
charity — grow by yajna, performance in action. 


May we continue to be the children of Prajapati, 
father of humanity (and of the ruler of the nation). May 
we become noble and virtuous and attain eternal 
freedom, happiness and immortality. 


22. (Dishah Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


at atsara Pura vendre aciesfa 
eq a: 1 aat unà dived vat aa dienssa d 
Tera ast gatsfa eect: | per cat aata 
cat TA car Aaa vem dus 


Asme vo’ astvindriyamasme nrmnamuta kratu- 
rasme varcansi santu vah. Namo matre prthivyai 
namo matre prthivya’ iyam te radyantasi 
yamano dhruvo'si dharunah. Krsyai tva 
ksemaya tva rayyai tva posaya tva. 

May our mind and perception, power and force, 
be for you and yours for us; all our wealth, thought and 
action, brilliance and achievement be yours, and yours 
for us. Reverence to the mother earth. The wealth and 
glory of the earth is yours for the mother. You are for 
the mother, for farming, for protection and growth, for 
production of wealth, for health and nourishment. You 
are the leader, disciplined controller, firm and constant, 
support of all, for the mother. 


23. (Prajapati Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 
ated daa: AAA urmevrsen-Hrdeireru 


asama neia errore ener uer: 
Carat us31 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


222 YAJURVEDA 


Vajasyemam prasavah susuve'gre somam 
rajanamosadhisvapsu. Ta' asmabhyam 
madhumatirbhavantu vayain rastre jagryama 
purohitah svaha. 
This illustrious creator of the food of yajna, the 
Sun, first generated the shining soma, vitality, in the 
herbs and waters. May these waters and herbs be honey- 
sweet invigorating for us and we remain wakeful and 
watchful in the front ranks of the realm with noble 
speech and virtuous acts. 


24. (Prajapati Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


erster tea: RRA fadi at fasa sear 
"ure | rfe arate wsmaeu at trad at 


Paes Carat usw 


Vajasyemam prasavah Sisriye divamima ca vi$va 
bhuvanani samrat. Aditsantam dapayati 
prajanantsa no rayim sarvaviram niyacchatu 
svaha. 

The illustrious generator of the food of yajna fills 
the heavens and all the regions of the world with light 
and therein abides. That glorious lord/ruler, knowing 
well the evaders of oblations/taxes, makes them give/ 
pay their share of the yajna/social yajna of the land. 


25. (Prajapati Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 
erste 4 Wee siretsyaar at fasar years weid:i 
wet ust ufzurfa faga wet oft ersidurdrssrar 
Caveat usw 


Vajasya nu prasava a babhuvema ca visva 
bhuvanani sarvatah. Sanemi raja pariyati vidvan 
prajam pustim vardhayamano 'asme svaha. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IX 223 


The illustrious creator of the food of yajna pervades 
all the regions of the world/land wholly and from all sides. 
That lord/ruler, master of eternal knowledge, increasing 
and promoting the material wealth and human resources 
(people) of the nation provides total protection all round. 


26. (Soma, Agni, Aditya, Vishnu, Surya, Brihaspati Devata, 
Tapasa Rshi) 


rerstauedasfieu-muméi 
arera genet a agertactarat ues 


Somam rajanamavase’ gnimanvarabhamahe. 
Adityanvisnum suryam brahmanam ca 
brhaspatim svaha. 


Let us, in truth of word and deed, follow the ruler, 
man of auspicious virtue, sun-like brilliant scholar of 
the Vedas, guardian of the noble seniors of wisdom, 
and aditya-brahmacharis of 48 years, and, by the grace 
of Vishnu, omnipresent lord of the world, let us begin 
the action. 


27. (Aryama & Others Devata, Tapasa Rshi) 


san gerade” «ru eu | 
ard fanretcadiesafaat er arisrastatet wee 


Aryamanam brhaspatimindram danaya codaya. 
Vacam visnum sarasvatim savitaram ca vajinam 
svaha. 

O ruler, for the sake of growth with creative 
contribution to life and happiness (dana), in truth of 
word and deed, and as a matter of principle and policy: 
protect, promote and exhort Aryama, the man of justice, 
Brihaspati, the man of knowledge, and Indra, the man 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


224 YAJURVEDA 


of honour and prowess. Protect and promote the study 
of sacred literature and language of knowledge. Advance 
the man of universal honour and recognition (Vishnu). 
Protect and promote women of knowledge and vision 
(Saraswati). Honour the brilliant man of light and 
creativity (Savita), and recognize and encourage the man 
of instant response and swooping action (vajin). 


28. (AgniDevata, Tapasa Rshi) 
amiserat ade a: Wid A: Gaal va | 
Ww at eres Gea wate shrarsorfa verat ren 


Agne’accha vadeha nah prati nah sumana 
bhava. Pra no yaccha sahasrajit tvaim hi 
dhanada' asi svaha. 


Lord of the land/world, Agni, be kind and generous 
to us and, in truth of word and thought, give us the 
message of knowledge and wisdom for all. Vanquisher 
of a thousand adversaries, you alone are the generous 
giver of wealth. Be gracious, lord, and bless us with all 
we need for fulfilment. 


29. (Aryama & Others Devata, Tapasa Rshi) 
Ut asada Ww WT OU agent: | 
u endet garg a: caret us 


Pra no yacchatvaryama pra pusa pra 
brhaspatih. Pra vagdevi dadatu nah svaha. 


May Aryama, man of justice (Kshatriya) give us 
justice for all. May Pusha (Vaishya), producer of food 
and wealth, give us food and prosperity. May Brihaspati 
(Brahmana) man of knowledge, wisdom and virtue, give 
us knowledge and the sacred word. And may the pious 
and brilliant women of knowledge and vision give us 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IX 225 


instruction in the meaning of life and conduct. All these 
and all this be in truth of word and action. 


30. (Samrat Devata, Tapasa Rshi) 


dene vor wrferq: tasaa vet eri wearer 
mad aret ata eer seeder aA- 
mAr arae uo 


Devasya tva savituh prasave ’svinorbahubhyam 
pusno hastabhyam.  Sarasvatyai vaco 
yanturyantriye dadhami brhaspatestva 
samrajyenabhisincamyasau. 

In this world of Lord Savita's creation, with the 
arms of the Ashwinis, that is, with the fiery brilliance of 
the sun and the soothing serenity of the moon, with the 
hands of Pusha, that is, with the nourishment and 
sustenance of the vital air, I anoint and consecrate you 
as the illustrious ruler of the land for the advancement 
of language and literature in the service of Saraswati 
(learning), for the promotion of science and technology, 
and invest you with the earthly regality of Brihaspati, 
the glorious lord of the mighty world. 


31. (Agni etc. Devata, Tapasa Rshi) 


Agnirekaksarena pranamudajayattamujjesama- 
$vinau dvyaksarena dvipado manusyanu- 
dajayatam tanujjesam visnustryaksarena 
trinllokanudajayattanujjesam somascatu- 
raksarena  catuspadah pasunudajaya- 
ttanujjesam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


226 YAJURVEDA 


Agni, with one akshara, syllable, Om and Gayatri 
verse conquered prana, vitality. So should I win that. 
(The ruler, bright as Agni, should win the heart of the 
people with good policies and advance them. So should 
the people support him). 


The Ashwinis, sun and moon, with two-syllabic 
Ushnik verse, conquered the bipeds, humans. So should 
I win them. (The ruler and his officers should help and 
support the people. So should the people support them). 


Vishnu, with three-syllabic Ushnik verse, 
conquered the three worlds. So should I win them. (The 
ruler, like Vishnu, should win and promote the regions 
with a name, a history and a location, and so should the 
regions support him). 


Soma, with four-syllabic Brihati verse conquered 
the quadrupeds, animals. So should I win them (the ruler, 
eager for honour, should protect and promote the 
animals, wild as well as domestic. So should the people). 


32. (Pushaetc. Devatas, Tapasa Rshi) 
QNT UsTel Wo faytssdsraemsovshrenferat 


Pusa pancaksarena panca disa’ udajayatta’ 
ujjesam  savita sadaksarena sadrtunuda- 
jayattanujjesam marutah saptaksarena sapta 
gramyan pasunudajayanstanujjesam brha- 
spatirastaksarena gayatrimudajayattam- 
ujjesam. 


Pusha, the moon, with five-syllable Pankti verse, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IX 227 


won and sustains the five directions (east, west, north, 
south and up and down), so should I win and support 
them. (The ruler should maintain and sustain nature in 
all directions and so should the people support the ruler 
and preserve nature). 


Savita, the sun, with six-syllable Trishtup verse, 
generates and lights the six seasons, so should I light 
and enrich them. (The ruler should keep the seasons of 
nature clean and unpolluted, and so should the people.) 


The Maruts, winds, with seven-syllable Jagati 
verse sustain and support seven domestic animals. So 
should I protect and promote them. (The ruler should 
protect and promote the domestic animals, and the 
people should support the ruler and promote animal life.) 


Brihaspati, lord of the divine voice and knowledge, 
with eight-syllable yajushi anushtup verse conquered 
gayatri. So should I too master and serve that. (The ruler 
of the people should honour and preserve value-based 
policy of governance and administration and the people 
should support the ruler and maintain the policies of value 
and the values of right policies.) 


33. (Mitra & Others Devatas, Tapasa Rshi) 


fat vatertur Aaaa ash 
amta fenrenpésrranpestufa-zsuentavmantur 
Beug fave gar grasmarur srt- 
FSSA FSa 033 


Mitro navaksarena trivrttam stomamuda- 
jayattamujjesam varuno da$aksaren viraja- 
mudajayattamujjesamindra’ ekadasaksarena 
tristubhamudajayattamujjesam vi$ve deva 
dvadasaksarena jagatimudajayanstamujjesam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


228 YAJURVEDA 


Mitra, universal friend of all, with nine-syllable 
yajushi brihati verse, won the three dimensional yajna 
of knowledge, action and worship. I too should 
accomplish the same. (The ruler should live an 
enlightened life of action and piety, and every citizen 
should follow the ruler and support him.) 

Varuna, the Supreme, worthy of choice, with the 
ten-syllable yajushi pankti verse, conquered the spirit 
and content of Virat, policy of sovereignty. I too should 
realize the same. 

(The ruler should honour the sovereignty of his 
office, commit himself to policies of eternal values and 
be the guardian of his people. The people should honour 
and follow him in his foot-steps.) 

Indra, Lord of glory, with eleven-syllable asurya 
pankti verse, won the spirit and content of trishtup, and 
I should realize the same. 

(The ruler should pursue the values and policies 
of magnanimity and excellence, and the people should 
emulate and support him.) 

Vishve-devas, noble spirits of the world, with 
twelve-syllable gayatri verse, realized the spirit and 
content of jagati, and I should realize the same. 

(The ruler should commit himself to the highest 
policies of social life and universal good, and the people 
should follow and support him.) 


34. (Vasus and Others Devatas, Tapasa Rshi) 


STWTRSITRREUT rasa erate | usw 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IX 229 


Vasavastrayodasaksarena trayodasam stomam- 
udajayan stamujjesam rudrascaturdas-aksarena 
caturdasamstomamudajayanstamujjesamadityah 
pancadasaksarena pancadasam stomam- 
udajayanstamujjesamaditih sodasa-ksarena 
sodasam stomamudajayattamujjesam praja- 
patih saptadasaksarena saptadasam stomam- 
udajayttamujjesam. 


Vasus, brahmacharis of the 24 year order of study 
and training, with 13 syllable asuri-anushtup verse, have 
achieved the 13-point programme of life (i.e., ten pranic 
energies, jiva or soul, creative nature or mahat-tattva, 
and original/virtual nature). So should I achieve the 
same. 


Rudras, brahmacharis of 44 year order of study 
and training, with 14 syllable samniushnik verse, have 
achieved the 14 point programme of life (i.e., ten organs 
of perception and volition, mind, intellect, memory and 
the sense of individual self). So should I achieve the 
same. 


Adityas, brahmacharis of 48 years of study and 
training, with 15 syllable asuri-gayatri verse, have 
achieved the 15 point programme of life, (i.e., four 
Vedas, four sub-vedas, six auxiliary studies, and 
practical expertise). So should I achieve the same. 


Aditi, Great-Council of Governance, with 16 
syllable samni anushtup verse, has achieved the 16 point 
programme of life, (i.e., sixteen steps/constituents of 
the science of logic). So should I achieve the same. 


Prajapati, ruler of the nation, with 17 syllable 
nichrid-arshi gayatri verse, has achieved the 17 point 
programme of life (i.e., four varnas, four ashramas, four 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


230 YAJURVEDA 


steps of study, four steps of asset building, and final 
freedom. So should I achieve the same. 


Note: In the four mantras above, from 31 to 34, a 
comprehensive programme of living has been given for 
the ruler and the people, of any locality, region, country 
or, in fact, of the world. It ranges from a one-point 
programme to 17 point programme. The whole 
programme is summarized below :- 


1. Om (one - syllable Word, the one essential 
name of God, Ishwara), the One and Only One Supreme 
Lord of the universe who creates, sustains and ultimately 
withdraws the world of existence: This is the Word, 
Akshara, eternal, imperishable, constant Reality which 
is Existent, Omniscient, Omnipresent, Omnipotent, just 
and merciful, infinite and of infinite power and bliss. 
The one-point programme is: His service and worship 
and the service of His creation. 


2. The service of humanity, the bipeds. 


3. Name, history (birth and the course of life/ 
existence) and location of any community, nation, or 
region, the service of the same. 


4. The service, protection and development of 
the life of the quadrupeds, the animals, wild and 
domestic. 


5. The service, protection, cleaning and 
development of the environment in all the five directions 
(east, west, north, south and up and down). 


6. The service of nature and the environment in 
all the six seasons of the year. 


7. '[he service, promotion and development of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IX 231 


the seven classes of animals: cow, horse, buffalo, camel, 
goat, sheep, and pony. 

8. Practice of an eight-point social policy in the 
service of the community and the country to be 
positively worked out for development, i.e., yajna, and 
not for mere power display. 

9. Nine orders or qualities of worship, action 
and knowledge, three each, the orders being high, 
middling and low (noble and saintly, average and 
human, and selfish and negative/evil and devilish). 


10. Practice of a ten-point political policy of 
service and development in a positive and progressive 
direction. 

11. Practice of an eleven-point policy of service 
and development in a positive and progressive direction. 

12. Practice of a twelve-point policy of service 
and development of the community and the 
environment. 


The points are to be worked out by the 
enlightened ruler and the enlightened people in mutual 
cooperation in the local context with reference to the 
past, present and the future. 


13-17 have been explained in mantra no. 34 above. 


35. (Vishvedeva Devata, Varuna Rshi) 
We d Pad rei cara verersficiavur deu: 
yama: venei mA dg: fnr uai: 
mrt fasadaraeat da. usureqaiz: taet 
faaho em mesa ar geez ssa eat: 
wal Hugs Assas were: 
wemel nuu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


232 YAJURVEDA 


Esa te nirrte bhagastam jusasva svaha'- 
gninetrebhyo devebhyah purahsadbhyah svaha 
yamanetrebhyo devebhyo daksinasadbhyah 
svaha visvadevanetrebhyo devebhyah pascat- 
sadbhyah svaha mitravarunanetrebhyo va 
marunnetrebhyo va devebhya’ uttarasadbhyah 
svaha somanetrebhyo devebhya’ uparisadbhyo 
duvasvadbhyah svaha. 


Man of felicity beyond reproach, this is your share 
of Raj Dharma, governance, administration and service 
of the republic, your power-and-responsibility, assets- 
and-liabilities integrated. Serve it with words and acts 
of truth. Serve it with words and acts of Dharma, by the 
noble people of the very eyes and leadership of light 
and fire sitting in front of you in the council. 


Serve it with words and acts of charity, by the 
people of the speed and guidance of the wind itself on 
your right side. 


Serve it with words and acts of courage, by the 
noble people of the eyes and leadership of the world 
heroes on your back. 


Serve it with words and acts of saints and sages 
of knowledge and wisdom, by the noble people of the 
eyes and leadership of the best, the friendliest, the wisest 
and the most dynamic yajnic souls of the nation on your 
left side. 


Serve it with words and acts of peace and love 
under the protective bliss of the noble people of the 
light and leadership of the soothing serenity of the moon 
itself, servants of knowledge, humility, Dharma and 
Ishwara. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IX 233 


36. (Vishvedeva Devata, Varuna Rshi) 
à garsa Ran: rsen: Talal À dem Baar 
eara mHe rp: taal 3p ear feeder: asad 
Weer: xerer cp car anado at edat 
Aamar: tater À dar: adAarssufiaet 
weder: Cavat sen 


Ye deva’ agninetrah purahsadastebhyah svaha 
ye deva yamanetra daksinasadastebhyah svaha 
ye deva visvadevanetrah pascatsadastebhyah 
svaha ye deva mitravarunanetra va marunnetra 
vottarasadastebhyah svaha ye devah somanetra’ 
uparisado duvasvantastebhyah svaha. 


Honour and salutations in truth of word and 
sincerity of heart to those men of knowledge and nobility 
in the eastern quarters of the republic who are dedicated 
to light and electricity. 


Honour and salutations in truth of word and 
sincerity of action to those noble men of justice in the 
southern quarters of the republic who are dedicated to 
the practice and discipline of the social and personal 
ethics of yoga. 


Honour and salutations in truth of word and 
reason to those noble men of knowledge in the western 
quarters of the republic whose science and philosophy 
shines in the scholars of the nation. 


Honour and salutations in truth of word and 
gratitude to those noble men of peace and bliss in the 
northern quarters of the republic who deal with everyone 
equally and justly as the wind touches all equally and 
who guide the nation to Dharma and strength as the 
circuit of prana and apana energy strengthens and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


234 YAJURVEDA 


ennobles the body and mind. 


Honour and salutations in truth of word and 
reverence to those noble men of knowledge and Dharma 
in the upper quarters of the republic who bless the nation 
with the gift of soma and good health and longevity. 


37. (AgniDevata, Devavata Rshi) 
anA ada yesa Ntate i 
qeria sm aaae NoN 


Agne sahasva prtana' abhimatirapasya. 
Dustarastarannaratirvarco dha yajnavahasi. 


Agni, enlightened ruler, face and defeat the enemy, 
remove the proud, overcome poverty and selfishness, and, 
hero of invincible prowess, fill this land with honour and 
brilliance. 


38. (Rakshoghna Devata, Devavata Rshi) 


dent var ufad: tasata vet uir eedtesmqi 
wure$sirefidur WERT waste: aver tater var 
amda vairsefirumprdo gg: ua2di 


Devasya tva savituh prasave '$vinorbahubhyam 
pusno hastabhyam. Upamsorviryena juhomi 
hatam raksah svaha raksasam tva vadhaya- 
vadhisma rakso' vadhismamumasau hatah. 


Ruler of the republic, in this sacred land of Lord 
Savita's creation, in truth of word and action, I accept, 
consecrate and celebrate you, protected by the arms of 
the Ashwinis, the fiery brilliance of the sun and the 
soothing serenity of the moon, blest by the generous hands 
of Pusha, the powers of health and nourishment, and 
supported by the prowess of your close associates, the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-IX 235 


council and the army. 


I accept and consecrate you for the destruction 
of evil. The evil is destroyed. We must punish the 
wicked, destroy him. Yes, he is destroyed. 


39. (Rakshoghna Devata, Devavata Rshi) 


Gan wat garsqacnat eddies eredi- 
we | aegedaatassat mess ns: uspedb funr: 
"ded aso emiudr4am us 


Savita tva savanam suvatamagnirgrhapatinam 
somo vanaspatinam. Brhaspatirvaca’ indro 
Jyaisthyaya rudrah pasubhyo mitrah satyo 
varuno dharmapatinam. 

Ruler of the land, may Savita, creator and promoter 
of honour and prosperity, inspire you. You are like the 
fire of the householders’ yajna, sap and life of the herbs 
and trees, truth of the heart of the good, friend and 
favourite of the servants and protectors of Dharma. For 
the advancement of learning, you are like Brihaspati, lord 
of knowledge. For the greatness and glory of the land, 
you are like Indra, lord of glory. For the animals, you are 
like Rudra, lord protector of the animals. 


40. (Yajamana Devata, Devavata Rshi) 
gd darssragendaea gd sn ned Arat 
aga REAA Rt (gud gay vaut 
ferrsuw ist ust arisen arenes 
Tat nxon 


Imam deva' asapatnam suvadhvam mahate 
ksatraya mahate jyaisthyaya mahate janarajya- 
yendrasyendriyaya. Imamamusya putram- 
amusyai putramasyai visa’ esa vo'mi raja somo’ 
smakam brahmananam raja. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


236 YAJURVEDA 


Noble people of the land/world, this man (first 
among us all), son of a noble father, son of a noble 
mother, graceful as the moon and inspiring as soma, 
accepted and anointed as he is as the ruler, yours, ours, 
and others', Brahmanas, all, cooperate and render him 
free from conflict and opposition for the sake of a mighty 
republic, supreme sovereignty, the highest government 
of the people, the glory of the order of the world. 


sta -Teurssum: nu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-X 237 


CHAPTER-X 


1. (Apah Devata, Varuna Rshi) 


ad dar nAra xrsreqíserat-r: i 
aRar en arfsrfi-u-a-enldi: ueu 


Apo deva madhumatiragrbhnannurjasvati 
rajasvascitanah. Yabhirmitravarunavabhya- 
sincan yabhir-indramanayannatyaratth. 

Noble men of wisdom and virtue obtain waters/ 
energies, sweet, invigorating, illuminating and 
enlightening by which they strengthen, cleanse and 
consecrate their prana, udana, and electric vitalities and 
ward off all conflicts and negativities of life. 


2. (Vrisha Devata, Varuna Rshi) 
qotsa «rezar vez efe tata quutsmf ta 
erar Usa ete quajiste weat ue d 
afe caret quirisfa tear wengqet fe usd 
Vrsna'urmirasi rastrada rastram me dehi svaha 
Vrsna’urmirasi rastrada rastramamusmai dehi 
vrsaseno'si rastrada rastram me dehi svaha 
vrsaseno'si rastrada rastramamusmai dehi. 
Mighty lord, shower of generosity, bringer of 
prosperity wave on wave, maker of the nation and 
builder of the republic, give me a sovereign republic of 
human values and just policies. 


Illustrious lord of generosity, ocean of knowledge 
of polity, harbinger of prosperity and comfort to the 
people, bless him (bless all of them) with the unity of 
the nation and dignity of the republic with truth of word 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


238 YAJURVEDA 


and action. 


Generous lord of a mighty force, maker of the 
republic, give me a world republic of universal values 
and universal peace. 


Generous lord of universal power of love and 
Dharma, maker of the world, give us all a world state of 
universal love and universal Dharma. 


3. (Apampati Devata, Varuna Rshi) 


stad ta mea Tee H ad aad La Wega 
Tea aa tar wear ue A ad 
varérslvardt ver rezar Treen ard: ufvarfauit 
*ep Wea Use Ý wur woe: ufvernfeuil wer 
rezar wae aviar ules wear vrez Ht ufu 
masai ufdzfu weet Tene agni nasa 
mea vr 3b afü area wit sha wear Tea 
af usu 


Artheta stha rastrada rastram me datta svaha’ - 
rtheta stha rastrada rastramamusmai dattau- 
jasvati stha rastrada rastram me datta svahau- 
jasvati stha rastrada rastramamusmai datta-’ 
pah parivahini stha rastrada rastram me datta 
svaha’pah parivahini stha rastrada rastram- 
amusmai datta’pam patirasi rastrada rastram 
me dehi svaha'pam patirasi rastrada 
rastramamusmai dehyapam garbho'si rastrada 
rastram me dehi svaha'pam garbho'si rastrada 
rastramamusmai dehi. 

Men of the country striving for wealth, builders 
of the nation, keep on striving, build a republic of truth 
in word and action for me. Men of wealth, go on striving 
for prosperity, contributing to the republic, and give 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-X 239 


him and all a great republic. 


Brilliant women of the republic, maintain your 
vigour and brilliance, contributing to the republic, and 
build for me a nation of love and justice. Keep up your 
genius and vigour contributing to the republic, and give 
him and all a great nation. 


Married women of the nation, dear as water and 
the breath of life to your partners, stay good and faithful 
in your love to your home, contributing to the families 
of the nation and give me a state of true discipline and 
virtue. Keep the channels of the nation flowing, 
contributing to the growth of the nation's life, and give 
him and all a dynamic state of brilliant leaders. 


Lord of the waters of the state, builder of a 
progressive state, give me a dynamic state of governance 
in truth of word and action. Lord of the national 
movements, keep the flow on for the nation and give 
him and all a state of clean governance and 
administration. 


Protector of the waters, generous giver of the 
republic, give me an affluent state of prosperity with 
values of truth and honesty. Protector of national 
progress, contributing to management and development, 
give him and all a republic, a state and a nation marching 
ahead and onward. 


4.  (Surya etc. Devata, Varuna Rshi) 
Gears CI Wea Us Y ad Cael WIS GRUT YT 
Tegal Teena ad gareta ver vrerar US HT 
Hal giaa ea wear Teena aa arat et 
mear Cee A aod talel Hat ver Teer Teen 


—_ A— 


aa aaia vor treat we 3 a caret erarfard vor 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


240 


YAJURVEDA 


Tear wea «ur amt wr wea we Gba 
W ayt eer mea Tenet aa fT eer 
West We A ao verre srfelear ver vreraT Tea 
ad adh ta Weal Wee TP ad Cael Vaan XT 
weet Teast aa way ta Treat wes Hur 
vere satay eer rezar Trea ar fenmenqd ver 
Tega Tz tad erret farage vor veram cet 


qad: wast tar Tega Tage ani cuebeersi- 
adh: Gera ae gr afrata a-amisstmterer: 
dea udistet aff spi afrata esr isu 


Suryatvacasa stha rastrada rastram me datta 
svaha suryatvacasa stha rastrada rastram- 
amusmai datta suryavarcasa stha rastrada 
rastram me datta svaha suryavarcasa stha 
rastrada rastramamusmai datta manda stha 
rastrada rastram me datta svaha manda stha 
rastrada rastramamusmai datta vrajaksita stha 
rastrada rastram me datta svaha vrajaksita stha 
rastrada rastramamusmai datta vasa stha 
rastrada rastram me datta svaha vasa stha 
rastrada rastramamusmai datta $avistha stha 
rastrada rastram me datta svaha $avistha stha 
rastrada rastramamusmai datta Sakvari stha 
rastrada rastram me datta svaha sakvari stha 
rastrada rastramamusmai datta janabhrta stha 
rastrada rastram me datta svaha janabhrta stha 
rastrada rastramamusmai datta vi$vabhrta stha 
rastrada rastram me datta svaha vi$vabhrta stha 
rastrada rastramamusmai datta apah svaraja 
stha rastrada rastramamusmai datta. Madhu- 
matirmadhumatibhih prcyantam mahi ksatram 
ksatriyaya vanvana anadhrstah sidata sahaujaso 
mahi ksatram ksatriyaya dadhatih. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-X 241 


Members of the Council, bright as the sun in your 
bearing, makers of the nation, give me a great republic 
with the values of truth and justice. Stay firm in your 
brilliance of bearing contributing to the nation, and give 
the common man a republic of truth and justice. 


Leaders of the land, men of learning, illustrious 
in character as the sun, makers of the nation, be firm in 
your brilliance of learning, and give me a state of 
learning and enlightenment in truth of word and values. 
Stay firm in your brilliance, contributing to the nation, 
and give to the citizen a nation of learning and wisdom. 


Men of vision and arts, creating joy in words of 
vision and light, be happy makers of the nation and give 
me a nation of happy people. Stay firm and strong in 
joy contributing to the nation, and create for the common 
man a nation of happiness and joy in truth of value and 
virtue. 


Farmers, living in your farms with the wealth of 
animals, makers of the nation in truth of word and 
simplicity of character, give me a nation rich in food 
and milk. Farmers and husbandmen, stay firm, 
contributing to the nation, and give to the common man 
a nation of happy and satisfied people. 


Be men of will and ambition, makers of the 
nation, and give me a nation of courage and action in 
truth of word and deed. Stay firm in your will, 
contributing to the nation, and inspire the people to be 
a nation with passion for development and progress. 


Be men of strength and prowess, makers of the 
nation, and give me a nation of power and prestige in 
truth of word and sincerity of character. Stay firm in your 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


242 YAJURVEDA 


determination, contributing to the nation, and give to 
the citizens a nation of strength and dignity. 


Women of the land, makers of the nation, be 
strong and powerful, and give me a nation of disciplined 
and virtuous young heroes of truth and honesty of word 
and action. Stay firm in your strength and dignity, 
contributing to the nation, and build up a nation of strong 
and heroic people for the citizens. 


Be sustainers of the people, makers of the nation 
in words of truth and action in discipline, and give me a 
nation of happy and disciplined people. Stay firm in 
your generosity, supporting the people, contributing to 
the nation, and give the citizens a state of happy and 
disciplined people. 


Be sustainers of the world, makers of a world- 
state in truth of word and action, and give me a universal 
nation of common human values. Stay firm, supporting 
the people of the world, contributing to the world state, 
and give to humanity one order of governance and 
organization of freedom for every citizen of the world. 


People of knowledge, Dharma and universal 
values, brilliant in your own right of character and 
wisdom, makers of a world nation in truth of word and 
action, stay brilliant and firm and give to every citizen 
of the world a world order of governance and universal 
justice. 


Women of the world, sweet as honey and deeply 
loving, meet with others equally sweet and loving, keen 
and anxious for a grand world order and conscientiously 
working for a supreme sovereign world state, stay fearless 
and, holding and sustaining that great world order for 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-X 248 


the sovereign rulers, sit and participate with men of equal 
power and brilliance. 


5. (Agni & Others Devata, Varuna Rshi) 


ares faha ada a fafta | sat Carer 
arta caret afas tatet eae Carat WSUT Carat 
geerda emaa tarar tata YeTET vette 
varetesotta wem sorta corvette caret uui 


Somasya tvisirasi taveva me tvisirbhuyat. 
Agnaye svaha somaya svaha savitre svaha 
sarasvatyai svaha pusne svaha brhaspataye 
svahendraya svaha ghosaya svaha slokaya 
svaha’msaya svaha bhagaya svaha’ryamne 
svaha. 

Ruler of the land, you are the brilliance of Soma, 
light of the nation’s glory. May my light of dignity be 
like yours. For the knowledge and power of fire and 
electricity for the nation, let there be specific and factual 
language and study of science. For Soma, life-sciences, 
knowledge of biology and medicine; for the sun, 
astronomy and cosmology; for Saraswati (Veda and 
education), grammar and Vedanga, i.e., auxiliary studies 
on the subject; for Pusha (pranic vitality and material 
growth), yoga and economics; for Brihaspati (lord of 
the universe), spiritual knowledge ; for Indra (lord of 
the senses, jivatma, the soul), intelligence and inner 
light; for language and communication, effective 
teaching and discussion; for poetry and composition, 
poetics; for the subtle elements of nature, science of 
atoms; for honour and prosperity, industry and dedication; 
for Aryama (leader of justice), politics of value and 
jurisprudence. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


244 YAJURVEDA 


6. (Apah Devata, Varuna Rshi) 


ufat wit core ufaqd: waasseararascur 
uao wir xfsufu: 1 aftycenfa aret 
area: Geter andi caret wera: eu 


Pavitre stho vaisnavyau saviturvah prasava’ 
utpunamyacchidrena pavitrena suryasya 
rasmibhih. Anibhrstamasi vaco bandhustapojah 
somasya datramasi svaha rajasvah. 


Ruler of the land/President of the council, free 
from pollution of mind and character, seasoned and 
tempered in the discipline of austerity, dedicated as a 
brother to the sacred voice of knowledge, you are an 
instrument of Soma, nature’s power of health and 
growth. 


Both of you (ruler and people, teachers and 
students, boys as well as girls), endowed with universal 
virtues of mind and character, stay pure and unsullied. 
In this holy world of Lord Savita’s creation, I sanctify 
you all with a ceaseless flow of the purest rays of the 
sun and the light of higher knowledge. Act in truth of 
word and deed and create noble heroes for the nation. 


7. (Varuna Devata, Varuna Rshi) 
errat erfiritidsuarsarilsmersaraezrenat-r: | 
URS Uh eur: uea TMA AA amer: wo t 
Sadhamado dyumninirapa’ eta’ anadhrsta’ 


apasyo vasanah. Pastyasu cakre varunah 
sadhasthamapam Ssisurmatrtamasvantah. 


The ruler, best choice of the people, should send 
the children of the mothers/nation to residential schools 
of the most affectionate and motherly teachers — 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-X 245 


mothers/nation, free and fearless, intelligent and 
educated, cool as water, smart at work, shining in 
prosperity, brilliant in achievement, living happy and 
together in beautiful homes. 


8.  (Yajamana Devata, Varuna Rshi) 


amei aaret saree spur curfu sce 
mAh erdierfa fascia eure crar 
qa dép i gard ww arf i uni ursd 
aad werset unrt freed fare: uta uci 


Ksatrasyolvamasi ksatrasya  jarayvasi 
ksatrasya yonirasi ksatrasya nabhirasindrasya 
vartraghnamasi mitrasyasi varunasyasi tvaya '- 
yam vrtram vadhet. Drva'si rujasi ksumasi. 
Patainam prancam patainam pratyancam 
patainam tiryancam digbhyah pat. 


Ruler of the nation, you are the strength and shield 
of the people, first cover of the republic, creator of its 
honour and dignity, and centre-pin of its governance. 
You are like the thunderbolt of lightning for the clouds 
of the enemy. You are friends with the friends and best 
with the good. By you and with you the nation would 
eliminate the simulators, the evaders and the hypocrites. 
You are a destroyer of the forts of evil and a plague 
upon the enemy. 


Defend him in all directions, from all directions, 
front, back and cross-wise. 


9. (Prajapati Devata, Varuna Rshi) 


amatais nieda qegstats - 
arti tarato eacdareanfaa: qur favadtars- 


smfetzrereituferdt fersarshsgarenfererf erstens u 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


246 YAJURVEDA 


Avirmarya’ avitto’agnirgrhapatiravitta’indro 
vrddhaSsrava’ avitau mitravarunau dhrtavrata- 
vavittah pusa visvaveda’avitte dyavaprthivi 
visvasambhuvavavittaditi-rurusarmma. 


All ye mortals, men and women, if the fire, 
sustainer of the home, or the man of knowledge and 
wisdom brilliant as agni (light) is well-known, and 
beneficent to you, if the man who has heard and attained 
the knowledge of all the Shastras is well-known and 
beneficent, if Indra, the man of power commanding the 
forces is well-known and committed to you, if friends 
and noble people dedicated to vows of goodness and 
virtue are close to you and kind, if Pusha, versatile man 
of medicine, giver of health and longevity is well-known 
and kind, if the heavens and electric energy and the earth 
are well-known and generous, if the mother and mother 
nature, generous givers of abundant love and joy, are 
well known, loved with reverence, and generous to you 
— if you know, love and respect all these and they are 
kind and generous to you, then happiness is assured for 
you. 


10. (Yajamana Devata, Varuna Rshi) 
ader asper: wrens West cata Taare 
ad eit asegar sfaury ug ou 


Avesta dandasukah pracimaroha gayatri tvavatu 
rathantaram sama trivrt stomo vasanta’ 
rturbrahma dravinam. 


Cross the hurdles on the way, eliminate the deadly 
biters, go forward (east) and rise to the heights. And while 
you drive on the chariot of life, may the light of Gayatri 
lead you on; the music of the Samans inspire you ; the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-X 247 


triple strength of body, mind and speech empower you; 
the three fold voice of the Veda (knowledge, action and 
prayer) exhort you; and may the beauty of the spring 
season, the vision of the universe and the wealth of 
existence bless you on the way. 


11. (Yajamana Devata, Varuna Rshi) 


arme freq cale sec wssasr cedri 
Wase: aa gator ues 


Daksinamaroha tristup tvavatu brhatsama 
pancadasa stomo grisma’ rtuh ksatram 
dravinam. 


Go forward on the right (south) and rise to the 
heights. And while you are on the way, the light of 
science contained in the Trishtup verses would reveal 
to you; the fifteenfold strength of great Samans (five 
pranas, five senses, and five elements) would empower 
you; the heat of the summer season would hasten your 
speed, and the splendour of governance and the wealth 
of existence would bless you. 


12. (Yajamana Devata, Varuna Rshi) 


uieii soit cre emeueurd acaast carat 
atsegi feum ue 3 


Praticimaroha jagati tvavatu vairupam sama 
saptadasa stomo varsa' rturvid dravinam. 


Go forward west, and rise high, and the various 
science of wealth contained in the Jagati verses would 
reveal to you; the seventeen-fold power of the Samans 
(five organs of volition, five objects of volition, five subtle 
elements and the science of cause and effect of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


248 YAJURVEDA 


materials) would enrich you; and the showers of the 
rainy season and the economic wealth of the world 
would bless you. 


13. (Yajamana Devata, Varuna Rshi) 


sdim wataq Surerwrenfaesr «int: 
wad: wei feur ues 


Udicimarohanustup tvavatu vairajam samaika- 
vimsa stomah $aradrtuh phalam dravinam. 


Go forward north and rise high, and the art of 
communication of knowledge contained in Anushtup 
verses would reveal to you; the twenty-one-fold various 
brilliance of the Samans (sixteen potentials, faculties 
of the soul, four-fold effort for fulfilment in life and the 
freedom of action) would enlighten you; and the length 
of winter years and wealth of the fruits of service would 
bless you. 


14. (Yajamana Devata, Varuna Rshi) 


sate ufecatadq smeerited a Arora- 
maan eat tara eed gfeut ucded 
Heu: fort: ues 


Urdhvamaroha panktistvavatu $akvararaivate 
samani trinavatrayastriinsau stomau hemanta- 
Sis$iravrtu varco dravinam pratyastam namuceh 
Sirah. 

Move up and rise high, and the knowledge 
contained in the Pankti verses, Shakvara and the Raivata 
parts of the Samans, the knowledge of the three divisions 
of time (past, present and future), the science of nine 
numbers (1-9), and of the thirty-three powers of nature 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-X 249 


(8 Vasus, 11 Rudras, 12 Adityas, Indra, i.e., electric 
energy, and yajna, i.e., cosmic chemistry) would reveal 
to you; the lustre of knowledge and discipline and the 
wealth of life would bless you. The heads of the sinner, 
the thief and the preventer would be down. 


15. (Paramatma Devata, Varuna Rshi) 


iren faha ada à fearfüsiara i 
ya: urngdresfr  uebsempeafa ueu 


Somasya tvisirasi taveva me tvisirbhuyat. 
Mrtyoh pahyojo'si saho'syamrtamasi. 


You are the light of majesty and magnificence. May 
your light be mine too. You are the lustre of life, the 
constancy of courage, and the immortality of existence. 
Save me from mortality. 


16. (Mitra-Varuna Devate, Varuna Rshi) 


fexus urssudl feutessssmfel-urssfasr: Gave | 
amts avor fra wef adsusmemufeafi feta = 
faatsfa ados ngan 


Hiranyarupa' usaso viroka' ubhavindra’ 
udithah suryaśca. Arohatam varuna mitra 
gartam tat$caksathamaditim ditim ca mitro'si 
varuno 'si. 


You are Mitra, friend of all. You are Varuna, the 
best of all and subduer of the enemies. Both of you are 
bright and powerful like gold, like the sun, like Indra. 
And just as the sun and the moon with their light light 
up the night and the dawn, so you too, with your 
illuminating actions, rise and enlighten the world around 
you. Ascend your chariot of knowledge, watch the world 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


250 YAJURVEDA 
of permanence and impermanence, and spread the light. 


17. (Kshatrapati Devata, Varuna Rshi) 


videar car grerafirfdserereratshar aie aed 
AAt amo sradfereufd fee at ngon 


Somasya tva dyumnenabhisincamyagnerbh- 
rajasa suryasya varcase’ndrasyendriyena 
ksatranam ksatrapatiredhyati didyun pahi. 


I anoint and consecrate you as the ruler with the 
light and grace of the moon, the brilliance of fire, the 
glory of the sun, and the swiftness of sense and mind 
like the velocity of electricity. Ascend the throne of the 
republic to do more than justice to the seat of 
governance. Develop the missiles of defence and protect 
and promote knowledge, Dharma and prosperity of the 
nation. 


18. (Yajamana Devata, Devavata Rshi) 
gH Jasamu gd art weg wisst 
"gd Seige igual vamqet gary 
fassus ISH UST ASEM ATUL, TSN e u 


Imam deva’ asaptanam suvadhvam mahate 
ksatraya mahate jyaisthyaya mahate jana- 
rajyayendrasyendriyaya. Imamamusya putra- 
mamusyai putramasyai visa’ -esavo'mi raja 
somo’smakam brahmananam raja. 

This brilliant man of knowledge and virtuous 
character, son of a noble father and of a noble mother is 
our ruler, yours, ours and of all others, all Brahmanas, 
i.e., the learned community of the land. 


Noble and educated men of the land and senior 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-X 251 


members of the army, all support him for the 
establishment of a grand world order of governance, 
for a great enlightened and meritorious community, for 
a great democracy of the people and for the dignity and 
honour of a mighty state. Let us render him universally 
acceptable so that he has to face no rival, no adversary, 
no enemy. 


19. (Yajamana Devata, Devavata Rshi) 


fa TN 


Pra parvatasya vrsabhasya prsthannavascaranti 
svasica' iyanah. Ta’ avavrtrannadharagudakta’ 
ahim budhnyamanu riyamanah. Visnorvikra- 
manamasi visnorvikrantamasi visnoh kranta- 
masi. 


From the top of the cloud, over the top of clouds, 
flying boats, fuelled and driven, roam around in the sky 
like boats on the sea. Piloted from down below on earth, 
soaring up like clouds into the sky, they pursue the 
clouds as Indra pursued Vritra. Master-maker of the 
nation, in the wide spaces of Lord Vishnu, you are 
capable of creating various kinds of motion. You are 
capable of creating special and definite steers of motion 
as the wind's. You are the cause and source of motion 
and speed by the power of energy. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


252 YAJURVEDA 


20. (Prajapati Devata, Devavata Rshi) 
Walaa 4 craararzit fasat vsurfur af ar sisrar | 


Gena wpHuuissreereeed frararaca für 
aay udet vrumeivared | eg aa fafa ur 


"mH dR Baa caret uso 


Prajapate na tvadetanyanyo vi$va rupani pari 
ta babhuva. Yatkamaste juhumastanno 
astvayamamusya pita 'savasya pita vayam syama 
patayo rayinam svaha. Rudra yatte krivi param 
nama tasmin hutamasyamestamasi svaha. 
Prajapati, Lord Supreme, father and protector of 
created beings, there is none other than you over, above 
and beyond, to be, to know, and to reveal all the forms 
of existence in the world. 


Whatever the aim, object or desire for which we 
worship you, may that be fulfilled for us. 

Father and guardian as you are of the seen and 
the unseen world, so may we be masters and guardians 
of the riches of life in truth of word and action. 

Rudra, Lord of justice and punishment, destroyer 
as you are of evil, that is the supreme name by which 
we worship you and celebrate you in the home in truth 
of word with honest action. 


21. (Kshatrapati Devata, Devavata Rshi) 

Su asiste faraccrinar uvm: ufstat aaa 
sTedemi wat xen warfteet orni edi used 
aanta der ufüftzsui usu 

Indrasya vajro'si mitravararunayostva prasa- 
stroh prasisa yunajmi. Avyathayai tva svadhayai 
tva'risto arjuno marutam prasavena jaya -pam 
manasa samindriyena. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-X 253 


Ruler of the land, you are like the thunderbolt of 
Indra (lightning) in power, inviolable, clean and 
spotless. I appoint you by the advice of the Governor of 
the council and the commander of the army for the 
exercise of your official powers freely and 
constructively without pain or fear or tyranny. Act with 
the inspiration, advice and support of the positive yajnic 
people of dynamic spirit and win your victories/goals. 
We are with you with all our will and power. 


22. (Indra Devata, Devavata Rshi) 


m dsz- a aad diredeardrssrsmrar ferdur | 
Rear tanta a dueen witea ana ea 
seta uu 


Ma ta' indra te vayam turasadayuktaso 
abrahmata vidasama. Tistha rathamadhi yam 
vajrahasta ra$min deva yamase svasvan. 


Indra, Ruler of the land, hero of the thunderbolt in 
hand, swift as you are in action and victory over the 
enemy, may we, your officers and people, never, 
disaffected, fall off from you. May you too never suffer 
disaffection from Ishwara and never fall off from your 
faith. 


Hero of the people, thunderbolt in hand, ascend 
and ride the chariot, take the reins in hand by which 
you drive the steeds and, swift in action, achieve your 
goals. 


23. (Agni & Others Devatas, Devavata Rshi) 
ammà medad Cael GINS STA vert SATA 
vereda caret (ufelfer araat at foiso 
TA UR BU 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


254 YAJURVEDA 


Agnaye grhapataye svaha somaya vanaspataye 
svaha marutamcjase svahendrasyendriyaya 
svaha. Prthivi matarma ma himsirmo’ aham 
tvam. 

Ruler and chiefs of the nation, provide and 
promote for agni, the enlightened householder, a true 
policy of value and virtue; for soma, herbs and trees, 
forestry and knowledge of Botany; for the strength, 
energy and lustre of the most dynamic people (maruts), 
yoga and peace-giving words; for the honour of Indra, 
ruler, right conduct and good reading; for the working 
efficiency of the soul (Indra), good instruction and 
practice. Mother earth, hurt me not. Nor shall I hurt 
you. Mother mine, ruin me not with wrong instruction. 
Nor must I hurt you (with ingratitude). 


24. (Surya Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


ea: tendara afewafidferdzrure i 
qUugrHddugdiWHassT is kansansa 
sed Il 
Hansah_ $ucisadvasurantariksasaddhota 
vedisadatithirduronasat. Nrsadvarasdrta- 
sadvyomasadabja goja' rtaja adrija rtam brhat. 
Ishvara, the Supreme Soul of the Universe, is the 
maker of forms from elements, present in all forms of 
purity, universal abode of all, present in the sky, creator 
of the universal yajna, present in and on the earth, holy 
as a sacred visitor, present in the homes, humans, the 
best of things, eternal nature and its law, and in all space, 
creator of the waters, stars and planets, giver of the light 
of eternal knowledge of the Veda, creator of the clouds, 
mountains and forests, the very Truth and Law Itself, 
and the greatest and highest of existence. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-X 255 


25. (Surya Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


pian af peu aatsta en uf 
img ut afe i sea at eed ags- 
atardar usw 


Iyadasyayurasyayurmayi dhehi yunnasi varco’ 
si varco mayi dhehyurgasyurjjam mayi dhehi. 
Indrasya vam viryakrto bahu' abhyupava- 
harami. 

You are so vast, so far, so great, wherever my eye 
goes. You are life Itself. Give me life and longevity. 
You join me with you in samadhi. You are the light and 
lustre of existence. Give me that lustre. You are Energy 
Itself. Give me energy. 


Ruler and people of the land, you are the arms of 
the Lord of Power, creator of virility. I take you both 
close to Him. 


26. (Asandi Rajapatni Devate, Vamadeva Rshi) 
wanes qata aaa arte | 
Tapis quart aaa Aaaa ure il 


Syonasi’ susadasi ksatrasya yonirasi. Syonama- 
sida susadamasida ksatrasya yonimasida. 
Woman of power: You are the beauty and grace of 
life, giver of peace and joy, and mother-maker of the 
nation. Come, take up your office of dignity to create 
joy and comfort for the people around and do justice to 
the judgement seat of the nation. 


27. (Varuna Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi) 
frdura gada GSU: WEA | 
maiaa Gerd: URI 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


256 YAJURVEDA 


Nisasada dhrtavrato varunah pastyasva. 
Samrajyaya sukratuh. 


The man committed to national vows of Dharma, 
dedicated to noble actions, first and best of choice for 
justice, should occupy the offices of power and 
administration for the governance of the republic. 


28. (Yajamana Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi) 


arfsrs!crand usa fast: woot sme warts 
"ferret Pease ertuilsfer uesa fagi 
SRSA Ua: | ART SARL YER ASIST 


at A emt eeu 


Abhibhurasyetaste Panca disah kalpantam 
brahmamstvam brahma'si savita'si satya- 
prasavo varuno'si satyauja indrosi visauja 
rudro'si suSevah. Bahukara sreyaskara 
bhuyaskarendrasya vajro'si tena me radhya. 


Subduer of the evil and the wicked, you are the 
dominant ruler. May all the five directions be favourable 
to you. Man of spiritual vision and knowledge, you are 
a scholar of the Vedas and creator of all comfort and 
joy, light and honour with noble actions of truth. Man 
of first and best choice, possessed of excellence, truth 
is your real power and lustre. Man of dignity and 
majesty, your greatness lies in the strength and support 
of the people. Man of justice, destroyer of sin and crime, 
harbinger of various kinds of happiness, doer of good 
over and over again, you are the thunderbolt of lightning 
action. With that instant power, protect me, save me, 
perfect me. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-X 257 


29. (Agni Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi) 


ama: yaddas: uereiriureafauredeer 
ag vemer | etpar: Geter aRar 
or Es E TERT 


Agnih prthurdharmanaspatirjusano' agnih 
prthurdharmanaspatirajyasya vetu svaha. 
Svahakrtah suryasya rasmibhiryatadhvam 
sajatanam madhyamesthyaya. 

Just as agni (fire), great and expansive, observer 
of Dharma, served in yajna, receives the libations and, 
sitting in the midst of its associate created materials and 
living beings, atomizes the materials and, with the rays 
of the sun radiates them into space, so should the ruler, 
brilliant, great and expansive like fire, observe his/her 
Raj Dharma, and in truth with justice, serve the nation. 
So should also the noble and honest members of the 
Council, in truth of word and action, observe their 
Dharma and try to serve the nation. 


30. (Savita & Others Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi) 


aa tafe tea ure wat xau: Geo 
URSA srguafdar sraium ereurirstarfi-ar 
ta aes rar fast ager dada waa: 
wduifa n3on 


Savitra prasavitra sarasvatya vaca tvstra rupaih 
pusnapasubhirindrenasme | brhaspatina 
brahmana varunenaujasa 'gnina tejasa somena 
rajna visnuna dasamya devataya prasutah pra 
sarpami. 
Inspired by Lord Savita, the creator of life, for 
creativity, enlightened by the sacred word of the Veda 
by the grace of Saraswati, the Lord's spirit of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


258 YAJURVEDA 


omniscience, projecting various forms of development 
by the grace of Twashta, the Lord's power of art, 
breathing the generosity of the earth (Pusha) to nourish 
the animals and other living creatures, realizing the 
possibilities of growth through electric energy by the 
grace of Indra, the Lord's power and force of nature, 
with the magnanimity of Brihaspati, the Lord's 
immanence in the universe and His eternal wisdom 
revealed in the Veda, with a sense of honour and 
obligation by the grace of Varuna, the Lord's majesty 
and glory, with the heat of fire by the grace of Agni, the 
Lord's light and refulgence, with the soothing vitality 
and beneficence of mind like the vitality of Soma and 
beauty of the moon, and with broadness of mind 
inspired by the Lords omnipresence in the universe, the 
tenth attribute of the Lord as Vishnu, and finally, 
supported by the will and words of our people — 
inspired, shaped and committed thus I (the ruler) move 
on in the business of governance. 


31. (Kshatrapati Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi) 


seat wera wat terest spart wea 
ara: Ud: ufadtur uerecraat araa: | sea 
Fa: Tat use 


A$vibhyam pacyasva sarasvatyai pacyasve- 
ndraya sutramne pacyasva. Vayuh putah 
pavitrena pratyanksomo atisrutah. Indrasya 
yujyah sakha. 


Ruler/officer/citizen, develop and be mature by 
the instructions of the teacher and the preceptor. Be 
mature for the attainment of knowledge and wisdom, 
and for decent communication. Develop yourself and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-X 259 


prepare for the honour and defence of the nation. 
Seasoned and sanctified as the pure wind through noble 
conduct and performance, be worthy of respect and 
admiration. Rise in knowledge, dignity and grace, be 
lovable as soma and the moon, and you would be a 
chosen companion of Indra, the ruler, and the Supreme 
Lord of life. 


32. (Kshatrapati Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi) 


qhap ah ut aan aehd fem | 
seen pR AA à aA adsstaa ata i 
smidse Ra ver aÀ walt vem 
HaT use 


Kuvidanga yavamanto yavam cidyatha 
dantyanupurvam viyuya. Ihehaisam krnuhi 
bhojanani ye barhiso nama' uktim yajanti. 
Upayamagrhito' sya$vibhyam tva sarasvatyai 
tvendraya tva sutramne. 


Ruler/Man of knowledge and honour, seasoned 
and sanctified you are in the discipline of education by 
teachers and preceptors. We accept you for the sake of 
knowledge and effective speech, in the service of the 
republic, for the honour and defence of the nation. 


Senior men of knowledge sitting around the fire 
on seats of grass chant words of homage in praise of 
the divine. Treat them to food and liberal hospitality 
with reverence. 


The farmers harvest barley in a certain order, sift 
the grain from the chaff and keep it safe. Protect the 
farmers, and, like them, sift the grain of truth from the 
chaff of untruth and protect the truth. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


260 YAJURVEDA 


33. (Ashwinau Devate, Shunahshepa Rshi) 


qongan Crbemem cre | 
ferfaurar sisreuditsz-z ed vereWu uas 


Yuvain suramama$vina namucavasure saca. 
Vipipana subhaspati’ indram karmasvavatam. 
President of the council and commander of the 
forces, bright and beneficent as the sun and the moon, 
dedicated to truth, protectors of the republic, and 
promoters of good social developments, both of you 
safeguard and advance the man of power and prosperity 
(such as the producer or the ruler or the administrator) 
who is whole heartedly and unfailingly dedicated to 
generous acts of public good (like the cloud showering 
rain for humanity). 


34. (Ashwinau Devate, Shunahshepa Rshi) 


wate faadtafyeriirsresr: esreddecnutfu | acer 
aa: erat: atta ver wearer ssi 


Putramiva pitaravasvinobhendravathuh 
kavyairdamsanabhih. Yatsuramam vyapibah 
Sactbhih sarasvati tva maghavannabhisnak. 
Ruler of the land/President of the council, you 
have enjoyed the delightful exhilaration of life by virtue 
of noble intelligence and wonderful exploits worthy of 
celebration in song. May your wife, with the vision and 
wisdom of Saraswati, spirit of poetry, serve and 
celebrate you in the home. 


President of the council, and Commander of the 
forces, both of you, with the order and approval of the 
ruler, and with actions worthy of song in poetry, defend 
the nation and the land as parents guard and promote 
their children. 

gta agratseara: di 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XI 261 


CHAPTER-XI 


1.  (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
pos: Wer aaa ferar fered: 
arisatfdferet uf2remssreursdiyq ue u 


Yunjanah prathamam manastattvaya savita 
dhiyah. Agnerjyotirnicayya prithivya'adhya- 
bharat. 

The man desirous of spiritual vision and earthly 
brilliance in search of the essence of spirit and matter, 
should concentrate his senses, mind and memory, direct 
itall on the universal energy immanent in nature, collect 
the light of Agni, Supreme Spirit and universal power, 
and bring that knowledge of experience down to the 
earth. 


2.  (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


per wet eb deed feng aa | 

Tarte sre UR 

Yuktena manasa vayam devasya savituh save. 
Svargyaya saktya. 


We men of yoga, in this world of Lord Savita’s 
creation, with all our mind and energy collected, 
concentrated and directed on the Spirit/on the object of 
our search, bring the light of heaven to the earth to turn 
it into a very paradise. 


3. (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


gear wad drerecesteiat aan fray à 
qemi: ater: Ha dorf ar ust 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


262 YAJURVEDA 


Yuktvaya savita devantsvaryato dhiya divam. 
Brhajjyotih karisyatah savita prasuvati tan. 


The yogis, noble people, trying to reach the 
regions of light and heavenly bliss with their mind and 
sense, refine their faculties as instruments of divination 
into the light and mystery of infinity. Savita, Lord of 
light and generator of life, inspires their mind and soul 
and helps them to join with the object of their love and 
ambition. 


4.  (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


gerd wissa dara fen fem femen get 
faufvad: | fa dat aà agafatassat dad 
"feng: uefa: isi 


Yunjate mana’uta yunjate dhiyo vipra viprasya 
brhato vipascitah. Vi hotra dadhe vayunavideka' 
inmahi devasya savituh paristutih. 


Great is the glory and high the praise of Savita, 
generous creator of light and life, the one mighty, 
infinite, all seeing, all-knowing lord of the universe. 
He alone receives all our prayers and sacrifices. Thereon 
do yogis, men of wisdom and vision, concentrate their 
mind and intelligence — only there and nowhere else. 


5. (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


ga at aad get anifula venehsug weme qi: | 

soared faye soTqadet warsam À erat eat Ae: t t 
Yuje vam brahma purvyam namobhir visloka’etu 
pathyeva sureh. Srnvantu vi$ve'amrtasya putra’ 
a ye dhamani divyani tasthuh. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XI 263 


I join, and join you both, with the eternal lord of 
the universe with hymns of praise and prayer as did the 
yogis of old. May our song of prayer reach its divine 
destination by the sure path of the great and the wise 
seers. Listen all ye children of Immortality who inhabit 
the holy worlds of the Lord's creation and join to reach 
the goal. 


6.  (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


wwe yanmasa deb ufzur rsen | 
a: urf£terf ferma wsudsm tfa ga: dfe 
Ham ngn 


Yasya prayanamanvanya 'idyayurdeva devasya 
mahimanamojasa. Yah parthivani vimame sa’ 
etas$o rajamsi devah savita mahitvana. 

The great Lord Savita with His own power and 
majesty has created all the regions of the earth and 
heaven. He is the lord of light omnipresent in this world 
whose great path of Dharma and yoga all the noble 
people and others have followed with all their power 
and potential. 


7. (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
ad afaa: wda ast wae aad ama 1 feet 
thd: chag: oda: uaa aea q: 
waq won 


Deva savitah prasuva yajnam prasuva 
yajnapatim bhagaya. Divyo gandharvah ketapuh 
ketam nah punatu vacaspatirvacam nah svadatu. 


Savita, lord of light and glory, light our yajna 
and promote our action for the attainment of happiness 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


264 YAJURVEDA 


and prosperity. Bless and promote the yajnapati to 
achieve honour and wealth. Lord sustainer of the earth, 
brilliant and holy, giver and purifier of life and 
knowledge, purify our science and consecrate our 
pursuit. Lord giver and purifier of speech, purify and 
elevate our speech with sweetness and grace. 


8.  (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


gH al ea feres aula eerercuafiaferd «uarfsrd 
erifsrde$uefsriu | azar carat Treat verdi 
wea Weare et ue 


Imam no deva savitar yajnam pranaya devavyam 
sakhividam satrajitam dhanajitain svarjitam. 
Rca stomam samardhaya gdayatrena 
rathantaram brhad gayatravarttani svaha. 


Savita, lord of life and inspiration, light, promote 
and expand this yajna of ours which protects our noble 
people and the virtues of our character, favours our 
friends, wins our yajnic sessions of truth and gives us 
wealth and happiness. Let it prosper with the chants of 
Rgvedic hymns and advance into the wealth of Dharma 
and knowledge with the truth of word and honesty of 
action. Let it rise with the gayatri verses revealing the 
paths of progress and prosperity to be covered and won 
through the scientific gifts of rathantara, modes of speed 
and progress. 


9. (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


eret var Ulad: WadsRartaigea Geo gets 
sae ma uweurfgrenedfereg: geata 
diremfzrerardr Fess weuWrfgren si 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XI 265 


Devasya tva savituh prasave’ $vinorbahubhyam 
püsno hastabhyam. Adade gayatrena chandasā- 
ngirasvatprthivyah sadhasthadagnim purisya- 
mangirasvadabhara traistubhena chandasa- 
ngirasvat. 


Man of knowledge and vision, I accept and 
welcome you as a man initiated by fire in this world of 
Savita's creation alongwith the force and attraction of 
the energy of prana and the attraction and retention of 
the life-giving air. 


Take up the study of agni (heat and electricity) 
immanent in the earth and revealed in the gayatri verses, 
and discover and develop for us its energy value like 
that of prana, the breath of life. Discover the energy- 
potential of the waters revealed in the trishtubh verses, 
and develop it like the blazing ambers of fire. 


10. (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
arfslxfar arifa carat eramfiaevlenn eraser 
aT 1 SIN SAMER eol 


Abhrirasi naryasi tvaya vayamagniin $akema 
khanitum sadhastha a. Jagatena chandasa- 
ngirasvat. 


Man of scholarship and imagination, you are a 
tool of discovery and development of yajnic value for 
humanity. Living together with you, let us be able to 
discover the secrets and then develop the power of agni 
(fire and electricity) with the help of the jagati verses 
of the Veda — agni which is like the very breath of life. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


266 
11. 


YAJURVEDA 


(Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 

w*dsememd fear ferafüleferuerilu 1 ar 
veilfdfzreredt uferemsasreretrardezira w-urfgr- 
WA ue? 


Hasta adhaya savita bibhradabhriin hiranyayim. 
Agnerjyotirnicayayya prthivya’adhyabharada- 
nustubhena chandasangirasvat. 


Savita, the creative man of science, having taken 


up and holding a golden spade, should dig out and 
collect the light and power of agni (electricity) with the 
help of the anushtubh verses of the Veda and bear it on 
the earth like the life-breath of humanity. 


12. 


(Vaji Devata, Nabhanedishta Rshi) 


wii Rada after wada i fafa d owed 
uma we ufu: ufereurfér ata ue su 


Praturtam  vajinnadrava varisthamanu 
samvatam. Divi te janma paramamantarikse 
tava nabhih prthivyamadhi yonirit. 


Warlike man of heroic knowledge, come flying 


on the wings at top speed, best and well-controlled. You 
are a child of the region of the sun, your navel, centre 
hold, is in the middle regions of the sky, and your home 
and values are on the ground. 


13. 


(Vaji Devata, Kushri Rshi) 


wpesmeme$irWdei weno aa quus d 
BPA MAST V3 1 


Yunjatham rasabham yuvam asmin yame 
vrsanvasu. Agnim bharantamasmayum. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XI 267 


Man of science and man of technology, both of 
you creators of a shower of wealth, yoke this horse- 
power of fire/electricity to this carriage bearing and 
taking us to our destination. 


14. (Kshatrapati Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi) 
Hb Ep endi ant amt zSTHE | 
PAIS AAAS us 


Yoge yoge tavastaram vaje vaje havamahe. 
Sakhaya 'indramutaye. 


Friends, in project on project, and battle after 
battle, we call upon Indra, our powerful ruler, to protect 
us and defend the country. 


15. Ganapati Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi) 


wqesleenrSbdi mau moai waste id 
Sarita aif vafeaegfarstarfst quay geo wast 
"HE urea 


Praturvannehyavakramannasasti rudrasya 
ganapatyam mayobhurehi. Urvantariksam vihi 
svasti gavyutirabhayani krnvan pusna sayuja 
saha. 


Overpowering the enemies, crushing the 
oppositions, go forward and, creating peace and well- 
being, come on top of the forces of the lord of justice 
(Rudra). 


Creating fearlessness all round, moving on the 
paths of peace and welfare, with strengthening and 
supporting comrades, rise to the vast skies. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


268 YAJURVEDA 
16. (Agni Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi) 


yen: aata direrafgreerardtatz dfremfz- 
marasi diem shear: eau 


Prthivyah sadhasthadagnim purisyamangira- 
svadabharagnim purisyamangirasvada- 
cchemo'gnim purisyamangirasvad bhari- 
syamah. 


Man of knowledge and vision, from the surface 
of the earth/from the midst of the sky, isolate and collect 
heat/magnetic/electric energy, a source of comfort like 
the light of the sun. From the surface of the earth/from 
admidst the sky, we collect in abundance heat/electric/ 
magnetic energy, a source of comfort like the breath of 
air. From the depths of the earth/heights of the sky, we 
shall collect heat/magnetic/electric energy in abundance, 
a source of comfort and prosperity like the breath of 
life. 


17. (Agni Devata, Purodha Rshi) 


aaea asthe Waal sida: | sty 
qie Gear ot WH uretufzretrssmdeaser ngon 


Anvagnirusasamagramakhyadanvahani 
prathamo jatavedah. Anu suryasya purutra ca 
rasminanu dyavaprthivi' atatantha. 

The original agni (fire) is present in every thing 
that is born in the universe. It is there before the dawn, 
and with the dawn it proclaims the day. It is there before 
the sun, and with the sun it pervades the rays of light 
across the earth, the skies and the heavens. 


(As the original fire pervades the heat and light 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XI 269 


of existence, so should the learned man spread the light 
of knowledge everywhere). 


18. (Agni Devata, Mayobhu Rshi) 
arn rese wet uem faye d 
anman wefa aater frfeleirea ngen 


Agatya vajyadhvanam sarvà mrdho vidhunute. 
Agnim sadhasthe mahati caksusa nicikisate. 
The war-horse, having come on the course, shakes 


the enemy in battle. The house-holder, in his extensive 
home, loves to collect, light and watch the fire. 


(So should the ruler of the land shake the enemies, 
light the fire of yajna and enlighten the people with 
education). 


19. (Agni Devata, Mayobhu Rishi) 


amend as Urata Sar em g 

wart qad at afe ad: wa d aa died 
Akramya vajin prthivimagnimiccha rucà tvam. 
Bhumya vrtvaya no bruhi yatah khanema tam 


vayam. 


Hero of light, speed and power, having shaken 
the enemies and having settled the earth in peace, you 
take up agni (power and gold) with interest and 
excitement, and ask us to go over the land so that we 
may dig out and develop the same. 


20. (Kshatrapati Devata, Mayobhu Rshi) 
wired ges dferdt geeshrearaReaaar art: à 
fara water waar fats Gaeta: Mon 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


270 YAJURVEDA 


Dyauste prstham prthivi sadhasthamatma- 
ntariksam samudro yonih. Vikhyaya caksusa 
tvamabhi tistha prtanyatah. 


Enlightened ruler of the land, your past is as bright 
as the sun, your present seat is firm as the earth, your 
soul is magnanimous as the vast sky, your origin is as 
deep as the ocean. Look round with your eye and be 
firm and strong to face the challenges. 


21. (Dravinoda Devata, Mayobhu Rshi) 


venta ved Wrstararuransmata zfenirar ater 
aaja yad dienssita wiassaeds- 
STEHT: MRN 


Utkrama mahate saubhagayasmadasthanad 
dravinoda vajin. Vayam syama sumatau 
prthivya’ agnim khananta’ upasthe’ asyah. 


Man of power and action, giver of wealth, rise 
up from this place of ours for the sake of great good 
fortune so that, digging out the wealth of the earth 
hidden in her womb (that is agni, gold and energy), we 
may be prosperous and feel secure in our proper mind. 


22. (Dravinoda Devata, Mayobhu Rshi) 


Udakramid dravinoda vajyarvakah sulokarn 
sukrtam prthivyam. Tatah khanema supratikam- 
agniin svo ruhana' adhi nakamuttamam. 


Man of science and technology, producer of 
wealth, just as a powerful impetuous steed gallops fast 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XI 271 


and high on its course, so you rise and advance to win a 
beautiful, well-deserved state of joy, the best, a very 
paradise on earth. And then we too, desiring and 
working for a life of joy, shall dig out and collect from 
earth and air a wonderful golden wealth of energy and 
create a very heaven for all. 


23. (Prajapati Devata, Gritsamada Rshi) 
favat | uei fdrsur ade ged eue vu 
SoTL URS 


A wā jigharmi manasa ghrtena pratiksiyantam 
bhuvanani visva. Prthum tira$ca vayasa 
brhantam vyacisthamannai rabhasam dr$anam. 


I take you up, O fire/wind, to study and celebrate 
with all my mind, besprinkled with the fragrance of 
ghee, co-existent with all things and all regions of the 
world, extensive, moving in all directions in waves, 
grown powerful with food, and so beautiful to perceive. 


24. (Agni Devata, Gritsamada Rshi) 


an fasad: ese Rroeizeran utar evita i 
Tel sit wggaguitssri-ai 3TH aay ST STUT: VS 


A visvatah pratyancam jigharmyaraksasá 
manasa tajjuseta. Maryasri sprhayadvarno' 
agnirnabhimrse tanva jarbhuranah. 


I perceive agni (fire and vital air) directly in and 
from all directions. It is the beauty and wealth of 
humanity, lovely in form and colour, and, vibrating by 
and through the body, it is soothing and auspicious to 
feel and endure. Just as I take it up for study and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


212 YAJURVEDA 


celebration with an honest mind full of love and 
reverence, so you too all take it up and enjoy. 


25. (Agni Devata, Somaka Rshi) 


uk erstufa: enfefidéenr-ientq i 
SISA mp ul 


Pari vajapatih kaviragnirhavyanyakramit. 
Dadhadratnani dasuse. 


Agni, creator, producer, preserver and giver of 
food and energy, omniscient eye of the universe, holds 
and wields the wealth of the world for the generous and 
the deserving people. Through the fire, He receives and 
universally disperses the materials offered in yajna by 
the house-holders. 


26. (Agni Devata, Payu Rshi) 
ufi cre ut aa fade iffufz d 
sagt fea faa gam srempueean usu 
Pari tvagne puram vayam viprain sahasya 
dhimahi. Dhrsadvarnam dive dive hantaram 


bhanguravatam. 


Agni/Commander of the forces, brilliant, 
courageous, enduring, awesome, pious and 
knowledgeable, defender of the weak and destroyer of 
the wicked, day in and day out we honour you, praise 
you, thank you in gratitude. 


27. (Agni Devata, Gritsamada Rshi) 


ma rfreenisrererfureerda szreceragu- redii | a 
ertvaeeerar eireerecet Jor fad Brera rfel: usw 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XI 273 


Tvamagne dyubhistvamasusuksanistva- 
madbhyastvamasmanaspari. Tvam vanebhya- 
stvamosadhibhyastvam nrnam nrpate jayase 
Suchih. 


Agni/Ruler/Yajamana, guardian and protector of 
the people, brilliant as daylight, instant in action against 
evil and darkness, from the waters and air, herbs, forests 
and sunbeams, thunder, cloud and granite, you take the 
best and rise pure and purer, strong and stronger among 
the people every day every way. 


28. (Agni Devata, Gritsamada Rshi) 


dena ver fer: tasata t yout Senay 
yrn: aerate wirernfgreen Garth d 
Ved cared xpudlensstermm asa relay d 
fra wsmszirsfe «urd uf?rem: aerate difrem- 
Rea GATS: udi 


Devasya tva savituh prasave '$vinorbahubhyarm 
pusno hastabhyam. Prthivyah sadhasthadagnim 
purisyamangirasvat khanami. Jyotismantam 
tvagne supratikamajasrena bhanuna didyatam. 
Sivam prajabhyo’himsantam prthivyah 
sadhasthadagnim purisyamangirasvat 
khanamah. 


In this yajnic world of Lord Savita’s creation, (in 
the field of science and technology), with the attraction- 
sustenance power of the earth and the sun, and the 
positive-negative circuit of universal energy, from the 
womb of the earth and the sky, I discover and develop 
the heat and light of agni, immanent and beneficent 
power of nature present like air everywhere. 


Agni, lord of light, by your grace we discover 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


274 YAJURVEDA 


and develop the power of agni, electricity from the midst 
of the sky, since it is present universally like the breath 
of air — agni which is a source of light, bright and 
beautiful, blazing by the splendour of the eternal sun, 
injuring none, and a means of comfort and happiness 
for all the people. 


29. (Agni Devata, Gritsamada Rshi) 


ami yota ars: dagafea: frau | 


asa nai user a yh feat ourdur efrunr 
Were Ren 


Apam prsthamasi yoniragneh samudramabhitah 
pinvamanam. Vardhamano mahan’a ca puskare 
divo matraya varimna prathasva. 


Agni, universal electric energy, you are the carrier 
of the waters and the mother of fire. Expanding the 
oceans (on earth and in the sky), yourself expanding on 
all sides, go on expanding with the expansive space of 
the heavens in the great womb of eternity. 


30. (Dampati Devate, Gritsamada Rshi) 


"rd cup xem ad a cashes emerssu | 
acad deat yaaa dither dao! 


Sarma ca stho varma ca stho’chidre bahule’ 
ubhe. Vyacasvati samvasatham bhrtamagnim 
purisyam. 


Man and wife, both of you live together in a 
comfortable home of peace and plenty, safety and 
security, in a state of abundance and uninterrupted 
happiness. Live together a long age with yajna which, 
well-maintained, is the best guardian-source of conjugal 
bliss. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XI 275 


31. (Jayapati Devate, Gritsamada Rshi) 
adama fiat udressiur art | 
aha Ret ufeurausterfiq ua 9 


Samvasathain svarvida samici'urasa tmana. 
Agnimantarbharisyanti jyotismantamajasramit. 


Man and wife, come together with heart and soul 
in unison, fully caring for each other and all, attaining 
a state of conjugal bliss, and live in peace and joy a 
long age with yajna fire, eternal light immanent in all, 
giving life and energy to all — and extended through 
the yajna of technology to be a source of new power 
and comfort. 


32. (Agni Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi) 


utteatste favastisaretat cat gat Prt à 
aà yaaa Fried 1 gA fede 
arad: 3231 


Purisyo’si visvabhara’atharva tva prathamo 
niramanthadagne. Tvamagne puskaradadhy- 
atharva niramanthata. Murdhno vi$vasya 
vaghatah. 


Agni, fire/electric energy, present in everything, 
you are the sustainer of the world. The first man of 
highest knowledge of reality, ‘Atharva’, explores you 
on top of the world, collects you and brings you down 
from the sky. 


33. (Agni Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi) 


ad cr aag: Yass Asado: i 
IESU Gay BRI 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


276 YAJURVEDA 


Tamu tva dadhyannrsih putra’ tdhe’atharvanah. 
Vrtrahanam purandaram. 


Then ‘Dadhyang’, man of science and 
technology, and son-like disciple of the man of vision 
and science, ‘Atharva’, further lights and develops you, 
‘Indra’, i.e., electric energy, breaker of the clouds and 
shatterer of the hidden sources. 


34. (Agni Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi) 


ad ver uregt qur adia aeqe-dar | 


eos tot ToT nex 


Tamu tva pathyo vrsa samidhe dasyuhantamam. 
Dhananjayam rane rane. 


Agni, energy existing in water and air, shower- 
like source of power, winner of wealth in project after 
project, destroyer of evil and wickedness, I develop you 
in a positive and constructive manner. 


35. (Hota Devata, Devashrava & Devavata Rshis) 


tid Eig: wasd ce fulfencaruaraat cadet 
art i cardigan gferat eromernt qeastart aat 


ST: URI 


Sida hotah sva'u loke cikitvantsadaya yajnam 
sukrtasya yonau. Devavirdevan havisa yaja- 
syagne brhadyajamane vayo dhah. 

Hota, expert of the science of yajna, take your 
seat of bliss on the vedi, light and complete the yajna in 
the home of the noble yajamana. Agni, presiding power 
of yajna, developed and protected by the noble sages, 
feed the devas, powers of nature, with yajna materials 
and bless the yajamana with the great gift of health and 
longevity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XI 277 


36. (Agni Devata, Gritsamada Rshi) 


fr erat gases faabet sifaats usstaacgaet: 
srdergaduufddfidw: weer:  vifelftets- 
sifi3: BEN 


Ni hota hotrsadane vidanastveso didivan’ asadat 
sudaksah. Adabdhavratapramatir vasisthah 
sahasrambharah sucijihvo’ agnih. 


The young disciple, participant in the yajna of 
education, sits close to his teacher in the house of 
learning. Eager to learn and shine brilliant in virtue and 
Dharma, smart and strong in performance, he is 
dedicated fearlessly to the vows and values of his own 
conscious choice. Blest is he with a thousand virtues of 
generosity, with a tongue of purity like fire itself. 


37. (Agni Devata, Praskanva Rshi) 


atlas ma uea mea sends: | 

fer qadmssted Hea wur Weed yia RVI 
Sam sidasva mahan’ asi $ocasva devavitamah. 
Vi dhumamagne 'arusam miyedhya srja prasasta 
darsatam. 

Agni, venerable teacher, participating in the yajna 
of education, great indeed you are and most eminent of 
noble scholars. Shine and burn with the light of 
knowledge and purity. Take your preceptorial seat, 
remove the dark and create a full human being, 
handsome and brilliant as the day. 


38. (Apah Devata, Sindhudweepa Rshi) 
sot ected nAi wem: i 
wratumemarafstearmrder: afore: usc 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


278 YAJURVEDA 


Apo devirupa srja madhumatirayaksmaya 
prajabhyah. Tasamasthanadujjihatamosadhayah 
supippalah. 


Man of science and medicine, create excellent 
waters of spirituous efficacy and with their use in 
horticulture produce medicinal herbs and fruits for 
treatment of the people against consumptive diseases. 


39. (Vayu Devata, Sindhudweepa Rshi) 


a x atasat asmqurarm ea aghen | at 
Sart otfa words ae da acteeg qud usen 


Sam te vayurmatarisva dadhatuttanaya hrdayam 
yadvikastam. Yo devanam carasi pranathena 
kasmai deva vasadastu tubhyam. 


Lady of the home, generous and broadminded, 
may the fragrant air of yajna sailing in the mother-sky 
support and inspire your liberal heart beaming with joy. 


Lord of home, noble and generous, moving in 
the company of the blessed and the brilliant people with 
spirit and enthusiasm, may all my effort and action be 
for your good. 


40. (Agni Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi) 


mid wR ae ert atserardacea: | 
aratssra fayans ferrent («o i 


Sujato jyotisa saha Sarma varuthama 'sadatsvah. 
Vaso'agne visvarupam samvyayasva vibhavaso. 


Agni/Grihastha, well-arisen with light and lustre, 
abide in peace and security in your happy home. Shining 
with beauty and prosperity, live decently, enjoy all forms 
and modes of dress and ornaments, without vanity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XI 279 


41. (Agni Devata, Vishvamana Rshi) 
sd fees xesenret at dem ferar i get at are 
dem xisraerfzret efe uerfeafut: wee 


Udu tistha svadhvarava no devya dhiya. Drse 
ca bhasa brhata susukvaniragne yahi 
susastibhih. 


Agni, worthy house-holder of yajnic work and 
conduct of love and non-violence, arise, and, with noble 
and virtuous intelligence, advance and protect us. 
Brilliant as fire and the sun, go forward with great 
splendour and fame, doing laudable work for all to see. 


42. (Agni Devata, Kanva Rshi) 
weiss y ulsmaa fau gat a fena | 
meat aster ata aafaa figata esu 


Urdhva’i su na'utaye tistha devo na savita. 
Urdhvo  váàjasya sanità yadanjibhir- 
vaghadbhirvihvayamahe. 

Learned teacher, of high quality of mind and 
intelligence, brilliant as the sun, stay firm for our 
protection and progress. Eminent scholar of science and 
technology as you are, you procure for us means of 
power and defence. We call upon you and honour you 
with the scholars of distinction and penetrative vision 
sharp as the beams of sunlight. 


43. (Agni Devata, Trita Rshi) 


Sad Tai ssifa qesmeerpumisauassmdsi i 
faa: foray: ufi atse u unqeerssrfér HAP 
Wag TUT: USB 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


280 YAJURVEDA 


Sa jato garbho'asi rodasyoragne carurvibhrta’ 
osadhisu. Citrah Si$uh pari tamamsyaktun pra 
matrbhyo' adhi kanikradadgah. 


Learned teacher, man of knowledge, just as the 
morning sun, rising between the heaven and earth, 
beautiful, of various wonders, as its warmth is absorbed 
in the herbs, dispels the shades of darkness from the 
heaven and earth and moves on rising in its glory, so 
should the child grow up gaining the light of knowledge 
to shine in the life of its parents in the home. 


44. (Agni Devata, Trita Rshi) 


Rent da digagssresta erai i 
yia Wear: dirnerméur ssi 


Sthiro bhava vidvanga’asurbhava vajyarvan. 
Prthurbhava susadastvamagneh purisavahanah. 


Child, keen for knowledge, be firm in the matter 
of education. Strong of body, sharp and smart in action, 
fast in learning and doing, gain practical knowledge of 
life’s affairs. Bright as fire and light, create a place of 
dignity for yourself. Enjoy great prosperity and support 
the people around. 


45. (Agni Devata, Chitra Rshi) 


frat da ws Aaa SR: | 
a zratufzretssrfr stearate ar ermurdl4 wea ut 


Sivo bhava prajabhyo mdnusibhyastvam- 
angirah. Ma dyavaprthivi’abhi Socirma’- 
ntariksam ma vanaspatin. 
Sonny, dear as my breath of life, be good to the 
people, to all human creations. Damage not the earth 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XI 281 


and the environment, pollute not the sky, do not 
desecrate the heavens. Do not destroy the trees and the 
forests. 


46. (Agni Devata, Trita Rshi) 


Wd ant amaaa: oat i naa direi 


m urere: uw às quur sicnt meng 
sass ead ise ui 


Praitu vāji kanikradannanadadrasabhah patva. 

Bharannagnim purisyam ma padyayusah pura. 

Vrsagnim Vrsanam bharannapam garbham 
samudriyam. Agna'a yahi vitaye. 

Dear son, educated and enlightened, vibrating, 

fast and fiery with electric energy, rushing, roaring, 


giving, shooting to the goal, fall not before the full years 
of your life are attained. 


Potent, creative, procreative, bearing and using 
the versatile energy of electricity, bring the showers of 
rain, child of the sea, sky and solar power, down to earth 
for the good of all. 


47. (Agni Devata, Trita Rshi) 


PERT T dile gre: treater: 
uR aa haart OAT: | Ca. 
fasas hranita aridas qfi feist 


Rtain satyamrtam satyamagnim purisyam- 
angirasvadbharamah. Osadhayah prati- 
modadhvamagnimetam $ivamayantamabhyatra 
yusmah. Vyasyan vi$va' anira' amiva nisidanno' 
apa durmatim jahi. 


Children of the nation, we know the Divine Law, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


282 YAJURVEDA 


simple, straight, constant and eternal. We observe it in 
life and conduct. We know the truth of existence, real 
and dynamic. We follow it in thought, word and deed. 
We bear and use ‘agni’, the energy of nature, life's mode 
of preservation and promotion, and scientific means of 
protection and prosperity. It blesses herbs, trees and 
other vegetation, and these give us health and energy. 


Listen you all, this agni is come, so good and 
blissful. Welcome it in response and rejoice. 


Be seated, man of science and medicine. Drive 
off all that is enervating and infectious. Throw off all 
that is stupid and ill-disposed. 


48. (Agni Devata, Trita Rshi) 


sidera: ufdqsuira yda: afaoren: i 
sa at mised: wersusmwenmmdeg use 


Osadhayah pratigrbhnita puspavatih 
supippalah. Ayam vo garbha’rtviyah pratnain 
sadhasthamasadat. 

Come would be mothers (in response to the 
generosity of nature), take the soothing beauty of the 
herbal flowers and the nectar-sweets of fruit so that the 
timely arrival of the coming guest to the maternal womb 
may be auspicious. 


49. (Agni Devata, Utkeela Rshi) 


fea urshar uer Aspat ea fear rasata: i 
grio ged: STH PST ATE eter wuildr ines n 
Vi pajasa prthuna sosucano badhasva dviso 
raksaso' amivah. Susarmano brhatah sarmani 
syamagneraham suhavasya pranitau. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XI 283 


Dear husband, blest with various strength and 
power, bright and pure as agni (light), great, prosperous 
and generous, dedicated to yajna and social life, stop 
and remove the jealous, hostile and wicked enemies of 
our married life, and I would live happy in your beautiful 


home of love and peace, observing your noble values 
of life. 


50. (Apah Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi) 
amar fe tat data ssi dares ad 
ae wia eu non 


Apo hi stha mayobhuvastà na'urje dadhatana. 
Mahe ranaya caksase. 


Women, pure, cool and generous like holy waters, 
creators of domestic peace and conjugal joy, stay firm 
and constant and hold on with strength and energy to 
face the great and memorable battles of life with us. 


51. (Apah Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi) 
ad: Radd tae arstade a: | 
sordiRa arat: uu 


Yo vah Sivatamo rasastasya bhajayateha nah. 
USatiriva matarah. 


Women, the most blissful pleasure and happiness 
of life that is yours and ours, create and share the same 
here in the home with us with the love and passion for 
motherhood. 


52. (Apah Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi) 


wenrssTi ware at aca aata freq à 
stat smda ST A: RN 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


284 YAJURVEDA 


Tasma'aram gamama vo yasya ksayaya 
jinvatha. Apo janayatha ca nah. 


Women, cool, pure and generous like holy waters, 
be active and happy and create conjugal peace and joy 
for a happy home for us and yourselves. And we too 
shall be wholly and exclusively with you with all our 
heart and soul. 


53. (Mitra Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi) 
fua: exert uferdi «qf a edrfdur we d 
guid wmraeaermagurd cm SSeS wismazd: tn a t 


Mitrah sainsrjya prthivum bhumim ca jyotisa 
saha. Sujatam jatavedasamayaksmaya tva sam 
srjami prajabhyah. 


Just as Mitra, the sun, joining the earth and the 
sky, illumines the two with its light, similarly I join you, 
Agni (yajna fire), brilliant and beautiful, and light you 
for the health and well-being of the people. 


Just as you, husband and dear friend, having 
joined the earth and home with the light of your 
knowledge and sense of justice, give me love and joy 
for the health and happiness of the family and the people, 
so do I join and help you, man of noble birth and 
education, in the life of the home and the people. 


54. (Rudra Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi) 
Gal: Gerd uferet sper: wem | 
at pasza deu Wed yx 


Rudrah samsrjya prthivim brhajjyotih samidhire. 
Tesam bhanurajasra’ icchukro devesu rocate. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XI 285 


Rudras (creative energies of the universe) create 
the earth and light it with the sun. The sun is the 
concentration of their energy and shines among the 
luminous objects continuously. 


Similarly, men and women of knowledge and 
justice create the light and joy of life among the people 
and shine like the sun. 


55. (Sineewalee Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi) 


weder adet ws: aval du d 
zeai yet enc fu-irereit ehuirq AT uuu t 


Samsrstam vasubhi rudrairdhiraih karmanyam 
mrdam. Hastabhyam mrdvim krtva sinivali 
krnotu tam. 


Young man, just as an artist refines and softens 
his plastic material with his hands and creates a beautiful 
form, so a girl, soft and gentle, dexterous of hand and 
efficient in yajna ritual, shaped and refined by serious 
teachers of Vasu and Rudra (of twenty-four and thirty- 
six years) standing is worthy of your love. Win her love 
and take her to wife. 


56. (Aditi Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi) 


Riar deaat deter citar à 
m qetufed weirat ead Sedat: eg UI 


Sinivali sukaparda sukurira svaupasa. Sa 
tubhyamadite mahyokham dadhatu hastayoh. 
Aditi, infinite creative power, mother of the 


universe, the young woman inspired with love, of 
beautiful hair, handsome of body, wearing beautiful 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


286 YAJURVEDA 


ornaments, virtuous in action and expert in food 
preparation carries in her hands a tray of delicious foods 
and waits on you. 


57. (Aditi Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi) 


sat chui neat smesardfafaffrar à Wrap wd 
Say ETT fateri visam | EET fortdsfut o 


Ukham krnotu saktya bahubhyamaditirdhiya. 

Mata putram yathopasthe sagnim bibharttu 
garbha’ a. Makhasya Siro’si. 

Young householder, you are the head of yajna. 

With her power, skill and intelligence, and, with her 


own hands, may Aditimake a tray of yajna materials for 
you. 


Just as a mother holds her baby in her lap, so 
may your wife hold agni, a bright and vibrating foetus, 
in her womb in grihastha yajna. 


58. (Vasu, Rudra, Aditya, Vishvedeva Devata, 
Sindhudveepa Rshi) 


waa Hurd waa samga gare 


aaa egret quaep deity w- 


ernia favilsfer "—— 
GASSES ASAT UGE UI 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XI 287 


Vasavastva krnvantu gayatrena chandasa’- 
ngirasvad dhruva'si prthivyasi dharaya mayi 
prajain rayasposam gaupatyain suviryain 
sajatanyajamanaya rudrastva krnvantu 
traistubhena chandasa'ngirasvad dhruva’- 
syantariksamasi dharya mayi prajam 
rayasposam gaupatyam suviryam sajatan- 
yajamanayadityastva krnvantu jagatena 
chandasa 'ngirasvad dhruva'si dyaurasi dharya 
mayi prajain rayasposam gaupatyain suviryain 
sajatanyajamanaya vi$ve tva deva vaisvanarah 
krnvantvanustubhena chandasa'ngirasvad 
dhruva'si diso’si dharya mayi prajain rayas- 
posam gaupatyai  suviryaíin sajatan- 
yajamanaya. 


Virgin girl, firm and strong you are like the breath 
of vitality, blissful and generous as earth. May the 
teachers of the Vasu order of 24 years prepare you with 
the inspiring gayatri verses to be my wife and give you 
unto me. 


Bachelor youth, unshakeable as the vital air and 
tolerant as the earth, may the teachers of the Vasu order 
of 24 years prepare you with the inspiring gayatri verses 
to be my husband and give you unto me. Bless me with 
children, wealth of life, good health, economic 
prosperity, and honour and lustre. And the children 
would be for the yajamana, the teacher, for study. 


Young woman, you are firm like the sky, full of 
love like the space between earth and heaven. May the 
teachers of the Rudra order of 36 years prepare you with 
the trishtup verses to be my wife and give you unto me. 


Young man, you are firm like the sky, full of love 
like the space between earth and heaven. May the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


288 YAJURVEDA 


teachers of the Rudra order of 36 years prepare you with 
the trishtup verses to be my husband and give you unto 
me. Get me children, wealth of life, good health, 
economic prosperity, and social honour and lustre. And 
the children would be for the yajamana, the teacher, for 
study. 


Young and learned woman, you are inviolable like 
the light of the sun, brilliant and enlightening. May the 
teachers of the Aditya order of 48 years, with the jagati 
verses, give you unto me as wife. 


Young man of learning, you are firm and 
invincible like the light of the sun, brilliant in character 
and behaviour. May the teachers of the Aditya order of 
48 years, with the jagati verses, give you unto me as 
husband. Give me children, world fame, good health, 
economic prosperity and brilliance of well-being. And 
the children would be for the yajamana, a brilliant 
teacher, for study. 


Blessed girl, you are firm and strong as the 
universal spirit of life among living beings, darling of 
space in all the directions. May all the learned sages 
and brilliant leaders of the world, with the anushtup 
verses, give you unto me as wife. 


Blessed young man, firm and strong as the vital 
link of life among living beings, admired of everybody 
in all the directions, may all the learned sages and 
brilliant leaders of the world, with the anushtup verses, 
give you unto me as husband. Bless me with children, 
glory, health, economic prosperity and intellectual 
brilliance, and the pride of heroic motherhood. And the 
children would be for the yajamana, the teacher 
preceptor of truth, for study. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XI 289 
59. (Aditi Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi) 


sda wenenafat fact eum 1 para a 
"élu uei aaa 1 gave: urdesafaft: 
gaaaf usu 


Adityai rasnasyaditiste bilam grbhnatu Krtvaya 
sa mahimukham mrnmayim yonimagnaye. 
Putrebhyah prayacchadaditih srapayaniti. 


Mother teacher, you are the giver of knowledge 
for the girl-child, your disciple. Let the disciple receive 
your body of knowledge with observance of the 
discipline of ‘brahmacharya’ (celibacy and austerity). 


Let the mother give the big, sacred, earthen 
sacrificial tray to the disciples to mix and cook the 
materials and prepare these for the fire of yajna. 


60. (Vasus and others Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi) 


aT STUSRq Ugo 


Vasavastva dhupayantu gayatrena chandasa- 
ngirasvad rudrastva dhupayantu traistubhena 
chandasangirasvadadityastva dhupayantu 
jagatena chandasangirasvad visve tva deva 
vai$vanara dhupayantvanustubhena chandasa- 
ngirasvad indrastva dhupayatu varunastva 
dhupayatu visnustva dhupayatu. 


Brahmachari/Brahmacharini, may the teachers of 
the first order of Vasus of 24 years standing, with gayatri 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


290 YAJURVEDA 


verses, like the vitality of pranas, strengthen you with 
nourishing and delicious foods. 


May the scholars of the higher order of Rudras 
of 36 years standing, with trishtup verses, like science, 
enlighten you with scientific method and discriminative 
knowledge. 


May the scholars of the highest order of Adityas 
of 48 years standing, with jagati verses, like the purest 
air of the sky, temper you with right conduct and 
behaviour. 


May the versatile scholars and men of wide 
experience of the world, with anushtup verses, like the 
vibrations of electric currents, vitalize you with inspiring 
advice and discussion. 


May Indra, man of power in governance, train 
you in the art of management and administration. May 
Varuna, man of right choice, give you the right vision 
and will in practical ethics and politics of value. May 
Vishnu, man of comprehensive knowledge and yoga, 
train you in the practice of personal and collective yoga 
and yajna of cooperation and common pursuits. 


61. (Aditi & others Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi) 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XI 291 


Aditistva devi visvadevyavati prthivyah 
sadhasthe'angirasvat khanatvavata devanam tva 
patnirdevirvisvadevyavatth prthivyah sadhasthe 
angirasvaddadhatukhe dhisanastva devirvisva- 
devyavatih prthivyah sadhasthe angirasvad- 
abhindhatamukhe varutristva devirvisva- 
devyavatth prthivyah sadhasthe angirasv- 
acchrapayantukhe gnastva devirvisvadevyavatih 
prthivyah sadhasthe angirasvatpacantukhe 
janayastvachinnapatra devirvisvadevyavatih 
prthivyah sadhasthe angirasvat pacantukhe. 


Innocent child, may the noble teachers, 
distinguished among the scholars of the world, at a 
settled place on the earth probe and open out your mind 
for development like the heat of fire. 


Intelligent girl, may the wives of scholars, 
distinguished among scholars of the world, at a 
distinguished school on the earth, hold you in their care 
like the breath of life. 


Ambitious girl, may the women of science and 
word-power, distinguished among scholars of the world, 
light up your will and intelligence like the vitality of 
their own life. 


Industrious girl, keen for the wealth of knowledge 
like a yajna vessel, may the noble teachers, eminent 
among distinguished scholars of the world in the field 
of science, in a reputed school of the world, enlighten 
you and temper you to perfection like the light of the 
sun. 


Brilliant girl, may the scholars of Vaidic 
knowledge, noble and distinguished among scholars of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


292 YAJURVEDA 


the world, in some reputed institution of the world, 
enlighten you to fullness of resistance and action like 
the currents of electricity. 


Dedicated girl, may the noble women of 
distinction, eminent among the scholars of the world, 
most meritorious and flying high in achievement, 
generous as teachers refine you and distil your human 
quality to perfection like the nectar of juices in the lap 
of mother earth in an ideal institution. 


Dear girl, be with them and learn, and grow to 
human perfection. 


62. (Mitra Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 
fired adog taet arate à 
grt farstaera dis 211 


Mitrasya carsanidhrto’vo devasya sanasi. 
Dyumnam citra$ravastamam. 


Lady of the house, honour and safeguard the old 
and auspicious wealth and reputation of your noble 
husband, friend and supporter of all and an admirable 
man of generosity and hospitality. 


63. (Savita Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 


secat afadrdug uurfur: cea: dares reat 
sTederurar gfsreararen fasrssmdur 16311 


Devastva savitodvapatu supanih svangurih 

subahuruta $aktya. Avyathamana prthivyamasa 
disa’aprna. 

Lady of the house, your noble husband, brilliant 

and generous like the sun, of long arms, beautiful hands 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XI 293 


and lovely fingers, with his strength and potency may 
bless you with conjugal joy and children. You too, 
without fear or trouble, may fill the earth in all direction 
with hope and expectation. 


64. (Mitra Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 


were gedt wate fees spem cen d 
fiat dssot ufiaarearfsbearsusr ar tf usu 


Utthaya brhati bhavodu tistha dhruva tvam. 
Mitraitam ta'ukham pari dadamyabhittya’esa 
ma bhedi. 


Enlightened girl, arise, and having risen, be great 
and stay firm. 


Friend, dear groom, I give unto you this noble 
and generous girl for wife wholly and exclusively for a 
free and fearless life. Never have any reservations with 
her, never entertain any differences with her as a matter 
of faith and trust. 


65. (Vasus & others Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 


Vasavastva"chrndantu gayatrena chandasa- 
ngirasvadrudrastva "chrndantu traistubhena 
chandasangirasvadadityastva "cchrndantu 
jagatena chandasangirasvadvi$ve tva deva 
vai$vanara' acchrndantvanustubhena 
chandasangirasvat. 


May the scholars of the first order of Vasus, with 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


294 YAJURVEDA 


the inspiring gayatri verses, kindle you like fire. May 
the scholars of the higher order of Rudras, with the 
enlightening trishtup verses, enlighten and firm you up, 
like pranic energy, in the triple discipline of knowledge, 
action and worship. May the scholars of the highest 
order of Adityas, like the sun, brighten you up with the 
jagati verses of world vision. May all the noble saints 
and sages of the world, with the elevating anushtup 
verses, enliven and sanctify you like the distilled 
essences of nature's powers. 


66. (Agni & others Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 


UWepsreiveTe! wsmdad uda coed Asana 
WTE neg 


Akitimagnim prayujain svaha mano medham- 
agnim prayujam svaha cittam vijiatamagnim 
prayujain svaha vaco vidhrtimagniin prayujain 
svaha prajapataye manave svaha'gnaye 
vai$vanaraya svaha. 
With truth of word and action, light the fire which 
inspires to courageous thinking and collective decision. 


With truth and honesty of social behaviour, light 
up the inner vitality which inspires the mind to will and 
the intellect to analyse and understand the problems of 
life. 


With honest social action, promote the agni, 
social will, which inspires chitta, instrument of 
knowledge, to think and preserve the knowledge already 
gained. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XI 295 


With truth of word and honesty of commitment, 
maintain the fire which inspires you to proclaim the 
truth in speech and to safeguard it in memory and 
tradition. 


Keep up the fire of inspiration, action and 
enthusiasm for the preservation and promotion of agni 
(fire and energy, both physical and mental), lighted, used 
and applied in personal yoga and collective action in 
the service of Prajapati, lord of the created world, Manu, 
men of thought, research and meditation, Agni, the 
enlightened leaders of the world, and Vaishwanara, the 
omnipresent Life of existence — the Supreme. 


(Keep up the fire, for the fire, in the service of 
Fire, Agni). 


67. (Savita Devata, Atreya Rshi) 


fasat sere Aquat atta uem | 
fasat trasgusata get duita qera caret usd 


Visvo devasya neturmarto vurita sakhyam. Visvo 
raya isudhyati dyumnam vrnita pusyase svaha. 


Let the people of the world opt for the love and 
friendship of the leading Light of the world. Let them 
all gird up their loins, take up arms for the wealth of the 
world and win the prize of honour and prosperity with 
truth of word and deed. This is how you flourish. 


68. (Amba Devata, Atreya Rshi) 


"rp fer m y RAs ga dita g | 
sifasad hR: ngen 


Ma su bhittha ma su riso'mba dhrsnu virayasva 
su. Agniscedam karisyathah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


296 YAJURVEDA 


Mother, alienate us not from learning. Hurt us 
not to ruin. Proud and bold, be valiant and take us to 
the end of the job with success. Mother and father/ 
Mother and child, doing thus bold and fine together 
like Agni, fire and the sun, you will accomplish the task 
on hand. 


69. (Amba Devata, Atreya Rshi) 
ae dfe ufafa adsa arn cert 
qa 1 ae Asgard gamer efè 
ASSAF UGS 


Drmhasva devi prthivi svastaya'asuri maya 
svadhaya krta’si. Justam devebhya’idamastu 
havyamarista tvamudihi yajne’asmin. 


Noble woman of knowledge and brilliance, 
generous as mother earth, be strong and firm for the 
sake of peace and joy. By your own virtue, with food 
and water, you have realized the power vibrant in pranic 
energy. Pure and unsullied, rise in this home yajna and 
help us grow. The food you have prepared for the yajna 
and the knowledge you have gathered,may it be a gift 
for all the people. 


70. (Agni Devata, Somahuti Rshi) 
xeu: afachafa: weit erat atva: | 
eéuupissmgd: Meo! 


Drvannah sarpirasutih pratno hota varenyah. 
Sahasasputro' adbhutah. 


Noble young man, living on herbs and fruits for 
food, and the fragrance of distilled ghee from yajna for 
‘drink’ (breathing), a yajnic of long standing, choice of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XI 297 


the good, son of a bold and courageous man, wonderful 
of nature, character and performance, rise in this home 
yajna of the family for growth in peace and joy. 
71. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi) 

utensatft Hadisi satay à 

"refi aR seta wee 


Parasya'adhi samvato’varan’ abhyatara. 
Yatrahamasmi tan’ ava. 


Virgin girl of excellence, on marriage, leave those 
you have departed from, and come, join those who are 
here on this side. Support and defend those wherever I 
am. If there was anything low or mean earlier, give up 
that, and adopt and uphold the values of our family. 


72. (Agni Devata, Varuni Rshi) 
umet: ure dfessesgerife i 
utter: gefratssa ed dur Wel: eri 
Paramasyah paravato rohidasva’ihagahi. 


Purisyah purupriyo'gne tvam tara mrdhah. 


Agni, young man of excellence, best of social 
supporters, most loved of the people, come here from 
afar on a chariot of fire for this excellent girl, join her, 
and with her overcome the hurdles of your life. 


73. (Agni Devata, Jamadagni Rshi) 
wr cf cart fer a aréfor eenfet i 
ad dated a yd assed afacsr 193i! 


Yadagne kani kani cid a te daruni dadhmasi. 
Sarvam tadastu te ghrtam tajjusasva yavisthya. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


298 YAJURVEDA 


Young man/woman, brilliant like fire, whatever 
things are for you, all those we place on the shelf. Accept 
and take all that as fire accepts the oblations of ghee. 
All that is ours is yours. All that is yours is ours too. 


74. (Agni Devata, Jamadagni Rshi) 


atana us amsstfradte i 
ad deed a gd asdeca wfemew wow 


Yadattyupajihvika yad vamro atisarpati. Sarvam 
tadastu te ghrtam tajjusasva yavisthya. 


Young man/woman of excellence, brilliant as fire, 
whatever the woman/man of controlled taste and tongue 
eats, and howsoever her/his breath flows in and out, all 
that is yours, for you. That is for your love and joy. 
Take all that as fire consumes the oblations. 


75. (Agni Devata, Nabhanedishtha Rshi) 


adenda ardissalaa farsa unde | 
mor aren Hadise ur a ufdaom Rar u 


Aharaharaprayavam bharanto’ $vayeva tisthate 
ghasamasmai. Rayasposena samisa madanto’- 
gne ma te prativesa risama. 


Agni, learned man of justice and brilliance, just 
as we bear lovely green grass for a horse in the stables 
every day, so we bear good and wholesome food and 
other things to this fair and just house-holder as his 
partners in good deeds of Dharma. May we, enjoying 
ourselves with plenty of food and energy, health and 
wealth with him, never injure the honour and reputation 
of this noble man out of jealousy. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XI 299 
76. (Agni Devata, Nabhanedishtha Rshi) 
mat ufereur: firemisarit vreredratz ged zer 
We | gra gedadt usb Gahaha uda 
MARA wos 


Nabha prthivyah samidhane'agnau rayasposaya 
brhate havamahe. Irammadam brhaduktham 
yajatram jetaramagnim prtanasu sasahim. 


When the fire is lit in the vedi in the heart of the 
land and the battle is raging for abundance and 
prosperity and for high national honour, we call upon 
agni, a fiery leader with electric action, victorious in 
battle and of tremendous endurance, himself a man of 
plenty and prosperity, admirable of character and 
adorable in performance. (We call upon such a man to 
lead the nation.) 


77. (Agni Devata, Nabahanedishtha Rshi) 
"m: Atsain aeons i 
a tat a a deehanediwdssrmersfüsesmemer neo 


Yah sena’ abhitvariravyadhinirugana’uta. Ye 

stena ye cataskarastanste'agne'pidadhamyasye. 

There are the forces up against in arms, large, 

swift and ready to strike. There are the thieves and the 

smugglers. All these that are there, I throw into the 

flames of fire. President of the Council, commander of 
the army, you do the same. 


78. (Agni Devata, Nabhanedishtha Rshi) 


weiten Ale SHE ETAT SST | 
stares waded wate gata, weed 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


300 YAJURVEDA 


Damstrabhyam malimlunjambhyaistaskaran’ 
uta. Hanubhyam stenan bhagavastanstvam 
khada sukhaditan. 


Ruler of the land, Chief of law and order, tear 
the night-walkers and highway men with the fangs of 
punishment, crush the robbers and smugglers with the 
jaws of justice. Seize and hold the thieves and grabbers 
of others' rights and property with the chains of law. 
You eliminate them all. 


79. (Senapati Devata, Nabhanedishtha Rshi) 
a way ufereta Aah eni | 
a ensleruraerai«d cert cwm weed 


Ye janesu malimlava stenasastaskara vane. Ye 
kaksesvaghayavastanste dadhami jambhayoh. 


Chief of law and order, those who commit 
despicable acts in the public, rob and smuggle in the 
forests, and commit crimes in high and hiding places 
and live a life of sin and crime, all these I put into the 
court of your justice. 


80. (Adhyapaka-Upadeshika Devata, Nabhanedishtha Rshi) 


asserting A mug wn: 
fraretssrenr facater wed d starar He uou 


Yo’asmabhyamaratiyddyasca no dvesate janah. 
Nindadyo' asman dhipsacca sarvam tam 
bhasmasa kuru. 


Ruler of the land, if a person maligns us out of 
hostility, or hates us out of jealousy, or speaks ill of us 
out of contempt, or deceives us to injure and destroy 
us, reduce all that hate, anger and negativity to ashes. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XI 301 
81. (Purohita & Yajamana Devata, Nabhanedishtha Rshi) 
aid Gi wr att def aca a 
aid at fry aerenhet quieaz ue s u 
Samsitam me brahma samsSitam viryam balam. 
Sainsitam ksatram jisnu yasyahamasmi puro- 
hitah. 

I am the high-priest of the yajamana, foremost in 
his creative and constructive projects. May the 
yajamana's knowledge of the Veda and mine be 
commendable. May his strength and prowess and mine 


be admirable. May his power and dominion and mine 
be great and praise-worthy. 


82. (Sabhapati & Yajamana Devata, Nabhanedishtha Rshi) 


sdui emgssifaqrqgessrm seu i 
Ro srefurrfirarqatarfi Cate NSA les 


Udesam bahu' atiramudvarco' atho balam. 
Ksinomi brahmana'mitranunnayami svan’ 
aham. 

I am the high-priest of the yajamana. With my 
knowledge and science of the Veda, I overcome the 
strength of arms, power and valour, honour and lustre 
of the others, i.e., thieves, robbers and cut-throats, etc., 
reduce their strength to nullity, and raise our honour 
and lustre high. 


83. (Yajamana & Purohita Devata, Nabhanedishtha Rshi) 


adusie At durmre spei: | 
Wd ard akasast at afe fea adder cai 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


302 YAJURVEDA 


Annapate nnasya no dehyanamivasya $usminah. 
Pra pra dataram tarisa' urjam no dhehi dvipade 
catuspade. 

Lord of food and energy, bless us with food, 
nourishing, invigorating, free from pollution and 
pleasing to taste. Bless the giver, the yajamana, to 
advance and attain fulfilment and prosperity. Give us 
energy both for humans and the animals. 


gla URES: d 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 303 


CHAPTER-XII 


1. (Agni Devata, Vatsapri Rshi) 


qt assa cela guider: frat Sart: | 
arfimudlssreeguifrdd-4 webs: usd 


Drsano rukma 'urvya vyadyaud durmarsamayuh 
Sriye rucanah. Agniramrto'abhavadvayo- 
bhiryadenam dyaurajanayatsuretah. 


Agni, Lord of Light, Light Itself, the Sun, 
explodes into light and illuminates the earth and reveals 
all the objects on the earth. The self-luminous lord, 
Himself the immortal seed of life, for His own glory 
and joy of the creatures, creates forms of indestructible 
life with foods as means and support of life. And He it 
is who creates the man of knowledge and vision (to 
show the divine path of life to others). 


2.  (AgniDevata, Kutsa Rshi) 


Tera «rra ferat emat fsreprebs are à 
maa wantssrdfanta wxerssr- aa 
gfeumar: usd 


Natkosasa samanasa virupe dhapayete 
sisumekam samici. Dyavaksama rukmo’ 
antarvibhati deva 'agnifa dharayan dravinodah. 

The night and the dawn, one dark, the other 
luminous, both different in form but of equal mind, 
together nurse one child, the sun, like two mothers. The 
self-luminous agni, light and life of the universe — of 
which the sun is a child — pervades both the earth and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


304 YAJURVEDA 


the heavens. All the powers of nature which sustain and 
invigorate life hold on to agni, the central life and spirit. 


3. (Savita Devata, Shyavashva Rshi) 


feat marta ufdzpzerd enfer: uratetra we fau 
ade fa mhra atuats+ wert 
fantaa nan 


Visva rupani pratimuncate kavih prasavid 
bhadram dvipade catuspade. Vi nakamakhyat 
savita varenyo'nu prayanamusaso virajati. 


Savita, lord of light and life, the sun, choice of 
all, watches all and inspires all. It lights up the dawn 
and illuminates and reveals all the forms of existence. 
It creates the means of life and support for the humans 
and the animals, and lights up the heavens above. 


4. (Garutman Devata, Shyavashva Rshi) 


aisha mata fort wad agda 
ual | xdidssmedr wrePvargit astesfe art a 
"rd à mda darafra ges fimus: great: | 
gaois meanrat us ta: Wa gne 


Suparno'si garutmanstrivrtte Siro gayatram 
caksurbrhadrathantare paksau. Stoma' atma 
chandainsyangani yajuinsi nama. Sama te 
tanurvamadevyam yajnayajniyam puccham 
dhisnyah $aphah. Suparno'si garutman divam 
gaccha svah pata. 


Man of knowledge and of the power of 
knowledge, you are like a celestial bird with beautiful 
wings and a high-flying soul: threefold virtue of 
knowledge, action and divine worship is your head and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 305 


brain by which you ward off the miseries of others. The 
knowledge of gayatri verses is your eye and vision. 
Brihad-rathantara sama verses are like your wings, 
something like a chariot by which you can cross the 
rivers of misery. Rigveda is your soul. The chhanda 
verses of the Veda are like the limbs of your body. The 
verses of Yajurveda are like your name and identity. 
Samaveda is like your body. The do's and dont's of the 
Vamadevya Samans are like your back bone. The roll 
of your voice is like your claws. You are like the divine 
eagle, Garuda, majestic and magnanimous. You are the 
sun, master of grandeur. Rise to the heavens. Find the 
bliss of heaven. 


5. (Vishnu Devata, Shyavashva Rshi) 


fact: sats wrucrer Teast S-asainte yria 
fechuwa fawn: matserfierfaet Fett was- 
sinterdRarasy fecha fast: matsen 
Em wd sasami faang fama fenum: 


mAs sat eared sasami fasis] 
faama ni 


Visnoh kramo si sapatnaha gayatram chanda’a 
roha prthivimanu vikramasva visnoh kramo’ 
syabhimatiha traistubham chanda 'aroha- 
ntariksamanu vikramasva visnoh kramo’sya- 
rattyato hanta jagatam chanda 'aroha divamanu 
vikramasva visnoh kramo'si $atruyato 
hantanustubham  chanda'aroha diso’nu 
vikramasva. 


Brilliant man of expansive knowledge, you are 
an instrument of Vishnu, omnipresent lord of the world, 
born to eliminate the jealous rivals. Study the gayatri 
verses, use the power revealed in there, go and expand 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


306 YAJURVEDA 


over the earth, cooperate with the earth, work on its 
resources, and develop the wealth and prosperity of the 
land. 


Noble scientist, you are a co-worker with 
omnipresent nature, born to defeat the proud and jealous 
forces inimical to growth. Study the trishtubh verses 
for knowledge and power for threefold comfort of body, 
mind and soul and, flying on the wings of that 
knowledge, cover the skies to explore and exploit the 
resources of the sky. 


Tempestuous scientist and astronaut, you are a 
friend of agni, universal electric energy, born to 
eliminate the failures and adversities of the internal and 
external life. Study the jagati verses for the knowledge 
of light and space and, on the wings of that knowledge, 
reach the heavens. Cooperate with space and light 
energy, cooperate with universal energy and conquer 
the inner darkness with the light, and external failures 
with knowledge. 


Steady man of technology, you are an instrument 
of eternal energy meant to serve as well as exploit the 
natural resources of the environment and eliminate the 
enemies who stem your growth. Go forward in and over 
all the directions on the earth and around on the wings 
of anushtubh verses, work with and on the currents of 
wind and energy and dominate over the directions to 
create one world on the earth in a healthy environment. 


6.  (AgniDevata, Vatsapree Rshi) 


sre Pr tardive at: amar thea einst: AEST 
wet wart fa zifüuurssnerar Uest art 


WIT: EI 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 307 


Akrandadagni stanayanniva dyauh ksama 
rerihad virudhah samanjan. Sadyo jajnano vi 
himiddho’ akhyada rodasi bhanuna bhatyantah. 


Agni roars like thunder in the sky and proclaims 
itself. Colourfully vitalizing the trees it caresses and 
blesses the earth with beauty and fruit. Properly lighted, 
it shines bright and immediately makes itself known. 
Between the earth and the heavens it blazes with its 
own splendour like the sun. 


(Just as agni is radiant and benevolent with its 
own majesty, so should the ruler/President of the 
republic be brilliant with his own qualities of nature, 
character and actions and bless the people with his grace 
and benevolence. Only a person of benevolence and 
brilliance deserves to be the ruler.) 


7. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi) 


arisera NaN ur aarda ae ws 
a | Gat Herat year urdur qued 


Agne’bhyavarttinnabhi ma nivarttasvayusa 
varcasa prajaya dhanena. Sanya medhaya rayya 
posena. 


Agni, brilliant and blazing presence abiding 
before us, generous man of knowledge, come blessing 
us with health and longevity, lustre of life, children and 
family, wealth and prosperity, acquisition and 
fulfilment, discriminative intelligence, beauty and 
dignity of life, and all-round growth and progress. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


308 YAJURVEDA 


8.  (AgniDevata, Vatsapree Rshi) 


amiss: wid xb werd: aed assurqd:i 
arem ura ardor wd -aeurehfir gaat xfaur- 
eT en 


Agne’angirah $atam te santvavrtah sahasram ta’ 
upavrtah. Adha posasya posena punarno 
nastamakrdhi punarno rayima krdhi. 


Agni, lord of light, knowledge and power/Man 
of natural and material science, come and visit us a 
hundred times with your acts and gifts. And may the 
blessings of your visits and gifts be a thousandfold for 
us. With the strength and support of your promoters, 
recreate and supplement for us whatever we might have 
lost in knowledge or natural and material wealth. 
Rebuild and regain for us whatever honour and prestige 
we might have lost or compromised. 


9.  (AgniDevata, Vatsapree Rshi) 


Gtest fetta v-terasgurdr à 
ui NEA: usd 


Punarurja nivarttasva punaragna' isayusa. 
Punarnah pahyarinhasah. 


Agni, brilliant power of light and knowledge/Man 
of knowledge and science, come, return your visits with 
the gifts of food and energy, health and age. Save us 
from sin and evil deeds again and again, and inspire us 
to do great things. 


10. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi) 


"E xm fidera fue sm | 
framat faserreaft ug ou 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 309 


Saha rayya nivarttasvagne pinvasva dharya. 
Visvapsnya visvataspari. 


Agni, brilliant power/Enlightened sages, come 
with all the wealth, come with gifts of that language 
and that intelligence which holds for us all the means 
and materials of comfort and prosperity. Come, and help 
us grow in all directions of life. 


11. (Agni Devata, Dhruva Rshi) 


at careret aRar era: i 
faske udt aroq A aga UTA ee 


A tvaharsamantarabhurdhruvastisthavicacalih. 
Visastva sarva vanchantu ma tvadrastram- 
adhibhrasat. 


Agni/Ruler of the land, we accept you and 
conduct you to the council as the ruler. Grace the seat 
of your office, be firm and stay inviolable. All the people 
accept and honour you. Let the land and the nation, 
under your control, never fail and fall to ruin. 


12. (Varuna Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi) 


dd deur ustaeraaterst fer Hees starrer 
stat aaalfaca ad dambratsstfeaa vum ue 211 


Uduttamam varuna pasamasmadavadhamam vi 
madhyamam $rathaya. Atha vayamaditya vrate 
tavanagaso aditaye syama. 


Varuna, lord of freedom and bondage, Ruler of 
the land, power of law and liberty, loosen and untie our 
chains of bondage of the highest, medium and the lowest 
order and let them drop from us. And then O Sun, lord 
of majesty, we shall be free from evil, crime and sin 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


310 YAJURVEDA 


and, dedicated to the vows of your discipline and law, 
we shall serve our land of inviolable freedom and 
integrity. 


13. (Agni Devata, Trita Rshi) 


ani gegralgedisshertastrart «reet eife 
arii Sota vergssr rat Fergal erri: t$ BU 


Agre brhannusasamurdhvo' asthannirjaganvan 
tamaso jyotisagat. Agnirbhanuna rusata svanga’ 
a jato visva sadmanyaprah. 

Agni, the sun, great, first and foremost, positioned 
over and above the dawn, comes forth from the dark 
and rises with all its glory. Resplendent with its 
wonderful beams which adorn it like brilliant limbs of 
its personality, it expands over the regions of the world, 
dispels the darkness and illuminates them all over with 
its light. (So should the ruler, first and great among the 
brilliant people of the land, come forth with the greatness 
of his personality, illuminate the land and glorify all 
the people.) 


14. (Jiva & Ishwara Devata, Trita Rshi) 
axa: tengdan aaa efawafdizrdzurm i 
SqHBCHPTHEHIHSSST isansa 
wed e 


Hamsah $ucisad vasurantariksasaddhota 
vedisadatithirduronasat. Nrsad varasad rtasad 
vyomasadabja goja' rtaja’ adrija’ rtam brhat. 


Hansa is the great soul that destroys evil. It exists 
in purity. It lives in all and all live in it. It fills the skies 
and expresses in holy work. It is the giver and receiver 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 311 


of oblations in yajna. It sits in the vedi and in the earth. 
It is rambling around as a venerable visitor. It stays in 
the home and in the sky and all through the seasons. It 
rules over people and commands the commanders. It is 
with and above the best of people. It lives in truth and 
in virtuous conduct. It is in space and in the heart. It is 
in the waters and in the vitality of prana, and it creates 
the waters and the vitality. It activates the senses, moves 
the animals and magnetizes the earth. It creates the 
universal law and abides in it. It forms the mountains 
and the clouds and it showers with the rain. It is the 
truth and dynamic reality of existence, and it is great 
over all. 


(It is the man of such an individual soul, inspired 
by the attributes of the great supreme soul, who deserves 
to be the ruler.) 


15. (Agni Devata, Trita Rshi) 


tie vd urgrearssussr fava agai fergra à 
deg ater urferersfsrsi efr eres sgren el fa 
fant ngu 


Sida tvam maturasya'upasthe vi$vanyagne 
vayunani vidvan. Mainam tapasa ma'rcisa 'bhi- 
Socirantarasyain $ukrajyotirvibhahi. 


Agni/Ruler/individual soul, you know all the 
ways of the world. Sit in the lap of this mother earth/ 
mother-land/mother. Don't hurt her with the heat of your 
power and passion. Don't dazzle her with the beams of 
your knowledge. Light of knowledge and power of 
vitality, be in the heart of the mother and shine there 
with the light of life. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


312 YAJURVEDA 


16. (Agni Devata, Trita Rshi) 
se Ga TAT: wat A | 
wempegegdur qussidae: frat aa nea 


Antaragne ruca tvamukhayah sadane sve. 
Tasyastvam harasa tapanjatavedah sivo bhava. 


Omniscient Agni/All knowing wide-awake ruler 
of the land, brilliant with your own light in your place 
in the world/dominion, blazing with your power and 
glory, be good and kind to the people. 


17. (Agni Devata, Trita Rshi) 


frat sper msa die Pracaq | 
frat: erat fast: wat: vei arPifirerda: ug 


Sivo bhutva mahyamagne atho sida Sivastvam. 
Sivah krtvà dis$ah sarvah svam yonimihásadah. 
Agni, ruler of the land, having been good and 
kind to us, the people, sit at peace undisturbed. And 
then, having rendered all the regions of the land in all 
directions safe and secure in the good life, be 
comfortable with satisfaction in your own office of 
justice and governance. 


18. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi) 


Raan werd siasettarena fede uf sadar: 
qita -Taumssrsterftreri-tsust sm vergit: uz 
Divaspari prathamam jajne’ agnirasmad 
dvittyam pari jatavedah. Trttyamapsu nrmana' 
ajasramindhana enam jarate svadhih. 


Agni, the sun, first rises over the heavens. Then 
it rises over us all illuminating our world. Third, it 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 313 


emerges in the pranic energies of nature, in the waters 
and in the mind of humanity — thus illuminating and 
activating everything and every mind from within. The 
pious and the devout people invoke, light and worship 
Agni, perpetual power, spirit and light of the world. 


(Just as Agni is the power, spirit and light of the 
world, so should the ruler be. And so should he/she 
vitalize and illuminate the people, and so should the 
people adore him/her.) 


19. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi) 
faan dssrerp em nòt fem d am fenjar 
"pear | fem dou urd wer afgen quei uds- 
S SEES nee 


Vidma te'agne tredha trayani vidma te dhama 
vibhrta purutra. Vidma te nama paramam guha 
yad vidma tamutsam yata' ajagantha. 


Agni, light, energy and power of the world, let 
us know the three orders of the three powers of yours 
(heat, light and electricity). Lord of majesty, love and 
favourite of all, let us explore and know the various 
forms and places where you exist, which you support 
and which support you. Let us know that supreme name 
and the thing you are in the essence which is hidden in 
a mysterious cave. Let us discover the spring, the water 
and the cloud from where you issue forth in formal 
existence (so that we may be blest with the power and 
prosperity which follows the discovery and the 
applications). 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


314 YAJURVEDA 


20. (AgniDevata, Vatsapree Rshi) 
Ha wat gosana aats feat aas- 
we a gata war wife o dfisraresdimurguesi 
afeats URI 


Samudre tva nrmana 'apsvantarnrcaksa 'idhe 
divo agna 'udhan. Trtiye tva rajasi tasthivam- 
samapamupasthe mahisa' avardhan. 


Agni, light and life of the world, a leader of 
thought among men, as I am, I discover and light you in 
the oceans. A visionary of humanity, I discover you in 
the foods, in the vapours and in the clouds. In the third 
region of the heavens of light, abiding in the solar 
sphere, in the dawn and in the heart of steam and flowing 
waters, great men discover, light and develop you. 


21. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi) 
adaa weprdfse dt: amr Wea died: 
was, | Get Sart fa difacgissrezer treat 
Wat VEIT: URN 


Akrandadagni stanayanniva dyauh ksama 
rerihad virudhah samanjan. Sadyo jajnano vi 
himiddho’ akhyada rodasi bhanuna bhatyantah. 


Agni, light and energy of life, roaring as lightning, 
reverberates in the skies with an explosion. Lighted well 
all-round and immediately blazing, it shines and 
illuminates everything. Between the heaven and the 
earth it shines with the beams of its own brilliance. The 
light reaches the earth, energizes the soil and emerges 
in the beauty of vegetation. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 315 


22. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi) 


stordant asot veituri Haor urdur: rin: | 
ad: Ga: adaisareg tet feremenisamtfiremt: us 3 


Srinamudaro dharuno rayinam manisanam 
prarpanah somagopah. Vasuh sunuh sahaso’ 
apsu raja vibhatyagra usasamidhanah. 


Generous lord of the light and glory of life, spirit 
of the graces of nature, sustainer of wealth and beauty, 
source of desire and fulfilment, guardian of the 
sweetness, joy and greenery of the earth, haven and 
mainstay of the world, child of the very force and victory 
of life, brilliant in the dynamics of existence, He blazes 
in splendour before the dawns. Such is Agni. (Such 
should be the ruler.) 


23. (Agni Devata, Vatsapri Rshi) 


fasdea alates misen Tréditssrqumesmdura: i 
ere auma urere wem aadA 
qs 3N 


Visvasya keturbhuvanasya garbha ’a rodast' 
aprnajjayamanah. Vidum cidadrimabhinat 
parayan jana yadagnimayajanta panca. 

Light of the world, going everywhere, seed of 
life, rising as the sun, illuminating the earth and heaven, 
breaker of the darkest cloud, hallowed and consecrated 
by the people and the energies of nature, such is Agni. 
(Such should be the ruler in his domain.) 


24. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi) 
sra ula shia: virer naana fer ath 
safe ented Nugat sitter enfirtart isi 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


316 YAJURVEDA 


Usik pavako aratih sumedha martyesvagnir- 
amrto ni dhayi. Iyartti dhumamarusam 
bharibhraducchukrena $ocisa dyaminaksan. 


Immortal agni, lovely and lovable, pure and 
purifier, intelligent and self-conscious, a holy presence, 
is existent in men and women. The same throws up the 
fiery smoke upward and with instantaneous light 
illuminates the sun and heaven. 


25. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi) 


art weusseut celu: f2r Sart: | 
afargaissragahaad asta, Rat: usu 


Drsano rukma’urvya vyadyauddurmarsamayuh 
Sriye rucanah. Agniramrto' abhavadvayobhir- 
yadenam dyaurajanayatsuretah. 


Agni, immortal light and vitality of existence, 
brilliant, golden glorious, explodes in heaven and 
illuminates everything with the earth. In love, as if, with 
the beauty of the world, it assumes various forms of 
self-assertive and inviolable life. And yet that Heavenly 
Power which creates this agni and brings it into 
existence is another, the Eternal Life of life and Light 
of light. 


26. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi) 
aesa PUT seas de gadan | 
Ud Wa Um entssTesrfsr Gr cadad erferesis i 


Yaste’adya krnavadbhadrasoce’pupam deva 
ghrtavantamagne. Pra tam naya prataram 
vasyo' acchabhi sumnam devabhaktam yavistha. 


Agni, brilliant and blissful lord of light, generous 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 317 


and ever youthful, whosoever may well prepare and 
faithfully offer for you rich and sumptuous food as 
sacrifice to-day, shower on him/her the gift of your light 
and take that favourite of the gods across to the world 
of joy. 


27. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi) 


ST d dat aaraeedmssagssagssust PET- 
"oa fra: get Aasa dares RAs 
gafta: nmen 


A tam bhaja sausravasesvagna’uktha’uktha à 
bhaja $asyamane. Priyah surye priyo’ agna 
bhavatyujjatena bhinadadujjanitvaih. 


Men of knowledge, wisdom and expertise, 
celebrate agni and promote it among the famous and 
the prosperous. Sing of it in verses of praise on the 
auspicious and admirable occasions of yajna. It is dear 
to the men of heat and light and the sun. Promote it 
with the hopes and actions of your children. Promote it 
with the hopes and aspirations of those who are yet to 
be born. 


28. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi) 


wares esturmssrr rp fever ae «fen erdifur à 
wat we aoire ast ahaa 
fada: mcu 

Tvamagne yajamana' anu dyun vi$va vasu 
dadhire varyani. Tvaya saha dravina- 
micchamana vrajam gomantamusijo vivavruh. 


Agni, lord of fire and science, the experts of yajna 
dedicated to you, with the use of fire and your blessings, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


318 YAJURVEDA 


daily pursue and achieve all the desired objects of the 
world. Men of reason, intelligence and will, desirous 
of wealth, choose for research and work on the cowshed 
and the cloud with the rays of the sun for the realisation 
of progress and prosperity. 


29. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi) 


amata Risg at ner ssfi fur: GPT: | 
sigh eraty gag eat erat rfr YARR u 


Astavyagnirnaram susevo vai$vanara rsibhih 
somagopah. Advese dyavaprthivi huvema deva 
dhatta rayimasme suviram. 


Agni, worshipped by seers and sages, is the 
darling of humanity, auspicious and adorable. 
Omnipresent, universal and all-commanding, it is the 
guardian and promoter of the means of life, peace and 
joy. We invoke the powers of earth and heaven — 
powers free of hate and jealousy and sources of bliss. 
Great men of the world, brilliant and generous, 
guardians of the peace and prosperity of life, generate 
and hold for us the wealth and power of life and polity 
which creates a great nation and fearless humanity. 


30. (Agni Devata, Virupaksha Rshi) 


wfirenfi- dena srt erarerfdferg à 
ara goat wg uso! 


Samidha’gnim duvasyata ghrtairbodhayata- 
tithim. Asmin havya juhotana. 


(Agni is an ‘atithi’, a chance guest, which comes 
at its own will whenever it comes. Serve it with the best 
of offerings you have.) 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 319 


Light and serve agni (fire) with fuel and fragrant 
materials. Wake it up, raise it with ghee and other 
sumptuous offerings as you would feed a venerable 
chance visitor. Offer the best of yajna into the fire. 


(Like the fire of yajna, serve the man of light and 
knowledge with the best you can offer for food and gifts 
whenever such a venerable person happens to visit you.) 


31. (AgniDevata, Tapasa Rshi) 
sd vr fase aarsore snp faf: 
a oat we fsreweruudles fade: nR 


Udu tva vi$ve deva'agne bharantu cittibhih. Sa 
no bhava Sivastvam supratiko vibhavasuh. 


Agni, of lovely forms of manifestation and lord 
of infinite light and wisdom, may all the noble and 
generous people of the world serve and celebrate you 
with the best of intention, devotion and acts of worship. 
May Agni, light of the universe, be good and kind to us 
all. (May the man of knowledge and wisdom be good 
and kind to us all as such persons are agni in human 
form.) 


32. (Agni Devata, Tapasa Rshi) 


Wary Sarita arte for 
geen Ar finer» uan: u33u 


Predagne jyotisman yahi Sivebhirarcibhistvam. 
Brhadbhirbhanubhirbhasan ma hiinsistanva 
prajah. 


Agni, lord of light and life, come forth to bless 
us with the gracious beams of light and warmth of life. 
Burning and blazing with the mighty flames of fire, hurt 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


320 YAJURVEDA 


not our people and our children. 


(As Agni, so should the ruler and the commander 
of the army be mighty and blazing with splendour, 
always protective but never unjust and hurtful.) 


33. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi) 


akaa emda eir: amar tea ed: Cassy 
wet wart fa xifüissnerar Ueet art 


MAA: URI 


Akrandadagni stanayanniva dyauh ksama 
rerihadvirudhah samanjan. Sadyo jajnano vi 
himiddho akhyada rodasi bhanuna bhatyanth. 


Agni roars and thunders like lightning in the sky 
as it proclaims its presence on the earth. Joining every 
bit of life and vegetation, it inspires all forms of 
existence with passion and vitality and thus manifests 
itself, protecting and promoting life. And it goes on 
blazing with its mighty splendour from the earth below 
to the highest heaven. 

(So does the scholar with his knowledge, the ruler 
with his power, and the commander with his force, shine 
and blaze all round, protecting, promoting and inspiring 
the nation and the environment with freedom, passion 
and enthusiasm). 


34. (Agni Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


wureufiTd rae sme fere X red sm: | 
ait a: ge udung wes dara sorna: 
rar 4: nxn 


Pra prayamagnirbharatasya $rnve vi yatsuryo 
na rocate brhadbhah. Abhi yah purum prtanasu 
tasthau didaya daivyo' atithih Sivo nah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 321 


This agni, ruler/commander of the forces, attends 
to the affairs of the state, and, distinguished with great 
knowledge and brilliance of character, shines forth like 
the sun. He stands firm every way by the state and the 
nation in the battles of life and defence. Dear and favourite 
of the good, intelligent and generous people, moving 
around among the people like a visitor, may he be good, 
kind and beneficent to us and shine. 


35. (Apah Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


ardt eet: ufeieufra we ehureereqgeemss 
citer paul mei sta: wuciluiad ws fetsyarecar- 
"HD UBL 

Apo devih pratigrbhnita bhasmaitatsyone 


krnudhvarn surabha'u loke. Tasmai namantam 
janayah supatnirmateva putram bibhrtapsvenat. 


Celestial waters, receive this light of agni, this 
ray of light, this seed of life. Keep it and nourish it in 
some soft, fragrant and beautiful region of freedom. 
Wives of the most virtuous order of character, honour 
and bow to it to receive it. Bear it in the vapours of 
space as a mother bears a child in the womb. 


36. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi) 
smart area aided were d 
Tat a wu wd: eu 


Apsvagne sadhistava sausadhiranu rudhyase. 
Garbhe san jayase punah. 


Agni, seed of life, the soul with the subtle and 
the causal body, your home is in the celestial waters of 
space. You love to grow in existence with the herbs, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


322 YAJURVEDA 


and thence, placed in the mother's womb, are born 
again. 


37. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi) 


misaeni m asada |g 
mi fayde spregrer TWUPSSTATARA gae! 


Garbho’ asyosadhinam garbho vanaspatinam. 
Garbho visvasya bhutasyagne garbho' apamasi. 


Agni, light of life, seed with the subtle and the 
causal body, you are a child of the herbs. You are a child 
of the plants and trees. You are a child of the entire forms 
of life in existence. You are a child of the waters of earth 
and heaven. 


38. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi) 
Weal spear Aaaa uferedide d 
eus arated verfdeum umida: sz t 
Prasadya bhasmana yonimapasca prthivi- 
magne. Sainsrjya matrbhistvam jyotisman 
punara"sadah. 

Soul, light of consciousness and seed of life, 
through the ashes of the funeral pyre you rise to a new 
home in the celestial waters of space. Then you come 
down to the earth to be with the forms of herbs. And 


then you come in to the mother's womb and are born 
again in a new body. 


39. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi) 


wie adaya gyfer | 
ore urqsiemaesrs-advuresferedu: 13.201 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 323 


Punarasadya sadanamapasca prthivimagne. 
Sese maturyathopasthe ’ntarasyam $ivatamah. 


Agni, soul with the desire and will to live in the 
forms of existence, again and again you come to find a 
place in the celestial waters of space. Again and again 
you descend to the earth to attain herbal forms of life. 
Then again you enter the mother’s womb and rest there 
to grow as a part of her life within. When you are born, 
you sleep in her lap in peace and joy. Noble soul, be 
good to the mother, be the darling of her love, joy and 
fulfilment. 


40. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi) 


Gates ati yasda | 
Gas: uanga: nso 
Punarurja nivarttasva punaragna 'isa"yusa. 
Punarnah pahyarinhasah. 
Agni, come again with energy, come with food, 


come with health and vitality for a long age. Come again 
and again, save us from sin and evil. 


41. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi) 


"e xm fidera fue sm | 
fasaceal fasaa wes u 


Saha rayya nivarttasvagne pinvasva dharaya. 
Vi$vapsnya vi$vataspari. 


Agni, come with wealth and honour. Come with 
a shower of all round nourishment and universal energy 
to the point of satisfaction and satiation for all and help 
us grow, develop and progress. Come with food for body 
and mind. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


324 YAJURVEDA 


42. ((Agni Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


wie Asser ad afacs meS We 
waa: | Urea As wat RA enam de 
RESSTUI ISR 


Bodha me’asya vacaso yavistha mainhisthasya 
prabhrtasya svadhavah. Piyati tvo anu tvo grnati 
vandaruste tanvam vande agne. 


Agni, intent listener, most youthful man/woman 
of independent and comfortable means, understand the 
sense and meaning of this great word of mine, important, 
worthy of attention and expressive of deep meaning with 
further implications. Let anyone denigrate you, let 
someone praise you, I am your admirer, and I appreciate 
and value your health of body and intelligence of mind. 


43. (Agni Devata, Somahuti Rshi) 


a alfa gR aà aga, | 
qaqa gte farado caret (nés 


Sa bodhi surirmaghava vasupate vasudavan. 
Yuyodhyasmad dvesamsi visvakarmane svaha. 


Agni, man of wealth and honour, creator and 
generous giver of power and prosperity, intelligent lord 
of knowledge, know for us the truth of life and existence 
and, in truth of word and deed, fight out our negativities 
and eliminate our hostilities for the achievement of 
success in all the affairs of life. 


44. (Agni Devata, Somahuti Rshi) 


Uteasstacen eer ada: ufi u-teigrurt aaa 
Gat: | uen wat dat aia Ue: eq asta 
THAT: nsx 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 325 


Punastva"ditya rudra vasavah samindhatam 
punarbrahmano vasunitha yajnaih. Ghrtena 
tvam tanvam vardhayasva satyah santu 
yajamanasya kamah. 


Agni, creator and giver of wealth and honour, 
may the brahmacharis and scholars of the Vasu, Rudra 
and Aditya order light you up in the vedi again and 
again. May the devotees of the lord of existence and 
masters of the science of yajna promote your gifts with 
the performance of yajna. Agni, power of light and life, 
grow on in your operations with the oblations of ghee 
and fragrant materials so that the plans and ambitions 
of the yajamana be fulfilled. 


45. (Pitarah Devata, Somahuti Rshi) 


ata dia fa a ada Asa ca doom GT a 
Wet: aasan ufereurssrohieTW frat 
AAS ise 


Apeta vita vi ca sarpatato ye tra stha purana ye 
ca nutanah. Adad yamo’vasanam prthivya’ 
akrannimam pitaro lokamasmai. 


The teachers who are old and those who are new 
and the parents and other seniors who are here on the 
earth, all should realise and actualise for young aspirants 
the knowledge of this world. The judge of the aspirants’ 
performance may grant them the certificate of completion 
and graduation in achievement. Hence keep away from 
Adharma (injustice and untruth), go on firmly with 
Dharma (truth and justice), and realise it without delay 
here and now. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


326 YAJURVEDA 


46. (Agni Devata, Somahuti Rshi) 
dara aaen fub a aen wana | 
aera: attra fed xer ufzfordsssefernd: 
SAAE PSE 


Samjnanamasi kamadharanam mayi te 
kamadharanam bhuyat. Agnerbhasmasyagneh. 
purisamasi cita stha paricita’ urdhvacitah 
Srayadhvam. 


Agni, man of knowledge, having passed through 
the crucibles of fire like ash, you are knowledge itself, 
full and complete like the orb of the sun and powerful 
like the force of electricity. May your plans, intentions 
and aspirations pass on to me as mine. 


Be wide-awake, collect knowledge from all round, 
go forward and take it to the heights. Be cooperative, 
mutually dependent, collectively self-dependent. Take to 
knowledge and to the teachers. 


47. (Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 


seesaw: ud uum wei aa- 
mm:n Gefea emere 4 ufidewueregedin 
mAT: wel 


Ayain so'agniryasmintsomamindrah sutam 
dadhe jathare vavasanah. Sahasriyam 
vajamatyam na saptiin sasavantsantstuyase 
jatavedah. 

This is that agni, vital heat of life, in which Indra, 
the sun, as if in love with life, places the nectar of life, 
Soma, like the distilled and delicious food for a thousand 
people. Life of life, Jataveda, generous giver as you are, 
you are worshipped by the devotees in your own right. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 327 


It is for the love of life that I absorb the same nectar of 
life into my body system. It is for the same love of life 
that I hold on to my darling wife and I enjoy my food 
and drink. 


48. (Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 
aT ad fafa ae: given eratwsireeruer as | 
Srreafisrqetad-et aa: uw wrqpuiet Tera: ise 


Agne yatte divi varcah prthivyam yadosadhi- 
svapsva yajatra. Yenantariksamurvatatantha 
tvesah sa bhanurarnavo nrcaksah. 


Agni, light of the universe, life of existence, 
power and presiding presence of the world, lord of yajna 
and friend of the yajniks, the glory that is yours shines 
in the heavens, vibrates in the earth, blooms in the herbs 
and breathes in the waters. It is the same by which the 
skies are pervaded and expanded. It blazes as the sun, it 
rolls as the oceans of space, and it watches our human 
performance as the universal eye. 


(Let the scholar and the teacher attain the 
knowledge of the universal spirit, nature and life in 
existence and, like agni among human beings, impart the 
same to his/her disciples.) 


49. (Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 
ard asantit fermes! cateisafar 


fawar & ar treat aed wales arag- 
feasa: seu 


Agne divo arnamaccha jigasyaccha devan’ucise 


dhisnya ye. Ya rocane parastat suryasya 
yascavastadupatisthanta’apah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


328 YAJURVEDA 


Agni, man of knowledge and light of the world, 
your knowledge reaches unto the waters of heaven and 
you proclaim that knowledge to the bold and the best 
among intelligent people who impart it to their disciples. 
It covers the waters which float in the luminous sphere 
of the sun and studies the vapours and energy vibrant on 
this side of the sun and beyond. 


50. (Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 
qieres: wma: WITH: | 
Wet aadgetsadtatssat eT: uon 


Purisyaso'agnayah pravanebhih sajosasah. 
Jusantam yajnamadruho’ namiva’iso mahih. 


All men and women of the world, experts in 
knowledge and blest with virtue, brilliant and energetic 
like agni (fire and electricity), living together with mutual 
love and shared qualities of enlightenment, free from hate, 
jealousy, fear and all physical and mental ailments, 
dedicate themselves to yajna (creative and constructive 
cooperative activities) and enjoy great plenty and 
prosperity of high order in life. 


51. (Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 
sett yeaa cu saand aa T | 
wart: Gaeta fenem or d wpHÉTSPCNuR gu 
Idamagne purudamsam sanim goh $a$vattamain 


havamanaya sadha. Syannah sunustanayo 
vijavagne sa te sumatirbhutvasme. 


Agni, light of life/brilliant man of knowledge, 
may your light, knowledge and intelligence be for our 
share. Create for us and help us create wealth of cows, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 329 


plenty of milk, food and energy, divine speech, vision 
and wisdom for all time for the sake of yajna and the 
yajniks. May we beget children capable of mighty deeds 
and achievements. And may the brilliant teacher bless 
our children with universal wealth of existence and the 
vision of divinity. 


52. (Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 
ara d Afra aat atsar tea: i 
a Sasa Xigren AY aed TRA gud 


Ayam te yonirrtviyo yato jato’arocathah. Tam 
janannagna 'a rohatha no vardhaya rayim. 


Agni, man of pure soul and brilliant character 
like light and fire, dear son, this is your place/home of 
birth where, born at the right auspicious time, you shine 
by your life and conduct. Know this, rise high and help 
us advance in wealth, prosperity, honour and happiness. 


53. (Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 


Maa wet sederfgrea gat cile d 
uftfadfa aat dederfgreea seria usu 


Cidasi taya devataya’ngirasvad dhruva sida. 
Paricidasi taya devataya’ngirasvad dhruva sida. 


Son/Daughter, you are knowledgeable, well 
aware and intelligent. Stay firm in this place of yours 
sitting close with that noble soul like the breath of life. 
Master/Mistress you are all round versatile. Stay firm 
in your place sitting close with the noble spirit of your 
Dharma and Karma. Be firm with the spirit of 
omniscience, giver of all wealth and joy. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


330 YAJURVEDA 


54. (Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 
vire dur fig gone de gat ay d 
zari cir sr eafezfem area uut 


Lokam prna chidram prnatho sida dhruva tvam. 
Indragni tva brhaspatirasmin yonavasisadan. 


Fill up, serve and complete this life. If there is 
any loophole, plug it. If there is any short-coming, 
overcome it, advance and excel. In this field of 
knowledge and action, may Indra and Agni, father and 
mother, nurture you with instruction and advice. May 
Brihaspati, the teacher, guardian of divine knowledge 
and good conduct, guide and confirm you in virtue. Be 
strong and stay firm in your place. 


55. (Apah Devata, Priyamedha Rshi) 


asset Uaaled: Mesio usui 
aeaa faster wer faan 


Ta'asya sudadohasah somam srinanti prsnayah. 
Janmandevanam visastrisva rocane divah. 


Blooming women of beauty and grace, wives of 
noble people, in this wonderful paradisal phase of their 
cultured home life, milk the dappled cows and prepare 
and season delicious foods with the dressing of soma. 
They create sweetness and joy in all the three phases of 
time, past, present and future, and are blest with noble 
and promising children. 


56. (Indra Devata, Sutajetra Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


og feasetssreiqererngaederd Fr: | 
xefrduerefrar aaz See ufdu usu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 331 


Indram vi$va' avivrdhantsamudravyacasam 


—--- -yv 


patim. 


All the sacred voices of truth inspire and exalt 
Indra, man of power and glory, wide and rolling as the 
sea, supreme hero of the chariots and battles of life, 
protector of truth and Dharma, and promoter of life and 
its prosperity. 

(The brahmacharis and brahmacharinis, who 
complete their education with the sacred voice of the 
Veda and the words of truth written and spoken by the 
Rishis, rise in life, and when they marry in the vaidic 
way, they raise families which grow in happiness and 
prosperity.) 

57. (Agni Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


aea eheugeresufust Ufa dareratt i 

gutar daa uou 

Samitain sam kalpethain sampriyau rocisnu 

sumanasyamanau. Isamurjamabhi samvasanau. 

Wedded couple, two-in-one joined in love, 

brilliant in health and lustre, of equal and enlightened 
mind, decent and graceful in clothes and ornaments, 
both of you together plan, act and realise your goal in 
food, energy, prosperity, honour and glory. 


58. (Agni Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


"ow misi a an ad frases d 
art attention sta cei asset aster gf yeu 
Sam vam manamsi sam vrata samu cittanya- 
karam. Agne purisyadhipa bhava tvam na 
isamurjam yajamanaya dhehi. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


332 YAJURVEDA 


Wedded couple, I join you as two-in-one in life 
and sanctify you with identical thoughts, intentions and 
operations, identical vows of plans, actions and 
achievements, and identical memories, values and 
aspirations. 


Agni, noble teacher, high-priest of yajna, be our 
super-guide and guardian. Create, hold and sustain for 
the yajamana couple nourishment, energy, honour and 
prosperity. 


59. (Agni Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


ama wa dite vfum dfeeuisussffa i 
Rear: par fast: wet: ta areata: ts ul 


Agne tvam purisyo rayimàn pustiman asi. Sivah 
krtva disah sarvah svam yonimihasadah. 


Agni, Lord of knowledge, light and power of 
yajna, rich in spirit, science and materials, and presiding 
priest of all round growth, you are dedicated to the earth 
and the laws of life. Rise, move abroad and, having 
created peace and prosperity in all directions, come and 
grace your super-seat of guidance. 


60. (Dampati Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


wed a: aA welaaratual 1 ar aacfexfere 
m asdf madad frat sheer d: ngon 
Bhavatam nah samanasau sacetasavarepasau. 
Ma yajnam himsistam ma yajnapatim 
jatavedasau sivau bhavatamadya nah. 

Wedded couple, both of you be of good mind 


and thought toward us. Be of noble equanimity and 
blissful intention for us. Be free of pride, arrogance and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 333 


negativity. Violate not yajna, nor Dharma, nor the 
yajnapati. Reborn as master and mistress of the 
knowledge of creation (as children of Agni), be good 
and kind to us right now. 


61. (Patni Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 

midt ux feret dteaahaesed amtavrear | 

wi fasddacratt: afar: wemdfafaseehut fa 

ew vee 

Mateva putram prthivi purisyamagnii’ sve 

yonavabharukha. Tam visvairdevairrtubhih 

samvidanah prajapatirvi$vakarma vi muncatu. 

Just as the earth like a mother holds the vital heat 

for the nourishment of life in her womb, so does a woman 
worthy of love and recognition hold a brilliant soul in 
her womb till maturity. May Lord Vishwakarma (maker 
of the world), father and guardian of His children 
(Prajapati), with gifts and nourishment from all the 
seasons and powers of nature, deliver her of a noble 
offspring. 


62. (Nirriti Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 
steers wrereufedfz derer a 
ammm wr dsgem ub efa faka qet- 
"Eg URSI 


Asunvantamayajamanamiccha stenasyetya- 
manvihi taskarasya. Anyamasmadiccha sa ta' 
itya namo devi nirrte tubhyamastu. 


Nir-riti, spirit of adversity, desire to catch the 
stingy and the miserly who does not perform the yajna 
and does not extract the soma for libations. Pursue the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


334 YAJURVEDA 


thief and the smuggler and catch him on the way. Go to 
someone other than me. That is your desired object and 
action. Salutations to you, power of justice. 


63. (Nirriti Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


7a: a d fex. feruauissenu fader aera d 
Hp wat wur dears saree saree 4&3 


Namah su te nirrte tigmatejo'yasmayam vicrta 
bandhametam. Yamena tvam yamya samvidan- 
ottame nake’adhi rohayainam. 


Power of eternal law, eternal felicity and 
adversity, your splendour is awful. You go with the law 
and are one with the law. Salutations to you. Undo the 
iron-chains of slavery and take this yajamana to the 
heights of heavenly bliss. 


64. (Nirriti Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


TA ASSESS IATA aS ATT » uum 
ver SAT aR wea Poeta cre ufda 
favad: next 


Yasyaste ghora’asanjuhomyesam bandhana- 
mavasarjanaya. Yam tva jano bhumiriti 
pramandate nirrtim tva’ ham pariveda visvatah. 


Awful spirit of adversity, eternal felicity, ever- 
abiding with the law, I offer the oblations into your mouth/ 
in the yajna vedi for the breaking of the chains of 
existence. Ordinary folks play with you in a state of 
wanton negligence, feeling that you are the all forbearing 
earth. But I know you well for what you are, spirit of 
justice, as the mother of felicity as well as the power of 
retribution. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 335 

65. (Yajamana Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 
ad det Akera urst zitereeiferererg id a 
fora + weed ratte waa: p ger 


ae Tar ec 


Yam te devi nirrtirababandha pasam griva- 
svavicrtyam. Tam te vi syamyayuso na madhyad- 
athaitam pitumaddhi prasutah. Namo bhutyai 
yedam cakara. 


Yajamana, the inexorable chain which the spirit 
of adversity, in full justice, had tied round your throat 
for want of yajna, I undo from the centre of your life 
right away. Regenerated through yajna, eat of this holy 
food. The spirit of generosity has done this miracle. 
Salutations to the spirit of generosity. 


66. (Agni Devata, Vishvavasu Rshi) 
fash: age adai favet xsursfsrelez yrei: 
dasa faa uere desir Gar defranis s u 


Nivesanah sangamano vasunam vi$va rupa 'bhi- 
caste Sacibhih. Deva iva savita satyadharmendro 
na tasthau samare pathinam. 


Who is a noble yajamana? A successful house- 
holder (grihasthi)? The man of vitality who takes a wife, 
makes a home, creates wealth and contributes to life like 
Savita, the creator; who watches and illuminates all forms 
of life on earth with his eyes like the sun, and manages 
various developments with his acts like Indra, the leader; 
who is firm in true Dharma and stands inviolable in the 
battles of the pathmakers of the world — such a man is 
the right yajamana and a noble house-holder. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


336 YAJURVEDA 


67. (Krishivala Kavayah Devata, Vishvavasu Rshi) 


ant gata Haat om adad yA | 
ant xen Gear ug 


Sira yunjanti kavayo yuga vi tanvate prthak. 
Dhira devesu sumnaya. 


Men of vision and intelligence use the plough 
and the yoke. The men of constancy among the brilliant 
and the generous separately as well as together devoutly 
in peace expand the beauty and graces of life and 
knowledge. 


68. (Krishivala Kavaya Devata, Vishvavasu Rshi) 


are drt fa om dae qa art aude sieh i 
frie afte: aT stat Aetasgsequa: Waar Ie 


Yunakta sira vi yuga tanudhvam krte yonau 
vapateha bijam. Gira ca srustih sabhara asanno 
nediya’ it srnyah pakvameyat. 

Work with the plough and yoke the horses/ 
bullocks. Expand the agriculture and its methods, tools 
and knowledge. Prepare the soil and sow the seed. In 
accordance with the knowledge of agriculture develop 
many kinds of produce of the richest order. And when 
the grains are ripe for harvesting, reap and bring the 
harvest home for all of us. 


69. (Krishivala Devata, Kumaraharita Rshi) 


pred wren tahoe spfnespi etsare 
aÈ yi gfe disburar ufüurenssideft: 
SAAT use 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 337 


Sunam su phala vi krsantu bhumim sunam 
kinasa’abhi yantu vahaih. Sunasira havisa 
to$amana supippala osadhih kartanasmai. 


Let the plough-shares turn the soil well. Let the 
farmers merrily follow the bullocks while they till the 
land and sow the seeds. May the sun and the air 
supplemented by the oblations of rich materials bless the 
herbs and plants with delicious fruit and nourishing 
grain. 


70. (Krishivala Devata, Kumaraharita Rshi) 


wr crar wet aban fasddactaa wets: ad 
siad usur fodarmrearta uecareare- 
AeA eon 


Ghrtena sita madhuna samajyatam vi$vair- 
devairanumata Marudbhih. Urjasvati payasa 
pinvamanasmantsite payasa bhya vavrtsva. 


Let the furrow in the field, made by the plough- 
share and levelled and refined by the leveller, accepted 
and approved by all the noble and generous people and 
vitalized by winds and rain, be enriched with water, ghee, 
sugar and honey. Energized and enriched thus with food, 
the field may yield for us a wealth of delicious 
nourishment. 


71. (Krishivala Devata, Kumaraharita Rshi) 


maga udivereugerdeurnfucde i dggufa raf 
Wael a diei usemdgsraré-dH wet 
Langalam paviravat suSevam somapitsaru. 
Tadudvapati gamavim prapharvyam ca pivarim 
prasthavadrathavahanam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


338 YAJURVEDA 


The plough, fitted with the share, symbol of peace 
and joy, a tool of soma— plenty, prosperity and happiness 
— drawn by horses or bullocks and held firmly by the 
hilt, turns up the crust of the kind and generous earth to 
make it ready for sowing. 


72. (Mitra & others Devata, Kumaraharita Rshi) 
cart pm yea fara adore erp d 
garanit gar memasti: mez 


Kamam kamadughe dhuksva mitraya varunaya 
ca. Indrayasvibhyam pusne prajabhya’ 
osadhibhyah. 


Mother of fulfilment and source of satisfaction, 
generous earth/furrow of the field/holy cow, let the desires 
be fulfilled for friends, noble scholars and guests, 
persons of power and glory, the people, powers of health 
and pranic energies, and for the growth of herbs and 
trees. 


73. (Aghnya Devata, Kumaraharita Rshi) 


ferbeuserem Genmanssnier aeons a 
SARR 13 


Vimucyadhvamaghnya devayana'aganma 
tamasasparamasya. Jyotirapama. 

Be free from poverty, ill-health and ignorance. 

Let us be rich with the holy inviolable cows for 


nourishment and prosperity. May we cross this darkness 
and attain to the light of the sun and the glory of life. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 339 


74. (Ashvins Devata, Kumaraharita Rshi) 


wperssrderfu: uspeurssreuifur | wir 
afer «elf: ay: cursudsrr wgd'vermsgdar 
gaa wemel Wow 


Sajurabdo'ayavobhih sajurusa' arunibhih. 
Sajosasavasvina damsobhih sajuh sura’ etasena 
sajurvaisvanara’ idaya ghrtena svaha. 


The year goes with the divisions of time, the dawn 
is one with the ruddy morning, the pranic energies 
express themselves in the actions of nature and of living 
beings, the sun shines and radiates light with its rays, 
the vital heat loves the earth, the libations of yajna and 
the voice of the Veda. 


(So should the people live together with one 
another. So should the husband and wife live a common 
shared life, complementing and supplementing each other 
in an integrated life.) 


75. (Vaidya Devata, Bhishak Rshi) 


at sitet: yt stat gesagt ui gd 
at a o wugpurueesrd smutfr weg xb on 


Ya osadhih purva jata devebhyastriyugam pura. 
Manai nu babhrunamahain $atam dhamani 
sapta ca. 


Earlier, three years before in the three seasons, 
whatever herbs such as soma etc. grew out of the earth 
with other natural powers such as water, air and sunlight, 
I should know: the hundred and seven varieties of these 
brown ones for the treatment of hundred and seven 
ailments which affect hundred and seven vital spots in 
the body. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


340 YAJURVEDA 
76. (Vaidya Devata, Bhishak Rshi) 


ya atsara amit wee al Ge: | 
stat yama wp Asam cha mean 


Satam vo'amba dhamani sahasramuta vo ruhah. 
Adha satakratvo yuyamimam me’agadam krta. 


Mother earth, mother of herbs, hundreds are the 
places where the herbs grow, and thousands are the roots 
by which they grow into innumerable varieties. Then, O 
physicians of a hundred specialities of ailments and 
scholars of a hundred varieties of herbs, come you all 
and render this body and community of mine free from 
all disease. 


77. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi) 
street: ufdurasei weder: were: d 
svatssa urease: mwa: neo! 
Osadhih  pratimodadhvam | puspavatih 
prasuvarih. A$va'iva sajitvarirvirudhah 
parayisnvah. 

All of you men and women, herbs, creepers and 
plants such as soma, in full bloom, rich in fruit and 
medicine, fast and victorious over disease take you across 
all ailments and sorrow. Use them, be healthy and strong 
and, like the victorious men of horse, rejoice and be 
grateful to them. 


78. (Chikitsu Devata, Bhishak Rshi) 


ame ararest deted wm a 
mamya m asera ad TET nosni 


Osadhiriti matarastadvo devirupa bruve. 
Saneyamasvam gam vasa 'atmananmtava purusa. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 341 


Herbs and medicinal plants, as mothers, are of 
divine efficacy. They nourish and save like mothers. 
Hence I pray for you all: Lord of Life, Supreme Soul, 
may I by divine grace have the gift of horses, cows, 
clothes and home, and a healthy body. 


79. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi) 
sat at Redi usi at qafacpar | 
mamasa fratan aq ada Ger wes 


A$vatthe vo nisadanam parne vo vasatiskrta. 
Gobhaja' itkilasatha yat sanavatha purusam. 


Men and women of the earth, you reside in a body 
which may or may not last till to morrow. Your life rests 
like a drop of dew on the leaf. Take the gifts of the earth 
and look after the soul in the body with herbs and 
medicines to live a full life. 


80. (Oshadhaya Devata, Bhishak Rshi) 


mide: Gama usta: ufarfee i 
feu: assed firdemerileurda: uou 
Yatrausadhih samagmata rajanah samitaviva. 


Viprah sa'ucyate bhisag raksohamivacatanah. 


Wherever medicinal herbs such as soma grow, 
there go as brave warriors go to the battlefield against 
the enemy. That person of intelligence and expertise who 
fights disease and destroys the anti-life forces is called 
the physician, the person who cures. 


81. (Vaidya Devata, Bhishak Rshi) 


saladiesairradtysta aya sary 
nfe aatsairdefrenssificatad uen 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


342 YAJURVEDA 


A$vavatiin somavatimurjayantunudojasam. A 
vitsi sarva' osadhirasma 'aristatataye. 


Medicinal herb is that which is powerfully 
efficacious, nourishing and rejuvenating, strengthening 
and lustrously invigorating. Physician, know and find all 
such herbs for the health and immunity of the sick and 
the needy. 


82. (Oshadhaya Devata, Bhishak Rshi) 


samso idte maA zirerfaava i 
at aRar wd usw RN 


Ucchusma’osadhinam gavo gosthadiverate. 
Dhanain sanisyantinamatmanam tava purusa. 


O man, the invigorating power and fragrance of 
vitality of the herbs which are ever keen to give health 
and lustre to your body and soul issues forth from them 
just as cows issue forth from the cow-shed (anxious to 
feed their calves). 


83. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi) 
geait at urarert qaesea Prep: | 
ant: taNo cea aama Preheat 23 
Iskrtirnama vo mata’tho yuyam stha niskrtth. 
Sirah patatrini sthana yadamayati niskrtha. 
Know the medicine which, as mother, serves your 
life with healing and, like the flowing streams, repay the 
debt by completing the development of the science of 


healing by herbs. Whatever causes disease and loss of 
health, remove from the paths of life. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 343 


84. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi) 
afr fasat: ufzeer Aasa suns: 
ade: ureberepifes cb deal, thes 


Ati visvah paristha stena’iva vrajamakramuh. 
Osadhih pracucyavuryatkim ca tanvo rapah. 


When a thief attacks a cowpen, he is challenged 
and warded off by the master. So do medicinal herbs, 
universal in their growth and presence, challenge 
whatever ailment attacks the body like sin and destroy 
the ailments. 


85. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi) 


area ersrdsgurdeireedssmast i 
arer agter Asafa ur staat uem neu 


Yadima vajayannahamosadhirhasta 'adadhe. 
Atma yaksmasya na$yati pura jivagrbho yatha. 


When I refine and strengthen these medicines and 
hold them in my hand, the very root of the consumptive 


ailment grabbing the vitality of the sick person is 
destroyed. 


86. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi) 
weve: wadergug deere: | 
qA gen faateeassar deansitRa 1c i 
Yasyausadhih prasarpathangamangam parus- 
paruh. Tato yaksmam vi badhadhva’ugro 
madhyamastriva. 


When the medicines spread over every part and 
every joint of the sick person, then, mighty and powerful, 
present in every cell of the body, they drive away the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


344 YAJURVEDA 


consumptive forces of disease, eliminating, as if, the 
enemy intruders of the body. 


87. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi) 


"res den uw da ardor feefensrfem i 
"re adea smi cures Ava frerehum uec 
Sakam yaksma pra pata casena kikidivina. 
Sakam vatasya dhrajya sakam na$ya nihakaya. 
Physician, let the consumptive disease go off with 
every dose of medicine, with every new prescription, 


with every motion of the breath, and let it be eliminated 
along with the last trace of pain. 


88. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi) 
are elssrcmdercerm-emumssuled i 
wr: adt: dfaarisse  urdar er: uec u 
Anya vo anyamavatvanyanyasya upavata. Tah 
sarvah samvidana idam me pravata vachah. 


Physicians, of your medicines, let one supplement 
and protect the other and let the other in turn support and 
protect the former. Let all of them be thus mutually 
agreeable in proper proportion. Keep this word of mine 
as true and hold on to it. 


89. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi) 
at: wferfraisstwensstusr urget uferit:i 
erated At PSaTAS 8: ues t 


Yah phalinirya' aphala'apuspa yasca puspinih. 
Brhaspatiprasutasta no muncantvamhasah. 


All the medicinal herbs which are rich in fruit 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 345 


and those which are without fruit, those which are rich 
in flowers and those which are without flowers, all of 
them are created by the Lord Creator. Let all of them, 
with proper treatment and preparation by the physician, 
protect us and free us from disease and pain. 


90. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi) 


Wed ur ymueupuen eeu | 
stat sre wzelermcere eura sefenfesura uso 


Muncantu ma sapathyadatho varunyaduta. Atho 
yamasya padvisat sarvasmad devakilvisat. 


May the physicians and the medicines protect us 
against ill-will, anathema and self-guilt. May they free 
us from water-borne diseases and those which are 
peculiar to the prosperous and the distinguished persons. 
May they release us from ailments caused by acts of 
indiscipline and breach of the rules of health and the good 
life. May they save us from all diseases caused by neglect 
or indulgence of the senses and the mind and those caused 
by frustration of the intellectuals. 


91. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi) 
sauda fessi rd ere à 
a stanan «cu fien usu: usa 


Avapatantiravadan diva’ osadhayaspari. Yam 
jivamas$navamahai na sa risyati purusah. 


The medicinal herbs come from heaven, the 
region of light and life. So say the wise. The person 
who feeds upon them never comes to any suffering. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


346 YAJURVEDA 


92. (Vaidyas Devata, Varuna Rshi) 


"saisi: areata: vrafetereram: i 
aretha cada crate EÈ ge 


Ya'osadhih somarajnirbahvih $atavicaksanah. 
Tasamasi tvamuttamaram kamaya sam hrde. 

Physician, of the many herbal medicines which 

are efficacious with a hundred properties and of which 


soma is the chief on top, you are the best judge for the 
peace of mind and achievement of the desired result. 


93. (Vaidyas Devata, Varuna Rshi) 


"safe: arhigitattcar: area i 
sewufdwqarssrep a ww dia uesn 


Ya'osadhih somarajnirvisthitah prthivimanu. 
Brhaspatiprasuta’asyai samdatta viryam. 


The many herbal medicines with life-giving 
properties like soma, specially grown on the earth, are 
the blessed gifts of the Lord-giver of life, Brihaspati. 
Refined and vitalized by the physician, they may, we 
wish and pray, give health and vigour to this woman/ 
man. 


94. (Bhishaja Devata, Varuna Rshi) 


asà ume gt ud: 
wel: age Aes AÀ H su idu uen 


Yascedamupasrnvanti yasca duram paragatah. 
Sarvah samgatya virudho 'syai samdatta viryam. 


Men and women of medicine, these herbs of 
which you and others hear around us, or which are close 
by, or those which come from afar, all these herbs, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 347 


plants, creepers and trees together, we wish and pray, 
may give her/him the gift of health and vitality. 


95. (Vaidyas Devata, Varuna Rshi) 
m at faq aia at cure eal a: 
fipareerd sara catch uel Herren. TEXT 


Ma vo risat khanita yasmai caham khanami vah. 
Dvipaccatuspadasmakarn sarvamastvanaturam. 


Whoever digs you (roots/minerals) out, may he/ 
she never injure/destroy you, nor should he/she come to 
any harm. Nor should the person for whom I (the 
physician) dig you out come to any harm. May all the 
bi-peds (humans) and all the quadrupeds (animals) of 
ours be free from suffering and disease. 


96. (Vaidyas Devata, Varuna Rshi) 


sida: Hee ae we wal d 
aed eguirfd smarorerexvisri urcamifa eg N 


Osadhayah samavadanta somena saha rajna. 
Yasmai krnoti brahmanastarn rajan parayamasi. 


Herbs and medicines alongwith their chief, soma, 
power of vitality, say: O Soma, king of herbs, whoever 
the patient for whom the learned physician has prepared 
the cure, let us take the person across the pain of 
suffering. 


97. (Bhishagvara Devata, Varuna Rshi) 
wR aaen ussufedifu i 


stat graver aentort orate rei usen 


Nasayitri balasasyarsasa’ upacitamasi. Atho 
Satasya yaksmanam pakarorasi nasant. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


348 YAJURVEDA 


Herbal medicine is a destroyer, sure cure, of 
phlegmatic consumption, piles, hemorrhoids, swellings, 
chronic sores and numerous types of pulmonary disease. 


98. (Vaidyas Devata, Varuna Rshi) 


veri theatsshateartteeat geet: 
Taras Gat wet fag wentaqert ecu 


Tvam gandharva’ akhananstvamindrastvam 
brhaspatih. Tvamosadhe somo raja vidvan 
yaksmadamucyata. 


O Gandharva, herbal medicine, the singer and 
artist searches for and discovers you. So does Indra, 
man of power and virility, Brihaspati, man of universal 
Vaidic lore, Soma, man of peace and blessed virtue, the 
ruler and the scholar. They all search for, discover, use 
and benefit from herbal medicines and free themselves 
from consumptive ailments. 


99. (Oshadhi Devata, Varuna Rshi) 
"erg sent: würd Gaara: | 
Beet ud CTS AAT ge 


Sahasva me'aratih sahasva prtanayatah. 
Sahasva sarvam papmanam sahamanasy- 
osadhe. 


Herbal medicine challenges disease. It resists the 
anti-life forces and overthrows the enemies of good health 
: Let the medicine resist all that causes sin and disease. 
It resists, fights out, defeats and eliminates the negativities 
and builds up the vitality and invincibility of the system 
for longevity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 349 
100. (Vaidyas Devata, Varuna Rshi) 


datas waiter unb a car candum d 
ad wt datdie sradesm fatear uoo 


Dirghayusta’osadhe khanita yasmai ca tva 
khanamyaham. Atho tvam dirghayurbhutva 
Satavalsa virohatat. 


Medicinal herb, may the person who searches, 
discovers, digs out and prepares the medicine be of long 
life. May the patient for whom I, the physician, prescribe, 
prepare and administer the medicine be of long life. May 
you (the herb) too be of long life and grow to rise into a 
hundred roots, shoots and branches. 


101. (Bhishaja Devata, Varuna Rshi) 


verbaareilusr ad qenssdera: i 
SURAT PSC ATSSTEATR ussffirardft o9 


Tvamuttamasyosadhe tava vrksa’upastayah. 
Upastirastu so’smakam yo’ asman’ abhidasati. 


Herbal medicine/Physician, you are supreme. All 
the trees (such as peepal and banyan) are subordinate to 
you as sources of medicine. Anyone who tries to suppress 
us, any disease that might weaken us, let that be under 
our control. (Strengthen us with health, vitality and 
courage of spirit.) 


102. (Kah Devata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi) 


m at fesdisatrer a: dire at ar fadera? 
cre | usurdsensr: taal wart wet xard 
femi feri got 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


350 YAJURVEDA 


Ma ma himsijjanita yah prthivya yo va divain 
satyadharma vyanat. Yascapascandrah 
prathamo jajana kasmai devaya havisa vidhema. 


The Lord who is the creator of the earth, who is 
the lord of the universal law of truth, who is the first of 
all and creator of the air, waters and the moons, and 
who pervades the heavens, whom we worship with the 
best homage of fragrant oblations, that lord of life may 
never hurt us with disease and ill-health. 


103. (Agni Devata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi) 


anada uferfer aaa udur ae | 
aai dssihaRtaatsshkied o3 


Abhyavartasva prthivi yajnena payasa saha. 
Vapam te'agnirisito'arohat. 


Come earth, revolving with yajna and water, milk 
and food, again and again, continuously. And may agni, 
vital life-generating heat of nature, activated by the Lord 
creator of life, bless your fertility and increase your power 
of production. 


104. (Agni Devata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi) 


ata ad Spp Gears Gd wed aay i 
wed was dox! 


Agne yatte Sukram yaccandram yatputam yacca 
yajniyam. Taddevebhyo bharamasi. 


Agni, vital energy of the universe, may we imbibe 
and internalize that power of your nature, character and 
function which is immaculate and generative, beautiful 
and blissful, pure and sacred, and worthy of service and 
worship through yajna for growth and development. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 351 
105. (Vidvan Devata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi) 


yupie Rasam qae SPT fase ema i 
ST "ur ird ferrea ers Sale Aaaa us ow u 


Isamurjamahamita' adamrtasya yonim mahis- 
asya dharam. A ma gosu visatva tanusu jahami 
sedimaniramamivam. 


From Lord Agni and the fire of yajna (spiritual, 
mental and physical) I receive and imbibe food for life 
and energy for action. I receive and internalize the fluent 
voice of the mother of truth and Dharma. May all this 
food, energy and spirit enter, vitalize and strengthen my 
body, mind and sense, and may it invigorate my cows 
with fertility. 


With all this food, energy and vitality I’d fight 
out and eliminate all pain, suffering, disease and debility. 


106. (Agni Devata, Pavakagni Rshi) 
ariaa stat erar ufa Asare fara i 
Wart wee erste qa mm eg gos 


Agne tava $ravo vayo mahi bhrajante' arcayo 
vibhavaso. Brhadbhano $avasa vajamukthyam 
dadhasi dasuse kave. 


Agni, lord of lustre, light of universal knowledge, 
man of supernal vision, let the adorable message of yours, 
youthful brilliance and splendid beams of light shine and 
radiate across the world. Whosoever celebrates you in 
yajna, you bless the yajamana giver with holistic 
nourishments and fullness of energy and vitality with 
additional food for yajna. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


352 YAJURVEDA 


107. (Vidvan Devata, Pavakagni Rshi) 


Wrerenel ait: sreneb eri sar Terent safe afr irat I 
vit mat renaatta uurf&r vrdeilssst u9 own 


Pavakavarcah $ukravarca'anunavarca 'udiyarsi 
bhanuna. Putro matara vicarannupavasi prnaksi 
rodas'ubhe. 


Agni, lord of light and splendour, pure as fire, 
clear and bright as sunbeams, full and complete, rising 
to the heights with the sun and pervading the spaces 
protects the heaven and earth like the son protecting 
the father and mother. 


(Similarly the young brahmachari or 
brahmacharini, roaming around the sacred premises of 
his/her institute, grows high in the light and lustre of 
knowledge, pure as fire, clear as sunbeams, full and 
complete, and rises high like the sun. He/she protects 
his/her father and mother as the sun protects the heaven 
and earth.) 


108. (Agni Devata, Pavakagni Rshi) 
Sail uresmaes : Geka eee sitfafulféa: i 
Asg: wedspifieuufrfender emend ngosi 


Urjo napajjatavedah susastibhirmandasva 
dhitibhirhitah. Tve’ isah sandadhurbhurivarpa- 
sascitrotayo vamajatah. 


Agni, child and protector of energy, lord of wealth 
and intelligence, lover and well-wisher of all, invoked, 
lighted and raised with devotion and hymns of praise, 
receive the libations, rejoice and grow. People of various 
hue, wonderfully favoured and secure in life, children of 
love and beauty, and sweet and dear by nature, offer food 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 353 
to you for growth and development. 


(As fire is invoked with love and devotion and 
fed with libations, so should the child be fed, nourished 
and helped to grow by parents and teachers with all the 
love and faith at their command so that the child not 
only lives and learns but also rejoices while he/she lives 
and learns.) 


109. (Agni Devata, Pavakagni Rshi) 


Beas users credis xrbssmed d 
a dire ada farts yori arate sede ug os u 


Irajyannagne prathayasva jantubhirasme rayo" 
amartya. Sa dar$atasya vapuso vi rajasi prnaksi 
sanasim kratum. 


Immortal Agni/man of action, invoked/inspired 
and rising in glory, rejoicing with people, create and 
expand the wealth of life for us all. Shining in the beauty 
and grace of your form in life, protect, promote and 
perfect the yajna of life which brings happiness, 
prosperity and all the blessings of existence. 


110. (Vidvan Devata, Pavakagni Rshi) 


geanne welad adad ue: 1 ula 
ame went wets aata GPa ha ug gol 


Iskartarmadhvarasya pracetasam ksayantam 
radhaso mahah. Ratim vamasya subhagam 
mahimisam dadhasi sanasim rayim. 


Agni, lord of power and sustenance, you uphold 
who performs and promotes the yajnic programmes of 
creation, construction and development. You sustain the 
person who is intelligent and wide-awake. You protect 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


354 YAJURVEDA 


the person who is settled in a peaceful home. You 
maintain the person who gives liberal amounts in 
charity. You are the preserver of the great and generous 
earth and its environment. You maintain a steady supply 
of food and energy. And it is you who protect and 
promote the ancient and traditional wealth of existence. 


111. (Agni Devata, Pavakagni Rshi) 
pareti fee fava sian agers afén uai smit: 
shoka car finr med rjr BT eee 


Rtavanam mahisam visvadarsatam agniin 
sumnaya dadhire puro janah. Srutkarnain 
saprathastamam tva gira daivyam manusa yuga. 


For the sake of peace, prosperity and joy, the 
people of former times have honoured and followed the 
human traditions of ages and you, Agni, lord of light 
and life, man of vision and excellence dedicated to Truth 
and Dharma, great, possessed of universal knowledge 
and experience, discreet listener and practical achiever 
and master of divine qualities of character. 


112. (Soma Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


aratna ud a farad: ur quud d 
Va esie Wrap URI 


A pyáyasva sametu te visvatah soma Vrsnyam. 
Bhava vajasya sangathe. 


Soma, ruler, man of grace and blessedness, rise 
and grow to excellence to win the glory of life. May the 
vitality, virility and grandeur of life come to you from all 
sides, and, in the battles of life and the nation, be great. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 355 


113. (Soma Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


a à vats ad ad emm: cd qurat-erferriure: i 
smemduriAüssmqais curo fafa satser 
firer Vai 


Sam te payamsi samu yantu vajah sam 
Vrsnyanyabhimatisahah. Apyayamano amrtaya 
soma divi sravamsyuttamani dhisva. 


Soma, man of peace, power and joy, may all 
delicious waters, milk and juices come to you. May all 
vigour, virility and vitality come to you. May all food, 
energy and means of speedy and powerful defence be 
yours to break down the pride of the enemy forces. 
Growing mighty and mightier, and rising towards heaven 
and immortality, hold on to the highest words, thoughts 
and visions as food for the mind and soul. 


114. (Soma Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


seater fan urn fesdfursss: i 
vat a: HUPDRTH: ual ger ge vdd 


A pydyasva madintama soma visvebhirain- 
Subhih. Bhava nah saprathastamah sakha vrdhe. 


Soma, man of widest fame and highest honour, 
happiest at heart and creator of joy all round, rise and 
shine with the beams of your excellence and be friends 
so that we all together may rise and advance in all 
directions. 


115. (Agni Devata, Vatsara Rshi) 


3T d aca val uuanurededsnend i 
arà wat plan fnr ue? 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


356 YAJURVEDA 


A te vatso mano yamat paramdaccit sadhasthdat. 
Agne tvankamaya gira. 

Agni, lord of life, light and love, the devoted 
yajamana as a child of yours would divert his mind even 
from the most exciting places and, with the sweetest 
words of praise, come to concentrate on you as a calf 
runs to the mother cow even from the richest pasture. 


116. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi) 


qz mseg favat: afer: eben d 
ant cararat uf eee 


Tubhyam ta angirastama visvah suksitayah 
prthak. Agne kamaya yemire. 


Agni, most brilliant power of the universe, the 
entire humanity, even though they might be very well 
placed in life, converge on you, each for the fulfilment 
of his/her own special desire. 


(Just as the children of the Lord creator approach 
Him with prayers for the fulfilment of their desires, so 
do the people of the land, even though well-placed in life 
otherwise, approach the ruler for the fulfilment of their 
requests.) 


117. (Agni Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


ata: fag ada art yard wreden | 
"urgent fenis nggon 


Agnih priyesu dhamasu kamo bhutasya 
bhavyasya. Samradeko vi rajati. 


Agni, sole and sovereign lord of the world, loved 
and worshipped by all that is born and all that is yet to be 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XII 357 


born, rules and blazes in his glory across the dearest 
and most beautiful regions of the universe. 


(Just as Agni, bright and blazing with His glory, 
is the lord of the universe, so that person alone is worthy 
of being the ruler of a country who is brilliant by virtue 
of his/her mind and character, unique in performance, 
loved and respected by all and shining across the present 
and the possible future in all regions of the land.) 


sta graviüssum: i 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


358 YAJURVEDA 


CHAPTER-XIII 


1. (Agni Devata, Vatsara Rshi) 


"df aesa Raa querer watt 
"mH aat: wen gi 


Mayi grhnamyagre 'agniin rayasposaya supraja- 
stvaya suviryaya. Mamu devatah sacantam. 


First of all I dedicate my mind and soul to the 
Lord Almighty, Agni, lord of light and life, power and 
prosperity, and I instal the yajna-fire in my home for 
the gifts of vigour and valour, wealth and prosperity 
and a noble family. May all the divine powers, for sure, 
favour and bless me. 


(Just as a house-holder or a student is dedicated 
to Agni, the Lord Almighty, and to agni, the yajna-fire, 
so too should he/she be dedicated to the agnis among 
the community, leading men and women of knowledge, 
wisdom and virtue who have specialised in various 
fields of knowledge and development.) 


2.  (AgniDevata, Vatsara Rshi) 
ami yoia ahr: ugue: frdar | 
asma mR uean a weehi feat ourdur aia 
Wen us 
Apam prsthamasi yoniragneh samudramabhitah 


pinvamanam. Vardhamano mahan' a ca puskare 
divo matraya varimna prathasva. 


Lord Almighty, infinite spirit and life of the 
universe, you are the centre-hold of waters and energy. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIII 359 


You are the original cause of heat and light. Surrounding 
and feeding the expansive oceans on earth and in space 
from all sides, you are great and ever greater in the 
intervening spaces between earth and heaven. And you 
reveal your glory by the measure and immensity of the 
light of heaven. 


3. (Aditya Devata, Vatsara Rshi) 


aa war das orents diva: geet Aasaa: | 
a qans fact: gara Adara 
fad: usu 


Brahma jajnanam prathamam purastad vi 
simatah suruco vena 'avah. Sa budhnya'upama' 
asya visthah sata$ca yonimasatasca vi vah. 


Brahma, infinite spirit of the universe, all-creator 
and omniscient, is the first and greatest reality of 
existence. Worthy of love and adoration, It is the highest 
object of desire for the wise. The great and glorious 
objects (such as the sun, the moon, the earth) which fill 
the skies in various regions of space are exemplary 
revelations of Its creative power. 


In the beginning of creation, that Brahma, from 
the potential and law of Its own existence, invokes 
Prakriti, the original Nature which is the cause of all 
that is come into existence and also that which is yet to 
come into existence. 


4. (Prajapati Devata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi) 


Roat: adada yet wea: ufetrehssmdt à 
a am yfai mg aa gard gft 
faa iri 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


360 YAJURVEDA 


Hiranyagarbhah samavartatagre bhutasya jatah 
patireka asit. Sa dadhara prthivim dyamutemam 
kasmai devaya havisa vidhema. 


The One Lord of Light and the sole creator of 
lights such as the sun existed before creation (as He 
ever exists). He alone was and is the lord and sustainer 
of all forms of created being. He holds and sustains the 
earth and heaven and supports this whole universe. We 
worship the same one lord and offer Him homage with 
libations of fragrant materials. 


5.  (Ishwara Devata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi) 


gegen yiri enfin vr etr art uai: 
wart créer uen uud wire eed erat: dd 


Drapsascaskanda prthivimanu dyamimam ca 
yonimanu yasca purvah. Samanam yonimanu 
sancarantam drapsam juhomyanu sapta hotrah. 


That eternal, perfect and primordial joy (Ananda) 
which blesses and coexists with the earth, the heaven 
and the original cause of existence, Prakriti, the same 
joy which universally subsists with its origin, the sole 
creator, I adore with all my breath of life (five pranas), 
mind and soul. 


6.  (Hiranyagarbha Devata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi) 


vais, ater Gro: dt yfai à 
Xrsaredfisr a fafa ast: atear ad: wen 


Namo'stu sarpebhyo ye ke ca prthivimanu. Ye 
'antarikse ye divi tebhyah sarpebhyo namah. 


For all those that move in space, and those which 
move on the earth, which move in the regions of heaven 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIII 361 


and those which move about in the sky between earth 
and heaven, for all these moving forms of existence 
Nature has provided food, the means of sustenance. 


7. (Hiranyagarbha Devata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi) 


asgi adam À at areas uses i 
a amg ska aed: atest aa: isi 


Ya’isavo yatudhananam ye va vanaspatin’ ranu. 
Ye vavatesu $erate tebhyah sarpebhyo namah. 
For all the arrows of the enemies of life, and those 
who damage the herbs and trees, being poachers and 
parasites, and those who sleep and wait in the obscure 


paths for victims, for all these surreptitious forms of 
moving life, a challenge and a thunderbolt! 


8.  (SuryaDevata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi) 


a art that feat a at wv eae d 
satay ade eet: Ese AA: en 
Ye vami rocane divo ye va suryasya rasmisu. 


Yesamapsu sadaskrtam tebhyah sarpebhyo 
namah. 


Or those negative forces that are in the heat of 
the solar region, or those in the rays of the sun, or those 
which have taken abode in the waters, to these moving 
forms of existence, a challenge to counter, overpower 
or destroy! 


9. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 
qoa ura: wifi «t gest rfe vrsremderta sgt 
qiie ufdfet zumirsseatfar feet varereafüsi: usu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


362 YAJURVEDA 


Krnusva pajah prasitim na prthvim yahi 
rajevamavan' ibhena. Trsvimanu prasitim 
drunano 'sta'si vidhya raksasastapisthath . 
Agni, ruler, your influence is fast, far and wide. 
Increase your strength and power and make it felt. Go 
like a shot over the earth as a king with his attendant 
forces. Cast your net of law instantly against the 
destructive elements and punish them with inescapable 
consequences. 


10. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


wd smresamepar daccerTeger yaa sisters: | 
asa spar uagridtzar ferar fahe: t9 o ti 
Tava bhramasa'asuya patantyanusprsa dhrsata 
sosucanah. Tapuinsyagne juhva patanga- 
nasandito vi srja visvagulkah. 

Agni (ruler, commander of the forces, lord of 
justice), the flames of your fire blaze with awe. Pure 
and purifying with might and daring, fall upon the forces 
which burn and destroy life and society, and with 
libations unrestrained, release a rain of lightning terror 
striking in all directions. 


11. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 
ufa went fads fta sat ursfévisaren 
ader p al aaas alsa mee 
aina aa ue 9 
Prati spaso visrja turnitamo bhava payurviso’ 


asya adabdhah. Yo no dure’aghasaimso yo’ 
antyagne ma kiste vyathira dadharsit. 


Agni, instant in action, bold and inviolable, if 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIII 363 


there is a tormentor or a wicked maligner or a supporter 
of sin and crime far or near against you or against us, 
release the forces to seize him and remove the obstacles. 
Be the protector and guardian of this people/community. 
Let none bully or terrorize you and us. 


12. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


samy fess verde AAA setan anA | 
a Assaia we ciem wd dead 4 
IRA ue 


Udagne tistha pratya tanusva nyamitran’ 
osatattigmahete. Yo no’aratim samidhana cakre 
nica tam dhaksyatasam na $uskam. 


Agni, lord of heat and light, leader of an 
advancing humanity, rise and grow. Let the light spread 
around. Wielder of the sharpest weapons and inviolable 
power, burn the enemies of life and human values. 
Blazing lord of fire and justice, if someone creates, 
supports or advances the selfish, ungenerous and 
ungracious forces, scorch him like a patch of dry shrubs. 


13. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


meat sta ufed aenema cata | 
ard fier dafe aat sires wdoirfa sta 
aream AST ATA ues 
Urdhvo bhava prati vidhyadhyasmadavisknusva 
daivyanyagne. Ava sthira tanuhi yatujunam 
jamimajamim pra mrnihi $atrun. Agnestva tejasa 
sadayami. 
Agni, lord of light and power, leader of humanity, 
rise and stay on top. Counter and ward off the enemies 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


364 YAJURVEDA 


of mankind. Develop the best things which our saints 
and scholars have discovered and invented. Resist and 
reduce the strength of the opponents to nil. Eliminate 
the natural, traditional and customary enemies of 
society. I instal you in your seat with the baptism of 
light and fire. 


14. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


anaiai fea: mpa: ufereurssTemg | stares. 
Yatesfa fsrefe 1 ster wister area ngi 


Agnirmurdha divah kakutpatih prthivya'ayam. 
Apam retamsi jinvati. Indrasya tvaujasa 
sadayarmi. 

This Agni, the sun, is the chief and summit of 
heaven. It is the father and sustainer of the earth and its 
life. It vitalizes and refreshes the waters of life for the 
earth and her children. So should you be, Ruler of the 
land. I anoint and consecrate you with the radiant power 
of Indra, the sun. 


15. (Agni Devata, Trishira Rshi) 
qat aaa Tasa rar erat frg: wes fsrerfst:i 
fafa ya afe vef ferie: ru wem 
TA lul 
Bhuvo yajnasya rajasasca neta yatra niyudbhih 


sacase Sivabhih. Divi murdhanam dadhise 
svarsam jihvamagne cakrse havyavaham. 

Agni is the leader and mover of the earth and its 

life, of the motions of wind and energy in the middle 


sphere, and of the cosmic yajna of creation. And there 
everywhere it is one with the blissful dynamics of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIII 365 


existence. As it sends up its flames of fire bearing the 
light and fragrance of yajna, it holds its head high and 
wields the light of the sun in heaven. 


(Similarly, O king, be the leader of the nation's 
life on earth and the dignity and dynamics of the polity. 
Be the path-maker of the policies of peace, justice and 
happiness and hold your head high with words of 
enlightenment, creativity and joy for the people.) 


16. (Agni Devata, Trishira Rshi) 


gard sreumwdar fegeehHum | WD wat agas- 
Seger uduuifsederarar uferdi dee NN 


Dhruvasi dharunastrta vi$évakarmana. Ma tva 
samudra'udvadhinma suparno’vyathamana 
prthivim drinha. 


Spirit of the human nation, polity of the world, 
you are the centre-hold of dharma, enlightenment and 
peace, created, completed and blest by the Lord-maker 
of the world, Vishvakarma. Let not the seas hurt you. 
Let not the sky, sun and moon and the clouds hurt you. 
Unhurt, free and peaceful, develop, beautify and beatify 
the earth. 


17. (Prajapati Devata, Trishira Rshi) 


wdea raum Wes wu I 

ada uha use ufo ngon 
Prajapatistva sadayatvapam prsthe samudra- 
syeman. Vyacasvatun prathasvatim prathasva 
prthivyasi. 


Spirit of humanity, mother of the common- 
wealth, lady of the polity, be open, free and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


366 YAJURVEDA 


accommodative, be expansive and celebrated. And may 
the creator of life, father of humanity, Prajapati, establish 
you with His blessings on the currents of rivers, on the 
paths of the seas, and over the currents of air in the sky. 


18. (Agni Devata, Trishira Rshi) 


RA yiera fasaa fayda weer 
eat | uferdi des uferdi dem yfaet ar fex- 
W: ngen 


Bhurasi bhumirasyaditirasi vi$vadhaya vi$vasya 
bhuvanasya dhartri. Prthivim yaccha prthivim 
drinha prthivim ma himsth. 

Agni, light of the universe, vitality of nature, you 
are the being and existence, you are the mother-support, 
whole, inviolable, all sustaining and all-nourishing, 
centre-hold and wielder of all the regions of the world. 
Sustain, guide and raise the world, develop and expand 
the life on earth. Do not hurt the earth nor violate the 
life of her children. (As Agni is the life and support of 
the earth, so is the woman the mother of the home.) 


19. (Agni Devata, Trishira Rshi) 

fasdet wora euraritarart ure aan 
aeara rm wea wfáur wed wu 
Wederfgresa spem wa ugs 

Vi$vasmai pranayapanaya vyanayodanaya 
pratisthayai caritraya. Agnistva'bhi patu mahya 
svastya chardisa $antamena taya devataya'- 
ngirasvad dhruva sida. 


Lady of the home, may Agni, lord of light and 
life/your husband, the presiding presence of the home, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIII 367 


fully protect and support you in every way for all the 
energy of life, prevention of suffering, best manners 
and behaviour, inner strength, dignity and recognition 
and virtuous conduct. In a state of perfect peace and 
well-being, with all the joys of life in a good home, stay 
firm and secure with Agni, the lord of life, and your 
husband, like Prakriti with Purusha and the light of the 
dawn with the day. 


20. (Patni Devata, Agni Rshi) 


ansku sra wea: weak i 
wer at gat ud Beau wed ww non 


Kandat kandat prarohanti parusah parusaspari. 
Eva no durve pra tanu sahasrena Satena ca. 


Lady of the home, delicate and graceful as the 
durva grass, just as the grass grows from one section of 
the stalk to another, from one knot of joint to another, 
so you too, grow in life, and let us grow and help us 
advance in life a hundred-fold and from thereon a 
thousand fold. 


21. (Patni Devata, Agni Rshi) 


a wet vant uestur fada i 
wake Ae fast efeeat emm een 


Ya $atena pratanosi sahasrena virohasi. 
Tasyaste devistake vidhema havisa vayam. 


Lady light of the home, root and foundation of 
the yajna of family life, as you grow a hundred-fold 
and then you rise a thousand-fold, O noble and generous 
mother, we offer you love and reverence in homage with 
the best fragrant offerings. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


368 YAJURVEDA 


22. (Agni Devata, Indragani Rshis) 


asri ws wal facuatd visus: 
aNs adhi eer water apf nee 


Yaste’agne surye ruco divamatanvanti rasmi- 
bhih. Tabhirno’adya sarvabhi ruce janaya 
naskrdhi. 


Agni, those lights of yours which, in the solar 
region, illuminate the heavenly spaces with the sun- 
beams, with all those lights to-day bless us with 
enlightenment for the sake of our people. 


(As Agni illuminates the heavens with the light 
of the sun, so should the teachers of men and women 
enlighten them with the light of their knowledge. What 
is the secret of Agni turning into light, and into light of 
the sun?) 


23. (Brihaspati Devata, Indragani Rshis) 


"mr wb Xeno qa wet wad at wets 
sivit af: adhi eat aT era segun R311 


Ya vo devah surye ruco gosvasvesu ya rucah. 
Indragni tabhih sarvabhi rucam no dhatta 
brhaspate. 


Divine powers of nature, your energy and vitality 
illuminates the sun and vitalizes the lives of animals 
like cows and horses. It also works in the motions of 
objects and the perceptions of the senses. 


O Brihaspati, Lord omniscient of this mighty 
universe, may the heat and light of natural energy in- 
vest our vitality with all that power and energy. 


Brihaspati, noble teacher and master of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIII 369 


knowledge and education, may our teachers like Indra 
and Agni in-form and in-vest our deep interest in life 
and nature with the hidden secrets of light, power and 
sensation as expressions of one universal natural energy 
(Prakriti). 


24. (Prajapati Devata, Indragani Rshis) 


fee waited. we, afer 
wdra Maa wed dísreur werfdurd i 
faded urerraturara eura faya fht à 
arf sfélufereart deddarfgreea spem ie uw 


Virad jyotiradharayat svarad jyotiradharayat. 
Prajapatistva sadayatu prsthe prthivya jyoti- 
smatim. Vi$vasmai pranayapanaya vyanaya 
vi$vam jyotiryaccha. Agniste'dhipatistaya 
devataya’ ngirasvad dhruva sida. 


The cosmic forms of the universe bear the light 
of the Lord. Self-luminant stars such as the sun bear the 
light as their own. 


O lady of light and knowledge, noble teacher and 
torch-bearer, may the father of created beings, Prajapati, 
instal you in your seat on the face of the earth. Give full 
light of knowledge to others for the sake of full energy, 
safeguard against suffering, and all good qualities of 
nature, character and action. Agni, lord of light and life, 
is your master and guardian. Stay firm and secure with 
that noble and gracious lord as the soul with the body, 
Prakriti with Purusha and the light of dawn with the 
day. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


370 YAJURVEDA 


25. (Ritava Devata, Indragani Rshis) 


Raya miara ardana ed: vers Sha 
enedai matga nedara ideaa: cedar: 
yag WH Aaa ada: | Asara: HHSHDSSHT 


wratuferetsgi | ard amaste- 
faa lastei wear adaga ga 
tee usw 


Madhuśca mādhavaśca vasantikavrtu' agne- 
rantah $leso'si kalpetam dyavaprthivi kalp- 
antamapa' osadhayah kalpantamagnayah 
prthanmama jyaisthyaya savratah. Ye'agnayah 
samanaso’ntara dyavaprthivi' ime. Vasanti- 
kavrtu’ abhikalpamana 'indramiva deva' 
abhisamvisantu taya devataya’ngirasvad dhruve 
sidatam. 


Chaitra is a honey-sweet month. Vaishakha is a 
month of honey-sweets. These are the months of spring. 
Both these, born of agni, are closely connected to 
summer. May the earth and heaven be favourable to us 
for the gift of excellence, may the waters be favourable, 
may the herbs and trees be favourable, may all the orders 
of agni (heat and light each), committed to its own law 
and function, be favourable to us. May all the forms of 
vital fire in earth and heaven, integrated and mutually 
harmonious, supporting and energizing the two spring 
months like all the powers of nature serving and working 
for the omnipotent lord Indra, bless and vitalize us in 
all ways. 

Just as the earth and heaven abide firm and secure 
with the Supreme Lord of the universe, just as the spring 
months abide by the vital fire of earth and heaven, so 
should we all abide firm and secure by the lord of the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIII 371 


universe, nature and spring, as breath abides by life, as 
Prakriti abides by Purusha, and as part abides by the 
whole. 


26. (Kshatrapati Devata, Savita Rshi) 
sate eur agent: Geta YaTT: | 
"eweraifu ar at fs eeu 


Asadha'si sahamana sahasvaratih sahasva 
prtanayatah. Sahasravirya'si sa ma jinva. 
Ruling power, Shakti, you are tolerant, 
challenging and invincible. Challenge the mean, the 
ungenerous and the destructive forces. Face, fight and 
defeat those who are bent upon violence. You have the 
strength and prowess of a thousand powers. Be good to 
me, be good and gracious to all. 


27. (Vishvedeva Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
ag aats vet ania Reta: od 
areal}: axardet: neon 
Madhu vata’rtayate madhu ksaranti sindhavah. 
Madhvirnah santvosadhih. 

The winds blow cool and sweet as honey. The 
streams and ocean-currents flow cool and sweet as 
honey. May the herbs and trees be as sweet and pleasant 
as honey. (Let us too be good and sweet in our conduct 
as the winds, the streams and the herbs and trees, 
observing the law and ethics of value.) 


28. (Vishvedeva Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


"Hep aata weteearfsterzvst: à 
aag ante a: frat wren 


Madhu naktamutosaso madhumat parthivam 
rajah. Madhu dyaurastu nah pita. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


372 YAJURVEDA 


May the nights and the dawn be honey-sweet, 
soothing and inspiring. May the dust of mother-earth 
be sweet and fragrant. And may the light of the sun be 
honey-sweet and kind as father for us all. (Let us too 
follow the honey-sweets of nature in life.) 


29. (Vishvedeva Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


"ebur erreafadisiuisussmp Ga: | 
meia waq A: d$ 


Madhumanno vanaspatirmadhuman' astu 
suryah. Madhvirgavo bhavantu nah. 


May the herbs with their juices and the trees with 
their fruit be honey-sweet for us. May the sun be kind, 
sweet and invigorating. May the cows be sweet and 
rejuvenating as honey with their milk. May the saints, 
scholars, seniors and teachers be kind and affectionate 
as the sun, the mother earth and the mother cow. 


30. (Prajapati Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
ami mieia ur cat waisfuratudt-urfi serm: i 
afsat: wsmsstTelareerd ver faesr afte: 
WAAL !i3o!l 
Apam gambhantsida ma tva suryo'bhi tapsin 
ma’gnirvaisvanarah. Acchinnapatrah praja' 
anuviksasvanu tva divya vrstih sacatam. 


Be in the centre of the waters deep as in the clouds 
so that the heat of the sun may not injure you nor the 
earthly heat, Vaishwanara, hurt you. Look round so that 
the people, free and fully protected from heat, are 
favourable to you. May the showers of celestial rain 
bless you. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIII 373 


31. (Varuna Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


EMME LN GE ERKELA arr | 
atte aata: Weed eiie d res aa ga war us e u 


Trintsamudrantsamasrpat svarganapam patir- 
vrsabha' istakanam. Purisam vasanah sukrtasya 
loke tatra gaccha yatra purve paretah. 

The master controller of pranic energies of life, 
through karma, crosses the three oceans of time and 
space leading to the paradisal abode of the blessed in 
the sphere of the sun. Abiding with the Spirit of the 
universe he/she brightens up the earth and showers it 
with all the objects of sweetness and desire. 


Man/Woman on earth, go thither to the region of 
the blessed where your noble ancestors have gone. (And 
that is the spring of the life of supernal joy.) 


32. (Dyavaprithivi Devatas, Gotama Rshi) 


Wet at: diet b asgi ag Haaa, id 

fugat at atta: uae 

Mahi dyauh prthivi ca na'imam yajnam 
mimiksatam. Piprtam no bharimabhih. 


May the great earth and high heaven bless and 
promote this yajna of our life. So may they and our 
parents join and bless our yajna of the household with 
their active blessings. 


33. (Vishnu Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


ferit: ptr asada xdi grt wear | 
weg GI: Tat uss 


Visnoh karmani pasyata yato vratani paspase. 
Indrasya yujyah sakha. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


374 YAJURVEDA 


Behold the great acts of the omnipresent lord of 
the universe, Vishnu, acts like the creation, sustenance 
and dissolution of the world. Therein I see the essence, 
the ultimate blueprint of the discipline and actions for 
living. He is the great friend and lover of the human 
soul. He is the giver of bliss. 


34. (Jataveda Devata, Gotama Rshi) 

gait ereurdr stat were atest Sa- 
dati a mia Breed a Gave get ded 
WET MIEXTI 

Dhruvasi dharuneto jajne prathamamebhyo 
yonibhyo' adhi jatavedah. Sa gayatrya 
tristubhanustubha ca devebhyo havyam vahatu 
prajanan. 

Mother of the universe, Prakriti, firm and 
inviolable power, bearer of the world's forms in 
existence as you are, it was through your oceanic womb 
that Agni, the omniscient creative consciousness first 
manifested Itself. And He, knowing and manifesting 
through everything born, moved the materials of the 
cosmic yajna to the evolutionary powers of nature and 
communicated the cosmic knowledge through gayatri, 
trishtup and anushtup verses to the visionary sages. 


(In the context of the home, grihastha, the wife is 
the Prakriti-like centre-hold of the organisation and the 
mother of the familial creation. The husband is agni, 
jataveda, father and yajamana of the home-yajna.) 


35. (Jataveda Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


EH wa Wea weed gasade | 
wurdfu verfu maA ciredt urdarn i35 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIII 375 


Ise raye ramasva sahase dyumna’urje’apatyaya. 
Samradasi svaradasi sarasvatau tvotsau 
pravatam. 


Master/Mistress of the home, you are the ruler, 
brilliant, self-enlightened and self-disciplined. Be stead- 
fast, live well and abide in the home for the sake of 
food, energy, courage, wealth, honour and children. May 
the noble and gracious Brahmanas and the learned and 
eloquent scholars guide and protect you in your homely 
world. 


36. (Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 


amt qa fe à aarvatar ea ure: | 
a adfa ue usd 


Agne yuksva hi ye tavasvaso deva sadhavah. 
Aram vahanti manyave. 


Agni, lord of power and science, those horses of 
yours which are swift and accurate to carry you to the 
target of your ardour and ambition like an arrow and 
thunder bolt, are wonderful. Lord of speed, rise and yoke 
the horses to your chariot. 


37. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi) 
gear fe degduis nsari nsr TAN | 
fr grab get: da: ngon 


Yuksva hi devahutaman’asvan’agne rathiriva. 
Ni hota purvyah sadah. 


Agni, lord of light and power, veteran leader and 
generous man of yajna, rise and yoke to the chariot of 
your mission the horses/powers trained by the gods and, 
like a glorious ruler and expert master, take your seat 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


376 YAJURVEDA 
on the chariot. 
38. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi) 


wae Gata aR a Aasaa Wr yaa: 
"paw smdssrferenensifu ferus daar nes- 
aT: UBEN 


Samyak sravanti sarito na dhena’ antarhrda 
manasa puyamanah. Ghrtasya dhara’ abhi 
cakaSsimi hiranyayo vetaso madhye’ agneh. 


Like streams, soft, sweet and ceaseless glides the 
flow of words distilled and purified by the heart and 
mind within. And I, wrapped in gold, in the midst of 
the light and fire of Agni, turned to a flute of reed, hear 
the murmur of the showers of benediction. 


39. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi) 


wa ver nep cat we wat ends cat 1 atsffad 
Asda yhe arsine’ varied c 391 


Ree tva ruce tva bhase tva jyotise tva. Abhiudidam 
vi$vasya bhuvanasya vajinam agnervai$va- 
narasya cad. 


To you Agni, lord of knowledge and speech, 
thanks and salutations for the knowledge of truth, love 
and lustre of life, light of science, and brilliance of 
justice and rectitude! By virtue of you alone, this soul 
has become aware of the entire world and of the 
universal presence of agni, the vital energy of life and 
nature active in the earthly sphere. By virtue of Agni 
alone this scholar and teacher can propagate this 
knowledge of reality among the people around. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIII 377 
40. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi) 


arfisatfeur verfdera want cerebur ew uer a 
azea Gels em nso 


Agnirjyotisa jyotisman rukmo varcasa 
varcasvan. Sahasrada' asi sahasraya tva. 
Agni, Lord of light and life, agni, man of science, 
is brilliant with the light of knowledge, illustrious with 
the lustre and splendour of power, golden lovable and 
blissful, and giver of a thousand gifts. We do homage 
to you for the innumerable gifts of prosperity, comfort 
and happiness. 


41. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi) 
araa mf usdur agfa use utri fasa- 
Am | uNg ater arts Hesen: sarda pure 
AAA: neseg 
Adityarh garbham payasa samandhi sahasrasya 
pratimam vi$varupam. Parivrndhi harasa 
ma'bhi mamsthah $atayusam krnuhi ctyamanah. 
With oblations of milk, honour the rising sun 
which holds in its womb and reveals innumerable forms 
and images of the world. With the heat, light and 
fragrance of the fire, ward off a host of ailments and 


grow. Growing in health and knowledge, help people 
to live a hundred years. Never never be proud. 


42. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi) 


ander afd ators mR sarditcer west à 
rey Amserau ar feed: aa 
elu US 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


378 YAJURVEDA 


Vatasya jutim varunasya nabhimasvam 
jajnanam sarirasya madhye. Si$um nadinam 
harimadribudhnamagne ma hiinsih parame 
vyoman. 


Agni, universal power, man of knowledge and 
power, hurt not the velocity of the wind and the centre 
of the water and vapours. Hurt not anything that is 
creative and procurative in the midst of the world. Injure 
not the produce of rivers, the clouds and anything grown 
on the mountains. Kill not the birds and aquatic 
creatures. Kill not anything that saves from suffering 
and evil. 


43. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi) 


smsherfirduew struemrfi-dte ydf watt: a 
qark: eneduri ni ur féseitrfafe fecrsiannea u 


Ajasramindumarusam bhuranyumagnimide 

purvacittim namobhih. Sa parvabhirrtusah 
kalpamano gam ma himsiraditim virajam. 

I worship Agni, eternal power, bright and fiery, 

lord of peace and bliss, and giver of health and vigour. 


With all means and materials I study and develop 
the power of fire and electricity collected and developed 
by the ancients. I proceed season by season, planning 
and achieving stage by stage. 


Agni, man of science and power, do not kill, 
destroy or injure the productive cow, the creative earth 
so bright and unviolated, and the restorative 
environment. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIII 379 
44. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi) 
aad aed ahaa wimarescstur: UAT 
Wéle$udgeftudrer rame wr fest: urn 
eju wee 


Varutrim tvasturvarunasya nabhimavim jajna- 
nain rajasah parasmat. Mahim sahasrim- 
asurasya mayamagne ma hiimsth parame 
vyoman. 


Agni, man of knowledge and power, do not 
injure, do not destroy, the protective power of the sun, 
the binding power of water, the lightning energy of the 
cloud born of regions beyond the sky, and the great, 
generous and regenerative earth, giver of a thousand 
blessings. 


45. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi) 
aati virentegfereassa at faereafi 
at ust ayahan wera adm ge: uÑ a 
Ure SGM 


Yo agniragneradhyajayata $okat prthivya'uta va 
divaspari. Yena praja vi$vakarma jajana 
tamagne hedah pari te vrnaktu. 


Agni, man of science and power, the vital fire 
and creative energy that was born of the flames of the 
cosmic yajna of Agni, Lord of life and light, illuminates 
the wide world and heaven, and with it Vishwakarma, 
the Lord Maker of all forms, makes the various forms 
of life in existence. May your passion for knowledge 
and power spare that creative energy from hurt and 
damage. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


380 YAJURVEDA 


46. (Surya Devata, Virupa Rshi) 


fat amyd ite aelftaer aera: | TAT 
matya sraa sae Sata TSE N 


Citram devanamudagadanikam caksurmitrasya 
varunasyagneh. A pra dyavaprthivi antariksam 
surya atma jagatastasthusa$ca. 


The Lord Supreme Creator is the wonderful life 
and splendour of the gods, universal powers of nature. 
He is the Eye, light and vitality, of the sun, the oceans 
of waters, and agni, the vital fire. He pervades and fills 
the heaven, the earth and the middle regions of the 
universe. He is the sole universal sun, the soul of the 
moving and the unmoving world and, like the sun, 
manifests Himself — ever risen, ever rising, never 
setting. 


47. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi) 


gH wr féxdifgard usredewmgi Aata efte: d 
we ust elu aera At forama Fre 1 aa 
a rag u fused a vrbes weed 


Imam ma hiinsirdvipadam pasum sahasrakso 
medhaya cityamanah. Mayum pasum medha- 
magne jusasva tena cinvanastanvo nisida. 
Mayum te $ugrcchatu yam dvismastam te 
Sugrcchatu. 


Agni/Ruler/Noble man or woman, growing and 
progressing in happiness, watchful with the vision of a 
thousand eyes, hurt not the humans, kill not the animals. 
Love and look after the wild as well as the domestic 
animals, both holy and serviceable. Working and 
progressing by that animal wealth, feel settled, be at 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIII 381 


peace with yourself. Let your concern address the wild 
animals, or let it be directed to those who hurt us. 


48. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi) 
sci ur fdeeitergtes usi chee enfe arf a 
ieee & fecenfü eb fears frie d 
Tt d weg a fused d spbiesq wc 


Imam ma hiinsireka$apham pasum kanikradam 
vajinam vajinesu. Gauramaranyamanu te disami 
tena cinvanastanvo nisida. Gauram te 
Sugrcchatu yam dvismastam te $ugrcchatu. 


Do not kill this one-hoofed animal, fastest among 
the fast, roaring in the battles. I advise you, turn your 
attention to the white, yellow and brown animals, the 
wild ones, and growing by this animal wealth, sit at 
peace with yourself. Let your concern address the wild 
animals. Let it be directed to those who hurt us. 


49. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi) 


setae maA oar feed aa aie | 
"remiss dw fast at ferarerat nds 
Tad tweed uw fused d owpbesq weed 


Imam sahasram satadharamutsam vyacya- 
manam sarirasya madhye. Ghrtam duhanam- 
aditim janayagne ma himsth parame vyoman. 
Gavayamaranyamanu te di$ami tena cinvana- 
stanvo nisida. Gavayam te $ugrcchatu yam 
dvismastam te $ugrcchatu. 


Agni, enlightened ruler, in the world even in the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


382 YAJURVEDA 


best of places, do not kill the cow and the bull, infinitely 
useful, and spring of a hundred streams and showers of 
milk and ghee for the people. It is holy and worthy of 
protection and development. I advise you, turn your 
attention to the wild cow and the bull and other animals. 
Growing and developing the economy with animal and 
forest wealth, feel settled with yourself and your land. 
Let your attention be directed to the wild cow and the 
forest wealth. Let your concern take on those who hurt 
us. 


50. (AgniDevata, Virupa Rshi) 
sate atore "fir caret agpi gaai erderani 
wate: Gat uer rini ur feet: ur edu 
semua uw fast at frere fes i 
se wd wpe a feared d Wes uuo 


Imamurnayum varunasya nabhim tvacam 
pasunam dvipadam catuspadam. Tvastuh 
prajanam prathamam janitramagne ma hiinsth 
parame vyoman. Ustramaranyamanu te disami 
tena cinvanastanvo nisida. Ustram te $ugrcchatu 
yam dvismastam te $ugrcchatu. 


Agni, noble ruler, in the wonderful world of the 
Supreme Lord, do not hurt, do not kill the sheep and 
other such animals, one of the first creations of Twashta, 
the maker of the world, and source of comfort and 
providers of woollen cover to the human beings and 
the animals. I point out to the wild camel and other wild 
animals. Growing and developing the economy with 
that animal wealth, be at peace with yourself in your 
land. Let your concern turn to the camel. Let it be 
directed to those who hurt us. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIII 383 
51. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi) 


ate aeratre viresredtssiusspeftranu i 
wt gat gaara dun Asatte: | 
mamko a fasmfa dd ferma Fate i 
wn d iag ub faune d eho usu 


Ajo hyagnerajanista sokat so'apasyajjanitara- 
magre. Tena deva devatamagramayanstena 
rohamayannupa medhyasah. Sarabhamaranya- 
manu te di$ami tena cinvanastanvo nisida. 
Sarabham te $ugrcchatu yam dvismastam te 
Sugrcchatu. 


The unborn individual soul was born in this world 
from the flame of the Supreme Lord's cosmic yajna of 
creation. It grew conscious and had a vision of the 
creator right there. By virtue of the vision and grace of 
the Lord, the pious souls, purified by the vision, realise 
the divine powers and rise to the heights of existence. 
Agni, noble ruler/noble man, I point out to the wild 
sharabha (fabulous antelope of the snowy forest, 
mightier than the lion and the elephant). Like that, 
defend yourself and grow, and growing thereby, be 
happy and feel satisfied and settled by yourself. Let your 
concern address the sharabha. Let your concern be 
directed to those who hurt us. 


52. (Agni Devata, Ushana Rshi) 


wa tas qa 4: ulf& qoe: Fe: | 
Tat Aaa AAT gu 


Tvam yavistha dasuso nrnh pāhi $rnudhi girah. 
Raksa tokamuta tmana. 


Young man/woman of superlative energy and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


384 YAJURVEDA 


character, listen to the voice of Divinity. Protect and 
promote the people who give with faith and generosity. 
With your very heart and soul, protect and promote the 
child — human, animal and all. 


53. (Apah Devata, Ushana Rshi) 

amit cEH-HTSGITESUI wtal<arearerat «car 
weet vem cerfdfü area wars 
maae a Wat aaah a I He 
meat | at cer at wear ver aa 
wat west maea war ait wears al 
ate area cart uretha areas (mud car 
saa Weare feo er ear areas mias 
a Sa Wests vem saa wean 
US A Saal ASA dug 


Apam tvemantsadayamyapam tvodmant- 
sadayamyapam tva bhasmantsadayamyapam 
tva jyotisi sadayamyapam tva'yane sadayamy- 
arnave tva sadane sadayami samudre tva sadane 
sadayami. Sarire tva sadane sadayamyapam tva 
ksaye sadayamyapam tva sadhisi sadayamy- 
apam tva sadane sadayamayapam tva sadhasthe 
sadayamyapam tva yonau sadayamyapam tva 
purise sadayamyapam tva pathasi sadayami. 
Gayatrena tva chandasa sadayami traistubhena 
tva chandasa sadayami jagatena tva chandasa 
sadayamyanustubhena tva chandasa sadayami 
pantkena tva chandasa sadayami. 


For the protection of life and the production and 
management of energy, I place/initiate you: 


in the waterways management, and study of the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIII 385 


source of water, the spatial wind; 
in the movement of water into the herbs; 
in the concentration of energy in ash; 
in the flash of light in lightning; 


in the currents of energy in the sky, and the orbits 
of the stars and planets; 


in the source and centre of pranic energy, and 
concentrations of air in space; 


in the secret motions of the mind, and the depths 
of the sea; 


in the power and source of speech, and storms of 
heaving oceans in space; 


in the faculty of vision and the science of light; 


in the faculty of hearing and the transmission of 
sound; 


in the science of radiation and the solar region, 
the source of energy; 


in the sources of energy in the middle regions; 


in the original sources of energy, the universal 
ocean of motion of the Rajas mode of Nature (Prakriti); 


in the sands of earth and rivers and the waste 
materials; 


in water, air and food, the sources of vital energy. 


I initiate you with the visions of nature and spirit 
contained in the gayatri verses, I initiate you with the 
pure knowledge contained in the trishtup verses, 

I initiate you with the knowledge contained in 
the inspiring jagati verses, 

I initiate you with the knowledge contained in 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


386 YAJURVEDA 


the enlightening anushtup verses, 


I initiate you with the knowledge contained in 
the clear exhilarating pankti verses of the Veda. 


54. (Pranas Devatas, Ushana Rshi) 
sma uit spen ursi sPbemerdt dur: ulurrerdt 
Tat atest whee reni mrerardureispéurei- 
wikagtaad veri aesan: wsmdferéraer 


— cC— oc 


verat uror Ga wem: uw 


Ayam puro bhuvastasya prano bhauvayano 
vasantah pranayano gayatri vasanti gayatryai 
gayatram gayatradupamsurupamsostrivrt 
trivrto rathantaram vasistha' rsih prajapati- 
grhitaya tvaya pranam grhnami prajabhyah. 


This Agni, universal spirit, is the first and 
foremost in existence, the eastern horizon of the world. 
Its offspring is prana, vital energy, life-breath of 
existence. The offspring of prana is spring. The song of 
spring is gayatri, joy. Joy is the music of spring from 
gayatri, the gayatra saman, soft, sweet and low. From 
gayatra, the upanshu, the receiver of soma, ladle for 
libation. And from the upanshu, creation of trivrit, the 
person dedicated to trivrit, threefold integrated Dharma 
of knowledge, action and prayer. From trivrit, the 
successful man, sociable, visionary and saviour. 


Woman of knowledge, virtue and love, blest by 
Prajapati, lord of creation, alongwith you I receive the 
vital energy of prana for the sake of children and family. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIII 387 


55. (Prajapati Devata, Ushana Rshi) 


ava daom fasadat «wur ue Ayao rid 
naka fad: vere | cae Taras 
mamasa: daara wea cUrnghscfu: 
wsmdfenéreaer ceram ub eru wsmed: uuu 


Ayam daksina vi$vakarma tasya mano vai$va- 
karmanam grismo manasastristubgraismti 
tristubhah svarain. Svaradantaryamo’- 
ntaryamat pancadasah pancadasad brhad 
bharadvaja’rsih prajapatigrhitaya tvaya mano 
grhnami prajabhyah. 


On the right (south) is the spirit and power of the 
divine, Vishwakarma, like vayu, wind and electric 
energy, the divine agency by which is accomplished 
every action and movement of the world. The offspring 
of Vishwakarma is the mind, desire and action. The 
offspring of mind is summer. Trishtup meter is the 
expression of summer. From trishtup is born swara-sama 
of heat and lustre as the mid-day. From swara comes 
the antaryama, the silent libation of soma with self- 
control. From antaryama comes/is born the fifteen-phase 
stoma (pancha-dasha-stoma), expression of joy and 
hilarity. From pancha-dasha stoma comes Brihat-saman, 
the great saman song of jubilation and celebration. The 
seer expert of Brihat-saman is Bharadwaja, man of full 
knowledge and prosperity. 


Woman of knowledge, virtue and love, blest by 
Prajapati, alongwith you I receive mana, mind, that is, 
love and desire for the sake of family and community. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


388 YAJURVEDA 


56. (Prajapati Devata, Ushana Rshi) 
wa wee fovere wabsseerend aa- 
vatge writ erdt saber sss smcniHressn: 
Sphredurasr: durasmgsud Tae Paes: wsmdfi- 
élu veram wrebügrf wem: uus 


Ayam pa$cad vi$vavyacastasya caksur- 
vai$vavyacasam | varsa$caksusyo jagati varst 
jagatya' rksamam. Rksamacchukrah sukrat 
saptadasah saptadas$advairupam jamadagnir- 
rsih prajapatigrhitaya tvaya caksurgrhnami 
prajabhyah. 

In the west (on the back) this sun is the divine 
power that illuminates and covers the whole world with 
light. The offspring of the sun is the light and the vision 
of the eye. The product of light and heat is the rain. The 
joy of rain is expressed in the jagati verse. In jagati metre 
are composed the Rik-samans. From the joy of Rik- 
Samans is born ‘shukra’, the lustre and vitality of life. 
From shukra is born the sapta-dasha (seventeen) stoma 
and the seventeen faculty subtle body. From this 
seventeen-element living life is born the diversity of 
living forms, of which the seer and visionary expert is 
jamadagni, man of light and lustre. 


Woman of knowledge, virtue and love blest by 
Prajapati, along with you I receive light and vision for 
family and the people. 


57. (Prajapati Devata, Ushana Rshi) 


gabe wer sddeurevsreedpzrTeng SRT- 
gets tese wierdsueeferssrsdenfers- wma 
aust favartasaft: usd cur si 
wam wsmz: uon 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIII 389 


Idamuttarat svastasya $rotrain sauvain $ara- 
cchrautryanustup $aradyanustubha'aidm aidan 
mantht manthina' ekavimsa’ ekavimsad 
vairajam visvamitra’ rsih prajapatigrhitaya 
tvaya $rotram grhnami prajabhyah. 

On the north is this spirit of bliss and joy. The 
instrument of joy is the ear, and sharad, autumn, is the 
season for ear and music. The metre for sharad is 
anushtup. In anushtup is composed the aida-saman 
which is the song of beauty and sweetness. From aida 
is the *manthi', churner, who churns out hilarity and 
virility. From manthis comes the twenty-one part stoma 
which constitutes an integrated programme of twenty 
one branches of learning. From twenty one stoma comes 
vairaja saman, a body of knowledge, of which the seer- 
master is Vishwamitra, friend of the whole world. 

Woman of knowledge, virtue and love, blest by 
Prajapati, alongwith you I receive the ear and the voice 
that gives me the songs of joy and virility for the sake 
of the family and the community. 


58. (Prajapati Devata, Ushana Rshi) 


saat aera eran dst area: use ut 
Tee foerdaf-rerdeasammrursarizaumq fora- 
waka fluresrafurssmzitessmeaen ren fagyas- 
n: wsmdferéraur crar aret srgrfar vismzd: to u 


Iyamupari matistasyai vanmatya hemanto 
vacyah panktirhaimanti panktyai nidhanavan- 
nidhanavata 'agrayana 'agrayanat trinavatraya- 
strimsau trinavatrayastrimsabhyain sakvara- 
raivate vi$vakarma rsih prajapatigrhitaya tvaya 
vacam grhnami prajabhyh. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


390 YAJURVEDA 


Up above is this intelligence. From intelligence 
and for it is speech. With speech goes the season of 
‘hemanta’, winter, and pankti is the metre for hemanta. 
Nidhanavat, the choric finale of a saman about hemanta, 
winter-song, is composed in pankti metre. From 
nidhanavat, the finale, is born the agrayana, first soma 
libation in agnishtoma yajna for the attainment of plenty 
of wealth and knowledge. From agrayana, there are 
twelve and thirty three saman hymns of praise. From 
these twelve and thirty three, we have shakvara and 
rewata, means to wealth, honour and power. The person 
who is an expert visionary of these hymns is a master 
of all arts and actions leading to wealth, power and 
honour. 


Woman of knowledge, virtue and love, blest by 
Prajapati, alongwith you I receive the gift of speech 
(knowledge, wisdom and expertise) for the sake of 
children, family and the community. 


gla watesttseara: d 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIV 391 


CHAPTER-XIV 


1.  (Ashvinis Devata, Ushana Rshi) 


gqatatadaditsate yet eirfrareila repent (suede 
FEMME MP MEA CAP TET 


Dhruvaksitirdhruvayonirdhruva'si dhruvam 
yonimasida sadhuya. Ukhyasya ketum 


— o 


tva. 


Lady of the house, your family and community 
is settled and strong. Your home is settled and secure. 
You yourself are firm and inviolable. Settle in peace 
and security firmly in your home, observing the duties 
of the household and tasting the first flavours of the 
heart. May the Ashwins (guides of the day) and the 
adhvaryus (guides of the familial yajna), teachers and 
advisors see you firmly settled. 


2.  (Ashvinis Devata, Ushana Rshi) 


gant qadi area: wur ila wes giro: d 
arf wat mgr ende a ced difufn 


xirstararfzeraieersi wlesrarfig cat usu 


Kulayini ghrtavati purandhih syone sida sadane 
prthivyah. Abhi tva rudra vasavo grnantvima 
brahma pipihi saubhagayasvina’dhvaryu 
sadayatamiha tva. 

Gentle lady, sweet and decent, blest with a noble 
family, abundance of milk and honey, and the wealth 
of a generous mind, take your abode in a beautiful 
comfortable home on the earth. May the scholars and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


392 YAJURVEDA 


men of justice and generosity appreciate and praise you 
without reservation. Be generous and kind to these 
people of knowledge and wisdom for the sake of 
conjugal bliss and prosperity. May the Ashwinis 
(guiding stars of the day) and adhvaryus (guides of the 
home yajna) bless you with a happy and prosperous 
home and family life. 


3. (Ashvinis Devata, Ushana Rshi) 
vádsrdsifude vila gamiesqer dea corte 1 Adfer 
masen gat vene dal, ufesmenfverserd 
atear cat usd 


Svairdaksairdaksapiteha sida devanam sumne 
brhate ranaya. Pitevaidhi sunava'a su$eva 
svavesa tanva samvisasvasvina’dhvaryu 
sadayatamiha tva. 

Noble woman, like a master controller of his 
personal powers and expertise and guardian of his 
people, settle here in this noble family for the great joys 
and battles of life. As a father protects and promotes 
his child, so, happy with your self and serving your 
family, live and advance in your life's mission. 

Master controller and promoter of faculties of 
intelligence, settle here with all your virtues and 
expertise for the peace and joy of the noble people. 
Noble woman, come like a father to the child and live 
in peace and comfort, comely and graceful, happy with 
yourself and serving the family. 


4. Cag Devata, Ushana Rshi) 


"ufereur: yiee ara at car agds A 
EET mirer yade de wsmdeut feum 
xIsreernfserdisers wiasarg cat wu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIV 393 


Prthivyah purisamasyapso nama tam tva vive 
abhi grnantu devah. Stomaprstha ghrtavatiha 
sida prajavadasme dravina"- yajasvasvina’- 
dhvaryu sadayatamiha tva. 


Noble lady of the house, you are the protector of 
the earth (fulfilment of this earthly home). You are sweet 
and liquid as the waters of life. May all the noble and 
enlightened people appraise, approve and honour you 
whole heartedly. Blest with plenty and prosperity of 
means and materials, keen lover of ritual hymns and 
yajna sessions, take your rightful place here. Blest with 
progeny, wealth and honour, win for us the best of life 
and joy. May the saints and sages of light and the guides 
of yajna consecrate you here in this home. 


5.  (Ashvinis Devata, Ushana Rshi) 


aeaa oss wudeunerdfanr att facet 
fasmafitucii sear i Sdan favachat 
wssefürfserseri uasa cat uud 


Adityastva prsthe sadayamyantariksasya 
dhartrim vistambhanim disamadhiptnim 
bhuvananam. Urmirdrapso’apamasi visvakarma 
ta’ rsirasvina’dhvaryu sadayatamiha tva. 


On the floor of this earth (in this home) I seat 
and consecrate you, lady of the inner world of the heart, 
firm support of the home-life in all directions, mistress 
and presiding presence of all the residences. You are 
the ripples of joy on the streams of life. Indeed you are 
conceived and created by Vishwakarma, the cosmic 
artist. May the Ashwinis, torch bearers of life, and the 
adhvaryus, experts of yajnic life, guide and sanctify you 
here. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


394 YAJURVEDA 


6.  Grishma Ritu Devata, Ushana Rshi) 


Ward Uva Seuiqqssreii:serqrsfur enedat 
vireitufzreit aedamrassitea: acca: qeres 
"pH Awa ada: Assara: uus arat- 
uíereittsgi | ieatqqsstfiiacdums site gars- 


aifsrafslsr cat dedarfgrera spp dita usu 


Sukrasca $uci$ca graismavrtu'agnerantahsleso'- 
si kalpetam dyavaprthivi kalpantamapa' 
osadhayah kalpantamasgnayah prthan mama 
Jyaisthyaya savratah. Ye’ agnayah samanaso'- 
ntara dyavaprthivi’ ime. Graismavrtu' abhi- 
kalpamana indramiva deva abhisamvisantu taya 
devataya 'hgirasvad dhruve sidatam. 


Jyeshtha and Ashadha are the two months of 
summer. Two-month summer, you are a temporal 
offspring of the internal (essential) power of agni, 
universal fire. May all the modes of agni, each with its 
natural power, be favourable to me toward honour and 
excellence. May the earth and heaven be favourable and 
make it (honour and excellence) possible. May the 
waters be favourable. May the herbs and trees make it 
possible. May all the forms of agni, heat, light, 
electricity, etc., working in earth and the heaven toward 
one end and maturing the summer season, be firm and 
steady in nature. Just as all the devas, powers of nature, 
subserve Indra, the essential and central energy of nature 
and life, so should the two months of summer faithfully 
and inviolably serve the power of agni as part subserves 
the whole. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIV 395 


7.  (Vasus & Others Devata, Vishvedeva Rshis) 


wspbgfd: afert: usns: wd rid 
ver àsa Rata ataare cat akat: 
wate: wedi: madda ar 
avarnravanissad ulesarg cat usphattt: 
wsrferenfsd : TL mx: meddan ver 


icai de mon 


Sajurrtubhih sajurvidhabhih sajurdevaih 
sajurdevairvayonadhairagnaye tva vai$v- 
anarayas$vina'dhvaryu sadayatamiha tva 
sajurrtubhih sajurvidhabhih sajurvasubhih 
sajurdevairvayonadhairagnaye tva vai$v- 
anarayasvina’dhvaryu sadayatamiha tva 
sajurrtubhih sajurvidhabhih sajurudraih 
sajurdevairvayonadhairagnaye tva vai$va- 
narayasvina’dhvaryu sadayatamiha tva 
sajurrtubhih sajurvidhabhih sajuradityaih 
sajurdevairvayonadhairagnaye tva vai$va- 
narayasvina’dhvaryu sadayatamiha tva 
sajurrtubhih sajurvidhabhih sajurvi$vairdevaih 
sajurdevairvayonadhairagnaye tva vai$va- 
narayasvina’dhvaryu sadayatamiha tva. 
Noble man, gentle lady, be in tune with the 
seasons and the waters, receiving the blessings of nature 


and breathing the generous vitalities of pranic energy. 
May the leading lights of life and the guides of the yajna 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


396 YAJURVEDA 


of home life establish you in this home and consecrate 
you to Agni, the Spirit of life pervasive in and on the 
earth. 


Noble man, gentle lady, love the seasons, love 
the waters of the earth and sky, love all the eight Vasus 
(supports of life), and love all the heavenly gifts of life's 
vitality. May the path-makers of life and the geniuses 
of the advancement of humanity establish you in this 
home for the service of Agni, Lord of life who blesses 
all his creatures with all they need for total fulfilment. 


Noble man, gentle lady, favourite of the seasons, 
blest with the vitalities of mind and energy, favoured 
by all the eleven Rudra supports of life-breath, and 
supported by all the enlightened people of divine 
knowledge, may the torch-bearers of the day and the 
experts of yajna establish and bless you here in this home 
in the service of Agni, lord of light and knowledge, for 
the happiness and prosperity of humanity. 


Noble man, gentle lady, friend of the seasons, 
master of mind and intellect, favourite of the sun round 
the year, friend and associate of the scholars and teachers 
of science, may the leading lights of the day and the 
specialists of the constructive projects consecrate you 
here in this life in the service of Agni, Lord of light and 
prosperity, for the enlightenment and advancement of 
society. 


Noble man of knowledge and education, 
generous lady of enlightenment, be friends with the 
seasons, support the creative and constructive 
programmes, join all the brilliant and generous leaders, 
cooperate with the powers that promote life and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIV 39'7 


happiness. May the leading lights of knowledge and 
progress and the leaders of social yajna consecrate you 
in this home and dedicate you to Agni, Lord of life and 
light, for the well-being of all the earth's children and 
the environment. 


8.  (DampatiDevate, Vishvadeva Rshi) 


wort crores ore eur urfz ag s seat 
fastfe siis yet | ata: firda fgurda 
adaa feat qe uz 


Pranam me pahyapanam me pahi vyanam me 
pāhi caksurma’ urvya vibhahi $rotram me 
Slokaya. Apah pinvausadhirjinva dvipadava 
catuspat pahi divo Vrstimeraya. 

With the earth and the environment, protect and 
strengthen my pranic energy, protect and strengthen the 
apana air going down and out, protect and strengthen 
my vyana air circulating in the body-system. Give the 
divine light to my eye, the divine voice to my ear. Protect 
and promote the waters. Refresh and promote the 
greenery. Protect the bipeds (humans and birds). Protect 
the four-footed (animals). Bring the showers of rain 
from heaven. 


9.  (Prajapati & Others Devata, Vishvedeva Rshis) 
yat ad: words: api Ta nda weal faen 
aastaufass-at fasaha ad: urit w-al aeat 
«rit fersrei wal gfir fagnet Wa: ur aes 
wal area esame wea: Ria adso aroa: 
Weare aut godt wdssan ad: Hepy wa sae 
ad: uwdrsedt wa: usu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


398 YAJURVEDA 


Murdha vayah prajapatischandah ksatram vayo 
mayandam chando vistambho vayo 'dhipati$- 
chando vi$vakarama vayah paramesthi chando 
vasto vayo vibalam chando vrsnirvayo visadlam 
chandah puruso vayastandram chando vyaghro 
vayo’nadhrstam chandah siinho vayaschadis- 
chandah pasthavad vayo brhati chanda’uksa 
vayah kakup chanda rsabho vayah satobrhati 
chandah. 


Like Prajapati, protector and sustainer of His 
children, try to attain the holiest qualities of knowledge, 
Dharma and peace of mind. 


Get to the Kshatriya class of regal virtues, justice, 
honour, magnanimity and courtesy. 


Like the guardian and supporter of the people, 
cultivate the economic values of freedom, justice, 
liberality and humility. 


Like Vishwakarma, maker of the world and lord 
of His creatures, try to be free and win the love of the 
people. 


Like a master of social and political activities, 
try to be a strong and independent expert of all socio- 
political developments. 


Like a mighty generous leader, be an independent 
harbinger of freedom, joy and prosperity. 


Like a great man of action and endeavour, take 
initiative in lovable action, family bonding and strong 
individuality. 


Like a tiger among men, be a man of invincible 
force and inviolable protection. 


Like the royal lord of excellence, be a man of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIV 399 


light, regality, prowess and prosperity. 


Like a carrier of historic burdens, be a man of 
strength, greatness and endurance. 


Like the cloud laden with vapours, be strong and 
generous, go round in all the quarters and bring showers 
of joy. 

Like a flood of life-giving waters, come with a 
living message of freedom, holiness, fertility and 
growth. 


10. (Vidvans Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi) 


stigarad: ufsse-at Sadar seit saraaa- 
wey wal taas eub fare wa: usalfadat 
Tat safaat ads sior vandag, 
AMSTS we: Ngo 

Anadvan vayah panktischando dhenurvayo 
jagati chandastryavirvayastristup chando 
dityavadvayo virat chandah paficavirvayo 
gayatri chandastrivatso vaya’ usnik chandas- 
turyavadvayo 'nustup chandh. 

Like the bull, be a man of strength, open, free 
and productive. 

Like the cow, be generous and create joy and 
fulfilment all-round. 

Like the trinity of life-support and the cow, sheep 
and goat, be generous, a man of knowledge, action and 
worship, and be blest with progeny. 

Like the carrier of harvested grain, be a man of 
plenty and joy unbounded. 


Like a master controller of the five senses, sing 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


400 YAJURVEDA 


ecstatic songs of yajna and have the joy of scientific 
knowledge. 

Like a holy man of knowledge, action and 
worship, find the blessings of strength with freedom 
from suffering. 

Like a visionary of the four Vedas and master of 
the four states of consciousness, be blest with 
knowledge, worship and divine communion. 


11. (Indragni Devate, Vishvedeva Rshis) 
vuleftssrederararfirezent qed Fay | 
yea matysi a fenem usen 


Indragni'avyathamanamistakam drinhatam 
yuvam. Prsthena dyavaprthivi’antariksam ca vi 
badhase. 


May Indra and Agni (the sun and universal 
electric energy), both of you, firm up the unshaken 
foundation of the yajna of earthly life. And may the 
heaven and the earth between themselves bind and hold 
the middle regions of the sky. 

(The husband and wife both should strengthen 
the foundations of home-life-yajna beyond disturbance 
and, with their intelligence and character, bind their love 
and yajnic life in stability.) 

12. (Vayu Devata, Vishvakarma Rshi) 


favachat car MAAR OS Seta welverit- 
waite moraa aeaa ar feet: 1 faved 
wota eurer ufasrt feb | 
aaa, crm wae cofur vez cat 
gadair gat dis exu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIV 401 


Vis$vakarma tva sadayatvantariksasya prsthe 
vyacasvatim prathasvatimantariksam yacchant- 
ariksam drinhantariksam ma himsth. Visvasmai 
pranayapanaya vyanayodanaya pratisthayai 
caritraya. Vayustva bhipatu mahya svastya 
chardisa Santamena taya devataya' ngirasvad 
dhruva sida. 


May Vishwakarma, lord maker of the world/your 
husband, seat you firmly on top of the sky. Do not 
pollute, do not injure, the sky. Growing expansive, 
encompassing, enrich the sky, strengthen the sky for 
the sake of prana, apana, vyana and udana energy, and 
for honour and strength of character. 


May Vayu, wind and universal energy/your 
husband, protect and promote you in all ways with great 
good fortune, light, peace and well-being. Stay firm with 
that divine power like the breath of life. 


13. (Dishah Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi) 
ua me fefarsfa «fatum fae uursfu 


uic fae meade fanfttascata gedt 
A esi 
Rajnyasi praci dig viradasi daksina dik samrad- 
asi pratici dik svaradasyudici digadhipatnyasi 
brhati dik. 


You are the mistress of the rising light of the east. 
You are the lady of universal light of the south direction. 
You are the noble and peaceful power of light in the 
west. You are the self-refulgent light of the north. You 
are the great lady of the top and foundation of the home- 
land, the great sustaining mother earth of the family. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


402 
14. 


YAJURVEDA 


(Vayu Devata, Vishvedeva Rshis) 

Arada wat maaa aa ue verfdurd i 
fedi maad cara fase nf à 
age stuf aedenfzrea spem Wh uewu 


Visvakarma tva sadayatvantariksasya prsthe 


visvar jyotiryaccha. Vayuste 'dhipatistaya 
devataya 'hgirasvad dhruva sida. 


Lady of light (mistress of the house), may 


Vishwakarma, lord of noble actions/your husband 
consecrate you on top of the sky for the sake of total 
prana, apana and vyana energy (of family life). Receive 
universal light and radiate the light of joy and peace. 
Vayu/your husband, is your lord sustainer. Stay firm 
with that divine power, dear as the breath of life, and be 
steadfast as the light of the sun. 


15. 


(Ritava Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi) 


dou quus enfüerqqssrmu-d:senmtsfa enctat 
aratge ccd-armusairder: sede: uere 
"HH — adar: | Asera: urs mat- 
ufereitsgir | ataata ea das- 
Rreh erat dadare ga aay gN 
Nabhaśca nabhasyaśca varsikavrtu agnerantah- 
Sleso'si kalpetam dyavaprthivi kalpantamapa 
osadhayah kalpantamagnayah prthanmama 
Jyaisthyaya savratah. Ye’ agnayah samanaso’ - 
ntara dyavaprthivi’ ime. Varsikavrtu' abhikalpa- 
mana’ indramiva deva’ abhisamvisantu taya 
devatava 'hgirasvad dhruve sidatam. 


Cloudy Shravana and misty humid Bhadra, two 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIV 403 


months of the rainy season, you are touched at heart by 
the passion of Agni. May heaven and earth be favourable 
to us for the gift of excellence, may the waters be 
favourable, may the herbs and trees be favourable, may 
all the orders of agni (heat and light), each committed 
to its own law and function, be favourable to us. May 
all the vital fires in earth and heaven, integrated and 
harmonious, supporting and energizing the months of 
rains, like the power of nature serving the omnipotent 
lord, Indra, bless and vitalize us in all ways. 


Just as earth and heaven abide by God, as rains 
abide by vital fire, so should we abide by the Lord, 
nature, and the rains like life and breath, Prakriti and 
Purusha, and part and the whole. 


16. (Ritava Devata, Vishvedeva Rshis) 


uferetsgi iymargqsatfucsedurqs gift as- 
sifireifelsre aat ladar graa sp vile usu 


Isa$corja$ca $aradavrtu'agnerantahsleso si 
kalpetam | dyavaprthivi kalpantamapa' 
osadhayah kalpantamagnayah prthanmama 
Jjyaisthyaya savratah. Ye’ agnayah samanaso'- 
ntara dyava-prthivi' ime. Saradavrtu abhikalpa- 
mana 'indra-miva deva' abhisamvisantu taya 
devataya 'hgirasvad dhruve sidatam. 


The lovely Ashwin and vigorous Kartika are 
months of the autumn season. You have the warmth of 
agni at heart. May the earth and heaven, the waters, the 
herbs and trees, and all the orders of agni (heat and light), 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


404 YAJURVEDA 


each according to its own law and function, be 
favourable to us for the gift of excellence. May all the 
vital fires in earth and heaven, integrated and 
harmonious, energizing the months of autumn like 
powers of nature serving the Lord, Indra, bless and 
vitalize us in all ways. 


Just as heaven and earth abide by God, as autumn 
abides by agni, so should we abide by the Lord, nature 
and autumn like life with breath, Prakriti with Purusha 
and part with the whole. 


17. (Rtavo Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi) 


amd uè woi d waa Ù urfz eumd Ù ute 
wat urfz srt a of adm fra m Ñ 
Rra arfe mfi aes ngon 


Ayurme pahi pranam me pahyapanam me pahi 
vyanam me pāhi caksurme pāhi Srotram me pāhi 
vacam me pinva mano me jinva tnanam me pahi 
jyotirme yaccha. 


Light and Law of the Universe, protect my life. 
Energize my breath. Clear and strengthen my cleansing 
system and eliminate the wastes. Strengthen the 
circulation of energy in my body. Protect and sharpen 
my eye. Protect and sensitize my ear. Guard and enliven 
my speech. Regenerate and broaden my mind. Save and 
strengthen my soul. Give me light, give me the light to 
see and realize. 


18. (Chhandans Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi) 
HT E: War vod: ufaat wei ssreHeu yu: 


used ssfiureg oat gedt w-lspeu wat fee 
oral mr we reg erat watt ard: eeu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIV 405 


Ma chandah prama chandah pratima chando’ 
asrivayaschandah pankti$chanda 'usnik chando 
brhati chando'nustup chando virat chando 
gayatri chandas tristup chando jagati chandah. 


Measure is the secret of happiness. Reason is the 
measure of intelligence. Freedom is the condition of 
truth incarnate. Practical science is the means of 
strength, prosperity and brightness. Five-fold yoga is 
the giver of light. Nature is the sustenance of life. 
Attachment to pleasure is bhoga (sufferance). The light 
of knowledge is science. The protector of gayatri is its 
realization. The well-being of body, mind and soul is 
happiness. The dynamics of existence lies in 
omnipotence. 


And these are the themes of Vaidic verses. 


19. (Prithivi & Others Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi) 


feret aA Gal eigo: aro -rafarfor 
Wal Ae Gal Huge: Hlaysa fetva wal 
WIT SHAT ASVAITS: ULI 


Prthivi chando’ntariksam chando dyau- 
Scahndah samaschando naksatrani chando vak 
chando manaschandah krsischando hiranyam 
chando gauschando ‘jacchando’svaschandah. 


Earth is the seat of freedom. Sky is the symbol of 
joy. Light is knowledge and science. Year is the 
understanding and measure of time. Stars are free in 
their orbits. Speech is the medium of truth. Mind is the 
seat of honesty. Farming is the source of production. 
Gold leads to pleasure. Cow is the mother of joy and 
plenty. Goat gives joy. Horse loves freedom. Know this 
and follow. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


406 YAJURVEDA 
And these are the themes of Vaidic verses. 


20. (Agni & Others Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi) 


anadan art gan gat gaat agat aaa 
ada laat eer aatan aet neat gaar fava 
ear aar agada «ear aeo eaat Maon 


Agnirdevata vato devata suryo devata candrama 
devata vasavo devta rudra devata’’ditya devata 
maruto devata vi$ve deva devata brhaspatir- 
devatendro devata Varuno devata. 


Agni (fire) is a divine power and value. It is a 
god. Vayu (air) is god. Sun is god. Moon is god. Vasus 
(sustainers of life) are divine. Rudras (powers of law 
and justice) are divine. The winds are divine. 
Vishwedevas, the great, brilliant and generous powers 
of the world, are divine. Lord of the great universe is 
God. Indra (universal energy) is divine. Varuna 
(universal waters) are divine. 


Know the divine powers and inculcate their 
qualities in your character and conduct. 


21. (Vidushi Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi) 


yaa we gart eent srxifur o i 
siTe vem acA aT FA cT AAS ET RRN 


Murdha' si rad dhruva' si dharuna dhartryasi 
dharani. Ayuse tva varcase tva krsyai tva 
ksemaya tva. 


Noble woman of knowledge and virtue, you are 
brilliant on top and firm, the support, sustenance and 
foundation of life like the earth. I accept and honour 
you for the sake of life and health, light and lustre, food 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIV 407 
and farming, and protection and presence of the home. 


22. (Vidushi Devata, Vishvadeva Rshis) 
wt Te aaa at geri at ad 


— LI — 


EU want cat vex vem Oa vem eire dTSg-mH 3 


Yantri rad yantryasi yamanı dhruva'si dharitrti. 

Ise tvorje tva rayyai tva posaya tva lokam ta 
indram. 

Gentle lady, faultlessly disciplineOd and brilliant, 

going by rule and leading others to rule, you are firm 


and sustaining like the earth. I accept and honour you 
for food and energy and for wealth and nourishment. 


23. (Yajna Devata, Vishvedeva Rshis) 


Wwe: decrevi ediur maar euts- 
wenferegr: udfeveerasreut -reayirssirerd: Afra 
ae gitar: enue eifsteergfátesit wat 
usaf: RaR: direst taae 
gaet faced ergfir-vit arch: wefrevitr felerdiscer- 
aera af Maer: R3 


Asustrivrd bhantah pañcadaśo vyoma saptadaso 
dharuna’ekavimsah praturtiraştādaśastapo 
navadaso 'bhivarttah savimso varco dvaviins$ah 
sambharanastrayovimso yoni$caturviins$o 
garbhah pancavimsa’ ojastrinavah kratur- 
ekatriinsah pratistha trayastriinso bradhnasya 
vistapam catustriinso nakah sattriin$o vivartto’ 
stacatvariinso dhartram catustomah. 


In the year round of yajna there is the spontaneous 
hymn (song) of the threefold stoma sacred for the purity 
of body, mind and speech. There is the fifteen part song 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


408 YAJURVEDA 


of light and the moon, the seventeen part song for the 
sky and the year. There is the twenty-one part stoma for 
stability, eighteen part song of fast motion, nineteen 
part song of austerity and discipline, twenty part song 
of open conduct, twentytwo part song of brilliance, 
twentythree part song of sustenance, twentyfour part 
song of union and discussion, twentyfive part song of 
procreation, twentyseven part song of prowess and 
lustre, thirtyone part song of karma and intelligence, 
thirtythree part song of stability, thirtyfour part song of 
the height of heaven and divinity, thirtysix part song of 
paradisal bliss, fortyeight part song of the modes of 
existence, and four stage song of celebration in 
chatushtoma yajna in the year. 


24. (Medhavinah Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi) 


amais Ri Ataras oat cad Preq-wra: | 
Tagai ms smqufsuci wrateseqasdera st 
xatd: | fired simt sfiarereurearfztuci feat afat 
PASTA CAA: URS 


Agnerbhago’si diksaya’ adhipatyam brahma 
sprtam trivrtstomah Indrasya bhago’si 
visnoradhipatyam ksatrain sprtam pancadasa 
stomh. Nrcaksasam bhago’ si dhaturadhipatyam 
janitram sprtam saptadasa stomh. Mitrasya 
bhago ’si varunasyadhipatyam divo vrstirvata 
sprta' ekavimsa stomah. 


You are a part of Agni, lord giver of life and 
protection, wholly under the direction and control of 
your dedication to the lord. With the observance of 
Trivrit (three part) stoma, you inculcate, protect and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIV 409 


promote the Brahmana character of society. 


You are a part of Indra, lord of energy and power, 
wholly under the direction and control of Vishnu, the 
omnipresent lord of the world. With the observance of 
Panchadasha (fifteen part) stoma, you inculcate, protect 
and promote the power and prowess (Kshatriya 
character) of the community. 


You are a part of the intelligent and wide-awake 
observers of the people, totally under the direction and 
control of the lord and ruler of humanity. With the 
observance of Saptadasha (seventeen part) stoma, you 
inculcate, protect and promote the economic power of 
the people. 


You are a part of Mitra, sun and universal energy, 
totally under the direction and control of Varuna, the 
universal water power. With the observance of 
Ekavinsha (twenty-one part) stoma, you attract and 
promote the wind and rain from the region of the sun. 


25. (Vasus & Others Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi) 
adat smirsfer sanoi adeard ege vlatasgr 
W: amfacrát srmirsfa meaai mit ear: 
dafa eit: aÀ sA yorsa 
wad Aoa wid: gaet aiai sfa amaA- 
we aeit asgen ert: usu 


Vasunam bhago'si rudranamadhipatyam 
catuspat sprtam caturvimsa stomah. Adityanam 
bhago'si marutamadhipatyam garbha sprtah 
pancavimsa stomah. Adityai bhago'si pusna 
adhipatyamoja sprtam trinava stomah. Devasya 
saviturbhago'si brhaspateradhipatyam 
samictrdisa sprtascatustoma stomah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


410 YAJURVEDA 


You are a part of the Vasus, eight sustaining 
abodes of life, under care and control of the Rudras, 
protectors of life. With the observance of Chaturvinsha 
(twenty four part) stoma you love and protect the animal 
wealth of the world. 


You are a part of the Adityas, the suns and stars 
of the universe, under care and favour of the Maruts, 
powers of wind and sky. With the observance of 
Panchavinsha (twenty five part) stoma, you protect and 
promote the maternal power of women. 


You are a part of Aditi, earth and sky, under 
control and favour of the powers of health and nutrition 
in nature. With the observance of Trinava (twenty seven 
part) stoma you protect and advance the lustre and glory 
of the people. 


You are a part of Savita, Lord creator and sustainer 
of life, under care and control of Brihaspati, lord and 
master of the wide world. With the observance of 
Chatushtoma yajna you protect, develop and safeguard 
all the directions of space. 


26. (Ribhavah Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi) 

wen anisedarrarfiad wt r- 
vacate eat: (esprit smirsfar feretur dar 
faucet speres datacenter: UREN 
Yavanam bhago’syayavanamadhipatyam praja 
sprta$catu$catvariin$a stomah. Rbhunam 
bhago'si visvesam devanamadhipatyam bhutarn 
sprtam trayastrimsa stomah. 


You are a part and master of mixed materials with 
full power over the separate materials for consumption 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIV 411 


in the cold season. With observance of the 
chatushchatwarinsha (fortyfour part) stoma you protect 
and promote all the species of life. 


You are a part of the intelligent and wise experts 
of art and technology with full power and love over all 
the brilliant and generous nobles of the world. With 
observance of the Trayastrinsha (thirtythree part) stoma, 
protect and promote all the living beings. 


27. (Ritavah Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi) 


"esu ugue tReet vaste enedat 
aata aed-ararassidtead: enced-dr uU: Uere 
"TH wei ddr: | assraa: GaAs arat- 
gfadtsga | &dferenreqsstfirenedurrsg-tfirer ders- 
alfsraifelsrr aut aadenfgrera gear Stars uod 


Sahasca sahasyasca haimantikavrtu’ agne- 
rantahsleso’si kalpetam dyavaprthivi kalpanta- 
mapa osadhayah kalpantamagnayah prthan- 
mama jyaisthyaya savratah. Ye' agnayah 
samanaso' ntara dyavaprthivi 'ime. Haimantika- 
vrtu’ abhikalpamana' indramiva deva' abhisam- 
visantu taya devataya’ngirasvad dhruve 
sidatam. 


The stimulating Margashirsha and invigorating 
Pausha are the months of Hemanta (winter). 


You are the innermost love and power of Agni, 
universal fire of life. May the heaven and earth be 
favourable, may the waters invigorate, may the herbs 
rejuvenate, and may all the modes of vital fire, each 
true to its nature and function, strengthen us for honour 
and excellence. Just as the powers of nature join to serve 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


412 YAJURVEDA 


Indra, universal divine energy, so may all the orders of 
agni in heaven and earth, integrated and cooperative, 
strengthening the winter months, join to bless us in the 
search and endeavour for excellence. 


May the winter months of nature and humanity 
stay firm with that universal power of Agni like the 
breath of life with Spirit. 


28. (Ishvara Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi) 


aaitedad Ud asyo  Smarfitufa- 
Tet UR 


Ekaya’stuvata praja’ adhiyanta prajapatir- 
adhipatirasit tisrbhirastuvata brahmasrjyata 
brahmanaspatiradhipatirasit pancabhirastuvata 
bhutanyasrjyanta bhutanam patiradhipatirasit 
saptabhirastuvata sapta rsayo’ srjyanta dhata’- 
dhipatirasit. 

The Lord of the universe, creator and protector 
of His children is Ishwara. Worship Him with one, 
sincere voice of the heart and soul. He created and 
revealed the universal knowledge of the Vedas for His 
children, and He is the Lord and protector of that 
knowledge too. Worship Him with three, reason, will 
and emotion. He created the five elements of nature. 
He is the Lord and protector of these elements. Worship 
Him with five, body, mind, intellect, memory and 
consciousness. Saptarshis (five currents of primary 
pranic energy, mahat tattva, i.e., creative nature, and 
ahankara, self-consciousness) were created by Him. He 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIV 413 


is the ruler and sustainer of the seven. Worship Him 
with seven, five currents of secondary pranas (energy) 
and your will and endeavour. 


29. (Ishvara Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi) 


mankan fucctsusrarfafavfétucardtq | wenrasr- 
fureqeassaeisuserdrdarssrfíludussme | 
maaka umtssngsu« Gare stearate 
weeragifiteeqera. Hadas setae AAS 
Tuve mer: usrats xperd agectartetofa- 
vfq ure 


Navabhirastuvata pitaro'srjyanta ditiradhi- 
patnyasit. Ekadasabhirastuvata 'rtavo'srjyant- 
artava adhipataya' asan. Trayodasabhirastuvata 
masa'asrjyanta samvatsaro’dhipatirasit. 
Pafcadasabhirastuvata ksatramasrjyatendro’- 
dhipatirasi. Saptadasabhirastuvata gramyah 
pasavo’srjyanta brhaspatiradhipatirasit. 


Worship Him with nine faculties of prana and 
mind who created the paternal and protective forces of 
nature and the earth which is the supreme mother of 
His children. 


Worship with eleven faculties (ten pranic energies 
and the soul) Him who created the seasons with their 
characteristic ruling properties. 


Worship with thirteen faculties (ten pranas, two 
commitments-one for values and one against disvalues 
— and the soul) Him who created the twelve months 
with their presiding year. 


Worship with fifteen faculties (five pranas, five 
senses, two commitments one soul, mind and reason/ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


414 YAJURVEDA 


intellect) Him who created the socio-political order of 
governance with Indra, the supreme ruler of the order. 


Worship with seventeen faculties (five pranas, 
five senses, two commitments, one soul, mind, reason/ 
intellect, hands and feet) Him who created the domestic 
animals and the economic order with Brihaspati as the 
head of the economic (Vaishya) class. 


30. (Jagadishvara Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi) 


waasha vpgraieusramennssr(fiuctts- 
amam uekfersremeqeehynnr: Usreisuperd 
eauirsfetufeurdtq (38fferesremeqed sp: usreis- 
were yfai wselfarcsreamqeanus: 
usats ergriffen aafeesreanedaa 
matyi lat adat egrsarlfacursal-Tourdeas- 


Werfeéfaqers2 Tr i30 


Navadasabhirastuvata $udraryavasrjyeta- 
mahoratre 'adhipatni'astam. Ekavimsatyastu- 
vataika$aphah pasavo’srjyanta varuno’- 
dhipatirasit. Trayoviin$atyastuvata ksudrah 
pasavo’srjyanta pusa 'dhipatirasit. Pancaviin- 
Satya'stuvata"ranyah pa$avo' srjyanta 
vayuradhipatirasit. Saptaviin$atya'stuvata 
dyavaprthivi vyaitam vasavo rudra 'aditya'- 
anuvyayansta' evadhipataya’ asan. 


With nineteen (ten pranas, five elements, mind, 
reason/intellect, memory and self-consciousness), 
worship Him who created the educated and the 
uneducated all, with the day-and-night cycle of time 
for work and rest as the power of control over work and 
rest. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIV 415 


With twenty one (functions and faculties of the 
human body, mind and soul), worship Him who created 
the undivided hoofed animals with Varuna, water and 
the night, being the presiding power for the animals. 


With twenty three (parts of animals' bodies), 
worship Him who created the little animals and insects 
with the natural sources of nutriment as the presiding 
power. 


With twenty five (parts of small animals' bodies) 
worship Him who created the wild animals of the forest 
with wind and speed as the presiding power. 


With twenty-seven (qualities of the wild animals), 
worship Him who created the heaven and the earth 
which are universal, and who also created the eight 
Vasus, eleven Rudras and the twelve Adityas existent 
within the heaven and earth and presiding over the life 
and nature in heaven and earth. 


31. (Prajapati Devata, Vishvadeva Rshis) 


"dferzsrearseqera ermurdeitsusura dnirsfitufetai 
ukarana usmssluwred emserderyu- 
fhasan | adasa AATA, 
wda: uean, uae 


Navavimsatya’stuvata vanaspatayo 'srjyanta 
somo 'dhipatirasit. Ekatriinsata 'stuvata praja’ 
asrjyanta yavascayavascadhipataya’ asan. 
Trayastrimsata’stuvata bhutanya$amyan 
prajapatih paramesthyadhipatirasit. 


With twenty nine properties of the herbs and trees, 
worship Him who created the herbs and trees with Soma 
as their chief and presiding power. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


416 YAJURVEDA 


With thirtyone parts and properties of the created 
world of nature, worship Him who created the elemental 
and the compound materials of nature and life with these 
very elements and forms being the presiding presences 
of existence. 


With thirty three properties of the elements of 
nature, worship Him in whose creation Prajapati, the 
father of His creatures, is the Supreme Lord, and into 
whom all the forms and elements of existence recede in 
peace and silence for the night of annihilation. 


gla aadettseara: d 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XV 417 


CHAPTER-XV 


1. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


art aa uular 4: Huemd Wemtarae wa: 
aft at afe qsad sere vun vui erat s- 
s ngu 


Agne jatan pranuda nah sapatnan pratyajatan 
nuda jatavedah. Adhi no bruhi sumana’ 
ahedanstava syama $armanstrivarutha udbhau. 


Agni, Lord omniscient and protector of life and 
society, throw out the adversaries arisen against our life. 
Keep off the negative forces not yet arisen but 
impending against us all. Kind at heart and favourable, 
speak to us from above and grant our prayer so that, 
secure from triple suffering, happy and advancing under 
your care and love, all may live in a home of triple bliss. 


2.  (AgniDevata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


EMT VAM WUIST C: WIA weal, Ier 
"ave sift dT afe quart aaesenta wu[ar 
A: GOAT dsl 


Sahasa jatan pranuda nah sapatnan pratyaja- 
tan jatavedo nudasva. Adhi no bruhi sumana- 
syamano vayam syama pranuda nah sapatnan. 


Agni, Lord omniscient of the life of existence, 
throw off the enemies of humanity come up with force. 
Counter the negative forces lying and waiting in 
ambush, not coming up openly. Kind at heart and 
generous of thought for us, speak to us from above so 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


418 YAJURVEDA 


that we may be able every way to repulse the open as 
well as the covert enemies of life and humanity. 


3. (Dampati Devate, Parameshthi Rshi) 
Meri was gfi erqyercenfesyr HAA eret 
wfeurq | sre: Uttara ATA aT wat fenyds- 
aR der: | edgar gadis vila morda 
gao xm 1311 


Sodasi stoma'ojo dravinam catuścatvārimśa 
stomo varco dravinam. Agneh purisamasyapso 
nama tam tva vi$ve' abhigrnantu devah. 
Stomaprstha ghrtavatiha sida prajavadasme 
dravina yajasva. 


Gentle lord of the home, and charming lady of 
the house far from greed and grabbing, generously 
cooperative with the rejuvenating forces of nature, you 
are dedicated and loyal servants of Agni. May all the 
generous saints and scholars appreciate and praise you 
for your noble work. Dedicated to hymns of divinity 
and yajna, generous in prosperity and charity, settle in 
this sweet home. Give us the wealth of life and the gift 
of a blessed family. 


4.  (Vidvans Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


Uyeda aasa: weed: flyads- 
aswa Weal cquys-: fupe: 
— Si — ]—— "—€— 
feveredizve-d: QII UAT: ne 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XV 419 


Evaschando variva$chandah sambhuschandah 
paribhuschanda’ acchacchando manaschando 
vyacaschandah sindhuschandah samudra- 
Schandah sariram chandah kakup chandas- 
trikakupchandah kavyam chando’ ankupam 
chando’ksarapanktischandah padapankti- 
Schando vistarapanktischandah ksuraschandah 
bhrajaschandah. 


Movement is life. Knowledge is thrill. Excellence 
is great, truth is excellence. Peace is great. Self mastery 
is sovereignty. Industry is prosperity. Protection against 
evil is security. Mind and thought is light. Generosity 
is exhilarating. Fluidity is majesty. Magnanimity, 
liquidity and transparency is gentleness. Universal 
reputation is honour. Divine knowledge, noble 
performance and honest prayer is glory. Poetry is 
ecstasy. Straight behaviour like liquid movement is 
satisfaction. The path to eternity is bliss. The way of 
the world is joy. The directions of space are exciting. 
The razor’s edge is the challenge of life. The splendour 
of existence is rapture. 


5.  (Vidvansa Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


arsaa: Wesusd: desi faues- suus 
Teel anassa faause-al nyoa 
WIT: UIT Talspeq waqsvayeal 
alassa usc aagepasdl fautgive-ct 
farei wd vofavo-dt Ne Sats Salssigs 
wed: GI 


Acchacchandah pracchacchandah samya- 
cchando viyacchando brhacchando rathanta- 
ranchando nikayaschando vivadhaschando 
giraschando bhrajaschandah sarinstup chando’- 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


420 YAJURVEDA 


nustupchanda’evaschando varivaschando 
vayaschando vayaskrcchando vispardha- 
Schando visalam chandaschadischando duro- 
hanam chandastandram chando’ ankankam 
chandah. 


Prevention of evil is light. Fight against evil is 
courage. Self-control is bravery. Variety of choice is 
versatility. Ascendancy to the heavens is freedom. The 
path to success is the right choice. The windfalls of 
attainment are lovely. Meditation on the sky reveals the 
bonds of piety. Voice is revelation. Light is illumination. 
Speech is expression of word, meaning and reality. 
Thought is reflection on meaning and reality. Effort and 
achievement on earth is meaningful. Excellence is 
valuable. Life is a boon. The life-force is irresistible. 
Emulation and competition is legitimate. Great action 
is glory. Cover and protection is nobility. Rising against 
difficulty is perseverance. Freedom is the breath of life. 
Faith and ascertainment is inviolable joy. 


6.  (Vidvan Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 
thant uera uei Bra ufdar erdum eni fsrarf-dcm 
feat fad fsrer aema Amaga Sra wie 
Bra yansan Nrg ten wat fsreitfsrem endet 
adhere wendatfacnzssmfacmfest- usu 


Ra$mina satyaya satyam jinva pretina dharmana 
dharmam jinvanvitya diva divam jinva sandhina' 
natariksenantariksam jinva prati-dhina prthivya 

prthivim jinva vistambhena vrstya vrstim jinva 

pravaya 'hna 'harjinvanuya ratrya ratrim jinvo- 
Sija vasubhyo vasunjinva praketenadityebhya 
'adityanjinva. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XV 421 


Love truth for the sake of truth with the light of 
truth in action. 


Protect Dharma for the promotion of Dharma with 
the observance of Dharma in practice. 


With research and advancement into knowledge 
of the nature of light, advance the knowledge of the 
regions of the sun. 


With research into the sky as the conjunction of 
earth and heaven, advance the knowledge of the sky 
for the sustenance of life. 


With knowledge of the earth and its relation with 
life, advance the knowledge of earth science for life. 


With the knowledge of rain and the sustenance 
of life by rain, advance the knowledge of water, 
evaporation and rain and promote rain for the sake of 
life. 


With the knowledge of the light of the day, know 
the light and day and advance the knowledge of 
cosmography. 


With the knowledge of night following the day, 
advance the knowledge of the day and night cycle. 


With the desire for the beauty of living, advance 
the knowledge of the Vasus (abodes of the sustenance 
of life) for the sake of the Vasus and better sustenance. 


With the knowledge of the planets and the sun in 
their respective orbits in the galaxy, advance the 
knowledge of the sun and stars in relation to planets 
and life. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


422 YAJURVEDA 


7. (Vidvansa Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


Resident aR aa- 
ameita fsr-eerfirfsrar asta ast frat wen 


Tantuna rayasposena rayasposam jinva sam- 
sarpena $rutaya $rutam jinvaidenausadhi- 
bhirosadhirjinvottamena tanubhistanurjinva 
vayodhasadhitenadhitam jinvabhijita tejasa tejo 
Jinva. 
By health, wealth and prosperity, increase health, 
wealth and prosperity in an ascending order. 


By a continuous process promote communication 
and knowledge for the development of communication, 
information and vaidic knowledge. 


By the development of food, herbs and trees, 
develop the science of medicine. 


By the observance of good conduct and Dharma, 
develop smart bodies and by smart bodies develop 
strong bodies and better health. 


By health and vigour and by life-sustaining 
reading, promote life-sustaining knowledge and 
education. 


By victorious prowess and lustre, advance and 
promote life-protecting courage, prowess and lustrous 
dignity. 


8.  (Prajapati Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


uud wierd egde vem | 
werd fa uu cat asitsfa ase cat net 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XV 423 


Pratipadasi pratipade tva’nupadasyanupade tva 
sampadasi sampade tva tejo’si tejase tva. 


You are the first find on the homeward journey. I 
love and accept you for constant companionship at every 
step. You are the support and confirmation of every step 
I take. I honour you for support and self-assurance. You 
are the real wealth of life, I love you as the prize of 
earthly existence. You are the light and lustre of life. I 
honour and prize you for light and glory. 


9.  (Prajapati Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


Gaeta fad cr ugd wad cr fergdfur faqd 
wat ugdfu uu cars SEAST car iisa 


Pennie Senn selena wach Parente a- 
filuferirsitst fra neu 


Trivrdasi trivrte tva pravrdasi pravrte tva 
vivrdasi vivrte tva savrdasi savrte tva" kramo’ 
syakramaya tva samkramo’si samkramaya tvo- 
tkramo’syutkramaya tvotkrantirasyutkrantyai 
tva’dhipatinorjorjam jinva. 

You know the threefold world of matter (tamas), 
motion (rajas) and mind (sattva). I love and respect you 
for the threefold world of nature. You are the power of 
initiative. I follow you for the sake of initiative. You are 
the versatile man of all-round action. I accept you for 
the variety of action. You are the man of constant 
Dharma. I dedicate myself to you for the observance of 
Dharma. You are the great leap forward in life. I follow 
you for the great leap forward. You are the man of 
balanced and comprehensive progress. I dedicate myself 
to you for balanced and comprehensive progress. You 
are the man of onward advance. I follow you for the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


424 YAJURVEDA 


advance upward. You are for change and ascendance in 
life. I admire and follow you for growth in the higher 
direction. 


Lady of the house, dedicate yourself to the head 
of the family and with vigour and enthusiasm, advance 
the power and excellence of the family. 


10. (Vasavah Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


Tse ure arada darsarfetacdaishae dia 
teat fora eit: qire saagama- 
HÀ Sard vendre are ufdfescmssrafisrs- 
mea wast xen feat aster aR derd 
fererat aranfitufasa a carr ad uferarar archer 
aes cert ote asta Ut Aaa gol 


Rajnyasi praci digvasavaste deva’adhipatayo’- 
gnirhetinam pratidharta trivrttva stomah 
prthivyain $rayatvajyamukthamavyathayai 
stabhnatu rathantaram sama pratisthitya' 
antariksa’ rsayastva prathamaja devesu divo 
matraya varimna prathantu vidharta cayam- 
adhipatisca te tva sarve samvidana nakasya 
prsthe svarge loke yajamanam ca sadayantu. 


You are the queen refulgent like the East direction. 
All the Vasu havens of life are your divine protectors. 
Agni, Lord of flames and wielder of the thunderbolt, 
wards off your adversities. May the Trivrit stoma hymns 
settle you on the earth. May the yajna libations of ghee 
and Uktha hymns firmly stabilise you against 
disturbance. May the Rathantara Sama hymns expand 
your honour to the skies. May the foremost Rishis, saints 
and scholars spread your honour and reputation with 
the measure of your heavenly excellence among the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XV 425 


noblest people. 


May this lord of yours and the Lord sustainer of 
the world and all those powers who know, together in 
unison, establish you and the yajamana on the heights 
of the heavenly regions of bliss. 


11. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


farrefa afaturr fasrared darssitadassst eet 
teat dsaastear cur: yfeateistad ws- 
Saas SA Teens ufdfiscmsarafiars- 
mae wast eae feat ater afar der 
fast arantatufasa à cer ad Afaa eheu 
ss wen otter asta a Uae eel 


Viradasi daksina dig rudraste deva’adhipataya’ 
indro hetinam pratidharta pancadaSastva 
stomah prthivyam $rayatu pra’ ugamuktham- 
avyathayai stabhnatu brhatsama pratisthitya’ 
antariksa’rsayastva prathamaja devesu divo 
matraya varimna prathantu vidharta cayam- 
adhipatisca te tva sarve samvidana nakasya 
prsthe svarge loke yajamanam ca sadayantu. 


You are the reigning lady of light like the South 
direction. All the Rudra powers of love and justice are 
your divine protectors. Indra, lord of power and the 
thunderbolt, keeps off your adversaries. May the 
Panchadasha (fifteen part) stoma of Rks settle you on 
the earth. May the Pre-uga Uktha hymns firmly secure 
you against fear and disturbance. May the Brihat-Sama 
hymns and karma extend your honour to the skies. May 
the foremost Rshis, saints and scholars spread your 
honour and fame with the measure of your heavenly 
excellence among the noblest people. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


426 YAJURVEDA 


May this lord of yours and the Lord sustainer of 
the world and all those powers who know, together in 
unison, establish you and the yajamana on the heights 
of the heavenly regions of bliss. 


12. (Adityas Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


"rhe YS tat cee weburi cur ered Ngan 


Samradasi pratici dig adityaste deva’adhipatayo 
varuno hetinam pratidharta saptadasastva 
stomah prthivyam $rayatu marutvatiyam- 
ukthamavyathayai stabhnatu vairupain sama 
pratisthitya’ antariksa' rsayastva prathamaja 
devesu divo matraya varimna prathantu vidharta 
cayamadhipatisca te tva sarve samvidana 
nakasya prsthe savarge loke yajamanam ca 
sadayantu. 


You are the lady of brilliance and bliss like the 
soothing light of the Western direction. All the twelve 
Adityas, stars of light and powers of energy, are your 
divine protectors. Varuna, Lord of waters and controller 
of evil, wards off your suffering. May the Saptadasha 
(seventeen part) stoma settle you on the earth. May the 
Marutvatiya Uktha and the libations firmly stabilize you 
against doubt and disturbance. May the Vairupa Sama 
hymns extend your honour to the skies. May the 
foremost Rshis, saints and scholars spread your honour 
and fame with the measure of your heavenly excellence 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XV 427 
among the noblest people. 


May this lord of yours and the Lord sustainer of 
the world and all those powers that know, together in 
unison, establish you and the yajamana on the heights 
of the heavenly regions of bliss. 


13. (Maruts Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


meedet fee mede dersarfétucer: Brat sat 
Wicerichfacercar eid: ufereares stag Preka- 
Teas TAS OSA Ufdfscmssrfiss- 
mea ves ead feat ureter erm tera 
fererat arerafétuferser a car ad afaart archer 
Usd tal citer asta GT Ue aT ULSI 


Svarddasyudici dinmarutaste deva'adhipatayah 
somo hetinam pratidhartaikavimSastva stomah 
prthivyam $rayatu niskevalyamuktham- 
avyathayai stabhnatu vairajam sama pratisthitya’ 
antariksa’rsayastva prathamaja devesu divo 
matraya varimna prathantu vidhartta cayam- 
adhipatisca te tva sarve samvidana nakasya 
prsthe svarge loke yajamanam ca sadayantu. 


You are self-refulgent like the light of the North. 
The Maruts, powers of wind and storm, are your divine 
protectors. Soma, moon, lord of peace and beauty, is 
your saviour against violence and evil. May the 
Ekavinsha (twentyone part) stoma settle you on the 
earth. May the Nishkevalya Uktha firmly stabilize you 
in love and faith against disturbance. May the Vairaja 
Sama hymns and related Karma carry your honour and 
fame to the skies. May the foremost Rishis, saints and 
sages spread your honour and reputation with the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


428 YAJURVEDA 


measure of your heavenly excellence among the noblest 
people. 


May this lord of yours and the Lord sustainer of 
the world and all those powers that know, together in 
unison, establish you and the yajamana on the heights 
of the heavenly regions of bliss. 


14. (Vishvedevah Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


ahea gedt fefravsd d earsarfiiqaatr 
aeaii ufeaeraf faurerrafzresm cat erat 
ues stant dseserfiuredssssbssreder 
vasfraressmarerriert anit ufdfescars eers 
mae Waast ead feat aster aR derd 
fart aranfitufasa d var we uferarar art 
yè tat citer atari St Ua ei 


Adhipatnyasi brhati dig vi$ve te deva’adhipatayo 
brhaspatirhetinam pratidhartta trinavatraya- 
strimsau tva stomau prthivyam $rayatam 
vai$vadevagnimarute'ukthe'avyathayai 
stabhnitam Sakvararaivate samani pratisthitya’ 
antariksa’rsayastva prathamaja devesu divo 
matraya varimna prathantu vidhartta 
cayamadhipati$ca te tva sarve samvidana 
nakasya prsthe svarge loke yajamanam ca 
sadayantu. 


You are the supreme mistress of the home like 
great directions in the upper spaces. All the divine 
powers and nobilities are your protectors. Brihaspati, 
lord of the wide world, is your guardian against all pain 
and suffering. May the Trinava (twentyseven part) and 
Trayastrinsha (thirtythree part) stoma hymns settle you 
on the earth. May the Vaishvadevagni and Maruta Uktha 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XV 429 


hymns firmly stabilize you against doubt and 
disturbance. May the Shakvara and Raivata Sama hymns 
extend your honour and fame to the skies. May the 
foremost Rishis, saints and sages spread your honour 
and reputation with the measure of your heavenly 
excellence among the noblest people. 


May this lord of yours and the Lord sustainer of 
the world and all those powers that know well, together 
in unison, establish you and the yajamana on the heights 
of the heavenly regions of bliss. 


15. (Vasanta Ritu Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


ara qi Ra: qeivfomered Taya veilsiser 
Sarina (gfosreseerem ot oeqeerem aat 
agen: usrat ife: dear wer wefan 
watssteq à aise a at yeg a a fa ayet 
"t Sf ater west eer: ngyn 


Ayam puro harike$ah suryarasmistasya ratha- 
grtsa$ca rathauja$ca senanigramanyau. 
Punjikasthala ca kratusthala capsarasau. 
Danksnavah pasavo hetih pauruseyo vadhah 
prahetistebhyo namo astu te no’ vantu te no 
mrdayantu te yam dvismo yasca no dvesti 
tamesam jambhe dadhmah. 


Yonder front in the east rises the sun like a king 
investing everything with green by its rays. Like the 
king’s commander of his forces and the chief of his city, 
are the two months of spring, Chaitra and Baisakha, 
months of enlightened joy and joyful glory. The rays of 
the sun collectively for all and separately for specific 
ritual are currents of energy for life on the earth. 


The mordacious creatures and animals are 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


430 YAJURVEDA 


weapons of wild nature against which human weapons 
of defence ought to be made and used. 


May the rays of the sun in spring and the powers 
of defence save us. May they be good and efficacious 
to us. Thanks and salutations to them. All those cruel 
forces which violate our life and all such forces which 
we oppose, all these we deliver unto the judgement of 
the powers and the spirit of nature. 


16. (Grishma Ritu Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


aa dfo fasant aet venen yup wats 
Amma | Aaa et resur aivarat 

Set varle3fur wa feret aatsereq a alsa a at 
ase a a fuer age A sie aaa mH aT Us! 


Ayam daksina vi$vakarma tasya rathasvanasca 
rathecitra$éca senanigramanyau. Menaka ca 
sahajanya capsarasau yatudhana heti raksamsi 
prahetistebhyo namo'astu te no'vantu te no 
mrdayantu te yam dvismo yasca no dvesti 
tamesam jambhe dadhmah. 


On the right from the south rides in his chariot 
this Summer Wind, Vishwakarma, versatile power for 
all activities. Like the king’s commander of the forces 
and the chief of his city, with the roar of the chariot 
wheels and the variegated colour of his banner, are the 
summer months of Jyeshtha and Ashadha. The special 
guests of the wind and the general currents of it are 
double waves of energy for life on the earth. 


Mordacious forces are the danger to life. 
Watchful defence is the counteraction. Thanks and 
salutations to the powers of defence. May they be kind 
and efficacious to us. All those that violate our life and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XV 431 


all those we oppose, we deliver unto the judgement of 
the powers of defence and the Spirit of nature. 


17. (Varsha Ritu Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


ard usura [fasselenaer v9burgsun uen 
Sari ara | weirs erpeeireb«it emend | 
cir eta: aor: wettedeat AUtsated d Atsarg a 
"b qed a a fus usd A Site ata wet 


aA: IIe'9ll 


Ayam pa$cad visvavyacastasya rathaprotasca- 
samarathasca senanigramanyau. Pramlocanti 
canumlocanti capsarasau vyaghra hetih sarpah 
prahetistebhyo namo’astu te no’vantu te no 
mrdayantu te yam dvismo yasca no dvesti 
tamesam jambhe dadhmah. 


At the back in the West is this rain power of Agni, 
universal electric energy. Like a king’s commander of 
the forces and the chief of his city, are the two months 
of rain, Shravana and Bhadrapada, with the charming 
beauty of the clouds and the awful majesty of lightning. 
The power to nourish the vegetation and the ripening 
touch to the crops are the two currents of its energy. 


Mordacious animals such as the tiger are 
dangerous. Creatures such as the snake are still more 
dangerous. Against them the thunderbolt for defence 
and man-made plans. 


May the powers of safety and defence save us. 
May they be good and kind to us. All those that violate 
our life and all those we oppose, we deliver unto the 
judgement of the powers of defence and the spirit of 
nature. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


432 YAJURVEDA 


18. (Sharad Ritu Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


SAAN GSU Teva Sarit 
mai | favareit er garet areacararat frata: 
Wefan adtsarg a disag a at eue a a 
fora age Al oft ade west weg: ngen 


Ayamuttarat samyadvasustasya tarksyasca- 
ristanemi$ca senanigramanyau. Vi$vaci ca 
ghrtaci capsarasavapo hetirvatah praheti- 
stebhyo namo'astu te no’vantu te no mrdayantu 
te yam dvismo ya$ca no devesti tamesam jambhe 
dadhmah. 


On the North side is this season of autumn, 
generous associate of yajna. Like a king’s commander 
of his forces and the chief of his city, are the months of 
Ashwin and Kartik, one the sharpest stimulant of 
intelligence, the other an antidote to pain and disease. 
The peace that pervades everywhere in nature and the 
power that blesses all with cool and soothing waters, 
milk and butter are two modes of its power. 


Waters are the boon. Breezes are the greater boon. 
Thanks and salutations to the powers. May they save 
us. May they be kind and blissful to us. 


All those that violate our life and all those that 
we oppose, we deliver unto the judgement of the powers 
of defence and the spirit of nature. 


19. (Hemanta Ritu Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


i. Sai iai, behaved 

a qeifetferseremcaterenupst-t e fataerae fe- 
p UP M GARS MEL pdt 
"Su dr ef ad wet xem: ee 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XV 433 


Ayamuparyarvagvasustasya senajicca susena- 
$ca senanigramanyau. Urvasi ca purva- 
cittiscapsarasavavasphurjan hetirvidyut 
prahetistebhyo namo’astu te no’vantu te no 
mrdayantu te yam dvismo yasca no dvesti 
tamesam jambhe dadhmah. 


This on top, after rains and autumn, is the winter 
season, treasure-giver of wealth. Like a king's 
commander of the forces and the chief of his city, are 
the two months of Marga-Shirsha and Pausha, one like 
a lord of the hosts, the other victorious. The spirit of 
great love and freedom and the spirit of winsome beauty 
of the heart are two powers of the season. The roar of 
thunder is the weapon and lightning is another and 
greater one. 


Salutations to the winter months and their gifts 
and powers. May they save us. May they be good and 
auspicious. Whoever violates our life and whoever we 
oppose in defence, we deliver unto the judgement of 
the powers of defence and the spirit of nature. 


20. (AgniDevata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


anaiai fea: eneperfd: ufereumsarum | 
amtata Rrafa uon 
Agnirmurdha divah kakut patih prthivya' ayam. 
Apa retamsi jinvati. 
In winter, this Agni, shining supreme as the lord 
of space between the earth and heaven like the sun, rules 


and illuminates the directions and inspires the vitalities 
of life with new energy. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


434 YAJURVEDA 


21. (AgniDevata, Parameshthi Rshi) 
staat: Hea erste vrfecreafd: | 
"pe ener Verum usu 
Ayamagnih sahasrino vajasya Satinaspatih. 
Murdha kavi rayinam. 
This Agni, Lord of eternal vision, rules the world 
on top of everything. Possessed of infinite virtues, giver 


of countless joys, He is the lord of food, energy and the 
wealth of the world. 


22. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 
vars yeka adat Friar | 
"e farder arad: uu 


Tvamagne puskaradadhyatharva niramanthata. 
Murdhno vi$vasya vaghatah. 

Agni (heat and electricity), Atharva, scholar high- 
priest of scientific yajna of energy, churns you out of 
the sky on top of the world to bring down the energy to 
the earth. 


23. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


qat aaa tasa Fat oat Fae: ate foremfit:i 
fafa eb «fe cast frat eeu eet 
ae URN 


Bhuvo yajnasya rajasasca neta yatra niyudbhih 
sacase Sivabhih. Divi murdhanam dadhise 
svarsam jihvamagne cakrse havyavaham. 


Agni, leading power of yajna, the earth and the 
sky, you raise your tongue of flames bearing the 
fragrance of yajna libations over there and, one with 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XV 435 


the blissful catalytic process of consumption and 
creation, you hold in heaven the top light of the world, 
the sun, which rains the showers of joy on the earth. 


24. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


aata: fire saat ufd eepferediqurda | 


aans ga Ww amg ioe: w amd: fared Aree 
"u$ USI 


Abodhyagnih samidha jananam prati 
dhenumivayatimusasam. Yahva'iva pra 
vayamujjihanah pra bhanavah sisrate 
nakamaccha. 


The fire wakes up and rises by the samits (fuel) 
offered by the devotees, and, just as a restless calf runs 
to the mother cow coming in the twilight of the dawn 
(or evening), so do the flames eagerly rise to the heaven 
(emanating peace, prosperity and happiness). 


25. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 
sata aa Were aal aare uu qu | 
Teed mur eda fedta newdeersdu- 
TT ul 


Avocama kavaye medhyaya vaco vandaru 
vrsabhaya vrsne. Gavisthiro namasa stoma- 
magnau diviva rukmamuruvyancamasret. 


Just as the man established in the Word offers 
hymns of praise with libations to the holyfire, just as 
the light in the sun-rays does homage to the splendour 
of the all-illuminant sun in heaven, so do we offer words 
of praise in celebration to Agni, lord of light and vision, 
worthy of reverence and worship, lord of strength and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


436 YAJURVEDA 


power, who showers rains of bliss over the earth and 
her children. 


26. (AgniDevata, Parameshthi Rshi) 
state vier emfer erqfsreiar atsivatssteatetted: | 
aaa wat fermer feni fai fas- 
fast usu 


Ayamiha prathamo dhayi dhatrbhirhota yajistho’ 
adhvaresvidyah. Yamapnavano bhrgavo 
virurucurvanesu citram vibhvam vise vise. 


This agni here, first and foremost power of nature, 
lighted and established in the vedi by dedicated saints 
and sages, is worthiest of reverence and esteem. It is 
most valuable for development through creative and 
constructive acts of yajna. Present as it is, wonderful 
and universal, in the rays of the sun and currents of 
energy, the most intelligent and versatile men of genius 
develop it for the general good of the people. 


27. (AgniDevata, Parameshthi Rshi) 
wea Maseke miana: gaat: gaara 
Tae | gadi a aast aaa Ana: 
ft: mon 


Janasya gopa’ajanista jagrviragnih sudaksah 
suvitaya navyase. Ghrtapratiko brhata divisprsa 
dyumad vibhati bharatebhyah $ucih. 


Agni (fire and electricity), pure and sacred, 
protector of the people, ever wakeful, versatile and 
generous, source and symbol of plenty and prosperity, 
came into existence for new and newer good and 
excellence of the people, and shines brilliant with 
heaven-touching grandeur. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XV 437 
28. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


ass wed füaueferafsofsrui at- 
a a alee aaa: wel Wed ware: WéUUIT- 
fs: meN 

Tvamagne 'angiraso guha hitamanvavindanchi- 


Sriyanam vane vane. Sa jayase mathyamanah 
saho mahat tvamahuh sahasas-putramangirah. 


Agni, fire, universal light of life, saints and 
scholars search for you and discover your presence 
hidden in the heart, abiding in every current of energy. 
Such as you are, churned out of nature you rise, and 
they find you mighty, great and awful child of the Wind, 
dear as the very breath of life. 


29. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 
wala: od: qeran e cmm | 
aesa farti repo wéved ure 
Sakhayah sam vah samyancamisam stomam 


cagnaye. Varsisthaya ksitinamurjo naptre 
sahasvate. 


Friends, offer properly and accurately the exact 
homage and libations to the darling of your people and 
settlements, Agni, generous giver, powerful protector 
and the dearest child of omnipotence. 


30. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


maad quant favataesert i 
gesund niied a A agama NoN 


Sam samidyuvase vrsanngne vi$vanyarya d. 
Idaspade samidhyase sa no vasunya bhara. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


438 YAJURVEDA 


Agni, powerful lord of light and wealth, you join 
with all in love wholly and completely. You rise and 
shine in your rightful holy place on the earth. Generous 
lord, shower on us the wealth of the world from all sides. 


31. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 
ver haara weder fep ade: | 
virferehsi Gefrarst gems arda 113211 


Tvam citrasravastama havante viksu jantavah. 
Sociskesam purupriyagne havyaya vodhave. 


Agni, most wondrous lord of food and energy, 
dearest to all, blazing with light like the sun, people in 
all nations from all walks of life invoke you and offer 
libations for the attainment of food, energy and comfort 
in life. 


32. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


Tat atsana Ades matag d 
fra àen farde qauudu uasa 


Ena vo’agnim namasorjo napatamahuve. 
Priyam cetisthamaratim svadhvaram vi$vasya 
dutamamrtam. 


For your sake, I invoke, explore and worship 
(develop) with the offering of this holy food 
(investment) Agni, creative and illuminative power of 
the world, universal energy, inviolable, dear and 
generous, most perceptively responsive, relentlessly 
active, guardian power of non-violent constructive acts 
of love, and immortal lord of the dynamics of existence. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XV 439 


33. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


Rede gangi fayde aauuda i 
a ahasan fasaner a dsed AET: 33N 


Visvasya dutamamrtam vi$vasya dutamamrtarn. 
Sa yojate'arusa vi$vabhojasa sa dudravat 
svahutah. 


I invoke the immortal Agni, universal power of 
light (in the form of the sun); I invoke the immortal 
Agni, universal power of fire (in the form of vitality); it 
joins with universal creative generosity for total 
nourishment, it unites with love overcoming all hate 
and anger, and, piously called upon, it responds and 
hastens to help and bless us. 


34. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


a Saad THEM: d dae THEM: | 

qaet aa: yet adat WenuTem GAMA dall 
Sa dudravat svahutah sa dudravat svahutah. 
Subrahma yajnah susami vasunam devañ radho 
jananam. 

That Agni, faithfully invoked in yajna, 
immediately stirs and rises. That same Agni, called up 
with love and sacrifice, responds spontaneously, it 
comes and blesses through the yajna. 

Attended by noble devotees, yajna is a great 
karmic act which is a divine embodiment of the wealth 
of humanity and the mother earth. 


35. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


ara aster Ndassa: Gea Ger | 
ara Aè maA cfe ard: nyn 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


440 YAJURVEDA 


Agne vajasya gomata’isanah sahaso yaho. Asme 
dhehi jatavedo mahi $ravah. 

Agni, light of omniscience, child of omnipotence, 
witness of all that is born, lord of food and energy, 
controller of the masters of cows, earth and all that 
moves, bless us with all that is great and glorious. 


36. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


asgat adenfartatteat fni 

taam «ouduite) diffe sen 
Sa'idhano vasuskaviragniridenyo gird. 
Revadasmabhyam purvanika didihi. 

That same Agni, bright and blazing, home of 
existence, visionary of the universe, celebrated with the 
divine Word, manifesting in infinite forms, shines and 
reveals the light for us as the wealth of the world. 


37. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


erdt thstad Sara cendhedrrd:i 
a fnm xerat ce ufd sen 


Ksapo rajannuta tmana'gne vastorutosasah. Sa 
tigmajambha raksaso daha prati. 


That same Agni, bright and blazing, thunderous 
force of relentless justice, power operative with your 
essential light and spirit in the day, in the night and at 
the dawn, burn with the same fiery essence the evil, the 
night walkers, daylight robbers and the darkness at 
dawn. 


38. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


agi atsatfacedt wet uta: denm agissteax: | 
WVSAISSA UAT: UBLN 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XV 441 


Bhadro no'agnirahuto bhadra ratih subhaga 
bhadro' adhvarah. Bhadra' uta prasastayah. 


Man of grace and yajna, may the Agni, invoked 
and raised, be gracious. May the oblations, charities and 
investments be positive and productive. May our yajna 
and creative ventures be constructive and fruitful. May 
our appreciations and appraisals be valuable and 
enlightening. 


39. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


Weissa Usha us ud: uper adi i 
pb aac wrHE: uae 


Bhadra'uta prasastayo bhadram manah krnusva 
vrtraturye. Yena samatsu sasahah. 


Man of knowledge, expertise and grace, may all 
our projects and appraisals be favourable. Do your best 
so that in our battles against covers of darkness and 
evil our mind be firm and undisturbed, and then in our 
battles of life we may endure and be victorious at the 
end. 


40. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


ant wed ureersd ftert cafe ah erefary | 
eri qserfurfecfar: ison 


Yena samatsu sasaho' va sthira tanuhi bhuri 
Sardhatam. Vanema te’ abhistibhih. 


The spirit by which the forces endure in battles 
and win, with that spirit strengthen and expand to the 
full our forces and powers so that we grow firm and 
inviolable. May we benefit from your gracious gifts, 
win our battles and enjoy in life. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


442 YAJURVEDA 

41. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 
wha q Ha at agqrd a afd ae: | mud AS- 
amasti Prater arirassdeseaaszisam AT ise 


Agnim tam manye yo vasurastam yam yanti 
dhenavah. Astamarvanta’asavo’ stam nityaso 
vajina’ isain stotrbhya’ a bhara. 


I know the Agni that is the hearth and home of 
existence. Homeward go the cows. The fastest coursers 
betake to home. The hero, the chariot, the feathered 
eagle, the stallion, all go home to rest without fail, all 
by nature. That is the home for me. 


That same Agni, mother of the home for all, is 
the ultimate haven. Mother mine, keep for the yajnic 
children food for life, energy for action, and light for 
the life divine. 


42. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 
Asaa adder ow anrard aed: 1 aad 
TIGA: GLAST: GRASSI EAM TASS AL sR 


So’agniryo vasurgrne sam yamayanti dhenavah. 
Samarvanto raghudruvah sam sujatasah suraya 
*isam stotrbhya 'a bhara. 


Agni is that who is the treasure, home and haven 
for all in existence. Him I celebrate in song. In Him the 
words of song find their meaning. Saints of wisdom, 
geniuses of science most responsive, men of vision most 
fortunately born, all have their recourse there. Lord of 
light and life, bear and bring the food, release the energy, 
and reveal the light of divinity for the celebrants. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XV 443 


43. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 
34M dears cufüur ad siosana 1 sat 
assdguissaed raag AAST AL insat 


Ubhe suscandra sarpiso darvi srinisa’asani. Uto 
na’ utpupurya ukthesu $avasaspata 'isain 
stotrbhya'a bhara. 


Graceful power of heat, light and knowledge, you 
burn two ladles of ghee in the mouth (vedi of yajna) 
and diffuse the light and fragrance in the air through 
the cross currents of the wind. Lord of strength and 
power of creation, fill the stores of food with grain for 
us and the minds with knowledge for those who offer 
oblations and chant the hymns of praise in yajna. 


Brilliant holy Sire of knowledge and power, just 
as the holy fire burns two ladlefuls of ghee in the vedi 
to diffuse the light and fragrance in the air, similarly 
you hold for us the two-fold knowledge of nature and 
spirit to disseminate it among the disciples who come 
to the school of yajna for education and sing the songs 
of the Vedas in praise of Agni, omniscient Lord of light 
and knowledge. Fill our minds with knowledge and the 
power of knowledge. 


44. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


STi amesa 4 ENA: chd A aed d 
seat assite: nexa 
Agne tamadyasvam na stomaih kratum na 


bhadram hrdisprsam. Rdhyama ta’ ohaih. 


Agni, lord of light and knowledge, like the horse 
broke in to perfection by training, like the holy yajna 
completed and perfected with the hymns of divine 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


444 YAJURVEDA 


worship, may we now receive that knowledge and virtue 
which touches the heart and, with you close by us and 
revelations of that sacred knowledge, come to prosperity 
and perfection. 


45. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 
STET Era maiae gates WITH: | 
Tae Teal AYA Use i 


Adha hyagne kratorbhadrasya daksasya sadhoh. 
Rathirrtasya brhato babhutha. 


Agni, lord of light and knowledge, be the sure 
and unfailing pioneer of noble and creative yajnic work. 
Be the guide, guardian, defender and leader of the good, 
efficient and pious people, and prophet of the great truth 
and universal law of existence. 


46. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 
UR sare At state venu Tarte: ad 
att farda: yasai: ise 


Ebhirno’ arkairbhava no arvan svarna jyotih. 
Agne visvebhih sumana anikaih. 


Agni, lord of the golden light of omniscience, in 
response to these songs of ours in praise of divinity, be 
pleased at heart and, with all your glory and majesty, 
come and reveal yourself before us. 


47. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 
feu a madaan, | asHedat xeset Ger aret 


ear | yaea fautftead afte siferatssagies 
"fad: nson 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XV 445 


Agnim hotaram manye dasvantam vasum sunuin 
sahaso jatavedasam vipram na jatavedasam. Ya' 
urdhvaya svadhvaro devo devacya krpa. 
Ghrtasya vibhrastimanu vasti Socisa "juhva- 
nasya sarpisah. 


I know Agni, lord of yajna, receiver and dispenser 
of libations, generous, treasure home of wealth and the 
world, child of omnipotence, existent with all that is. I 
know It as intimately as I know an inspired sage of all 
knowledge standing face to face. 


I know the kind and brilliant lord of love and 
yajna who, with high blazing activity worthy of 
celebration in divine speech, illuminates and 
disseminates the splendour of ghrta and the fragrance 
of vapours through the flames arising from oblations 
into the fire. 


48. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 
and vd atsdussa mar f$rer tat nes: | 


adithaddstarssteat afar eprdaerfae: (d cat 
wifes Wife: genre sree uds: eeN 


Agne tvam no’ antama’ uta trata Sivo bhava 
varuthyah. Vasuragnirvasusrava’ accha naksi 
dyumattamain rayim dah. Tam tva Socistha 
didivah sumnaya nunamimahe sakhibhyah. 


Agni, closest you are at hand, most intimate. Be 
good and kind, redeemer and protector, a very home of 
supersecurity for all of us. 


Agni is the omnipresent home of all, treasure of 
peace and wealth, brilliant leader and pioneer, most 
refulgent of all, generous giver of prosperity. Here I 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


446 YAJURVEDA 


attain to the lord. 

Lord most blazing, power of splendour and 
majesty as you are, we pray to you, in faith, for peace 
and prosperity for ourselves and all our friends. 


49. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 
Asaa Gaarafaretarsathtaesedated: | 
afta fea msaa mga wio- 
AET seu 


Yena’ rsayastapasa satramayannindhana' 
agnim svarabharantah. Tasminnaham ni dadhe 
nake 'agnim yamahurmanava stirnabarhisam. 


By the austerity of discipline and action the seers 
come to the sessions of yajna and, lighting and exploring 
the agni, attain to ages of joy and happiness. By the 
same discipline, in similar session, at the same level of 
blissful existence, I commit myself to the pursuit of the 
same agni which people say pervades the skies. 


50. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


d ucilfrcimesu xar: qauidftea er fatus: l 
"re qure: Apae vites gett yes sarket Tart 
fea: non 


Tam patnibhiranu gacchema devah putrair- 
bhratrbhiruta va hiranyaih. Nakam grbhnanah 
sukrtasya loke trtitye prsthe'adhi rocane divah. 


Powers of light and joy, dedicating ourselves in 
prayer and action to the same Agni, may we attain to 
the highest and most beloved region of the beautiful 
world of bliss and noble pursuits with our wives, 
children, brothers and all our wealth and prosperity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XV 447 
51. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


3T ara nelega ruris: adfavaferars: | 
qs dfrem Aà ahama dua d 
dac: wee 


e 


A vāco madhyamaruhad bhuranyurayamagnih 
satpati$cekitanah. Prsthe prthivya nihito 
davidyutadadhaspadam krnutam ye prtanyavah. 


This Agni, power of knowledge, active and wide- 
awake, supporter and protector of the true and the good 
life, well-established on the face of the earth, lighted 
and raised, blazes and, in the middle of the chant, 
ascends to the heights of the skies. 


If there be any forces that wish to fight the true 
and the good in life, may the same Agni keep them down 
and out. 


52. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


ammiakdan eurem: defen madres | 
faima: aR neassa u alf faca 
at i31 


Ayamagnirviratamo vayodhah sahasriyo dyota- 
tamaprayucchan. Vibhrajamanah sarirasya 
madhya' upa pra yahi divyani dhama. 


This Agni, power of fire and manliness, bravest 
of all, young and fresh lord of health and age, mighty a 
thousand fold, shines relentlessly without let up. 
Glorious on the earth and in the midst of the sky, he 
inspires and graces wonderful places and positions. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


448 YAJURVEDA 
53. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


waaay Taare wem Aaa eure | 
wt: quart fuer gattraratesdia waa wd- 
T dud 


Sampracyavadhvamupa samprayatagne patho 
devayanan krnudhvam. Punah krnvana pitara 
yuvananvatamsit tvayi tantumetam. 


Ye men and women all, move together, go close 
to Agni by the paths of divinity for light and knowledge. 
Create new paths for the future. 


Agni, light the paths for humanity. Only in your 
presence under your guidance can young people as 
parents follow Dharma under the discipline of piety and 
continue the yajna and the life-line. 


54. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


sajen ufd wf ater ada 
al arfesrasmesrsareerev fard sar ersinrayer 
ied ul 


Udbudhyasvagne prati jagrhi tvamistapurte sam 
srjethamayam ca. Asmintsadhasthe 'adhyuttara- 
smin vi$ve deva yajamanasca sidata. 


Agni, lord of light and yajna, wake up and arise 
in response to the invocation and, in return, awaken 
and guard the yajamana. Create, together, the desire and 
will to do the acts necessary as duty and the acts 
desirable by choice for the sake of complete self- 
fulfilment. May all the powers of divinity, all the noble 
people and the yajamana dwell in this auspicious house 
in this life and after, ever rising higher and higher. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XV 449 


55. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


aa adte weet Saba UAA i 
vH aa at rep wadag mA eal 


Yena vahasi sahasram yenagne sarvavedasam. 
Tenemam yajnam no naya svardevesu gantave. 


Agni, leading power of light and action, by 
knowledge and karma you bear a hundred burdens of 
the business of existence through the whole range of 
duties set out in the Vedas. Carry us too in this yajna of 
life and lead us into the state of bliss among the noblest 
souls of the world. 


56. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 
ara a Akfa oat satsata: | 
a amdan Ceret at aefar TRA ean 
Ayam te yonirrtviyo yato jato’arocathah. Tam 
janannagna 'a rohatha no vardhaya rayim. 
Agni, fire and power of life, this home of yajna 
is your seat of action in accordance with the time and 
season. From here emerging, you shine and illuminate 


the world around. Knowing this, proceed and rise, and 
develop the wealth of life for us. 


57. (Shishirartu Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


adsa aara MRNAS Raa Vesa eda 
aata aed=ararassidea: acd: uera 
aa wel ddr: | assraa: GaAs arat- 
yfadisgh 1 srraqssthracdurissaitra Ras- 


alfsraifelsrr aut aedenfgrera gear dla uod 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


450 YAJURVEDA 


Tapasca tapasyasca Saisiravrtu’ agnerantah- 
Sleso'si kalpetam dyavaprthivi kalpantamapa’ 
osadhayah kalpantamagnayah prthanmama 
Jyaisthyaya savratah. Ye’ agnayah samanaso’ - 
ntara dyavaprthivi’ime. Saisiravrtu abhikalpa- 
mana 'indramiva deva’abhisSamvisantu taya 
devataya 'hgirasvad dhruve sidatam. 


Margashirsha and Phalguna (January-February 
and February-March) are the months of winter season, 
cold, cool and pleasant. You are the lovely warmth of 
the inner-most heart of Agni's fire. 


May the heaven and earth be auspicious, may the 
waters be fresh and invigorating, may the herbs and trees 
be revitalized and rejuvenating, may all the modes of 
fire, heat, light, lightning, etc., each committed and 
constant in its quality and character, be favourable and 
blissful to me for growth in excellence. 


May all the vital fires abiding in earth and heaven, 
integrated and harmonious, supporting and energizing 
the months of the winter season like the powers of nature 
serving the omnipotent lord, Indra, bless and vitalize 
us in all ways. 


Man of yajna and lady of the house of yajna, both 
of you joining the months of the season be firm and 
stay fast with the lord of nature as breath and life 
together. 


58. (Learned Woman Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 
ast wat ura feaers verfdurdr 1 fede 
worta eure fasa cnfdees 1 usus- 
fhaa dadasiga gar dia uou 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XV 451 


Paramesthi tva sadayatu divasprsthe jyoti- 
smatwun. Vi$vasmai pranayapanaya vyanaya 
visvam jyotiryaccha. Suryaste’dhipatistaya 
devataya 'hgirasvad dhruva sida. 

Lady of knowledge and vision, may the Lord 
Supreme establish you on top of celestial light for the 
attainment of full and complete energy of prana, apana 
and vyana, cross-currents of energy and universal 
vitality. Spread the universal light of knowledge around 
for others. Your husband like the sun, brilliant and 
refulgent, is your lord and protector. Stay firm and secure, 
steadfast with that noble man like the breath of life. 


59. (Indragni Devate, Parameshthi Rshi) 
vire dur fsg gore de yar aq | 
sare car aR heart Sarasa 1148 1 


Lokam prna chidram prnatho sida dhruva tvam. 
Indragni tva brhaspatirasminyonavasisadan. 


Noble lady of the house, fulfil this life. Fill up 
the holes, complete and perfect the life and stay firm 
and stead-fast in this home. May Indra, lord of 
excellence, Agni, lord of light, and Brihaspati, lord of 
knowledge, establish you happily in this family home. 


60. (Apah, Devata, Priyamedha Rshi) 


asset yaza: artes storia usda: | 
wateart fastara tea fea: ngon 


Ta'asya sudadohasah somañ srinanti prsnayah. 
Janmandevanam visastrisvarocane divah. 


The people of this land, intelligent, varied, 
pursuing the origin of life and the powers of nature, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


452 YAJURVEDA 


and dedicated to the light of heaven in threefold activity 
of knowledge, action and meditation proclaim the glory 
and magnanimity of this creator of peace and prosperity 
who presides over the community. 


61. (Indra Devata, Madhucchhanda Rshi) 


vg favatsarcitqe<aggeterd fir: à 
xefrdurer9frar emen-ar$uefd ufdu use 


Indram vi$va avivrdhantsamudravyacasam 


patim. 


May all the voices exhort and strengthen Indra, 
leader and president of the land, great and deep as the 
ocean, bravest of the brave warriors in the battles of 
progress, promoter of truth and goodness, and protector 
of life and the human nation. 


62. (Agni Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


maas a audasfaerser ve: Gatungueale | 
arder adsa erf virferreb ca d wid enum- 
fa ngn 


Prothadasvo na yavase ’visyanyada mahah sam- 
varanadvyasthat. Adasya vato' anuvati 
Sociradha sma te vrajanam krsnamasti. 


Agni, ruler of the land, just as a horse arises eager 
for the grass, so whenever you are challenged, you arise 
from a state of deep peace and, determined for the 
protection of your people, stand firm and unshakable. 
Your clarion call and your brilliance rallies the people 
round and, electrified, they follow you in every 
movement. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XV 453 


63. (Vidushi Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


SATS wet MAA AST AM BARA EAA 
wid mei a at aren dred 
RA ugs 


Ayostva sadane sadayamyavataschayayain 
samudrasya hrdaye. Rasmivatim bhasvatima ya 
dyam bhasya prthivimor-vantariksam. 


Learned woman, lady light of the home, mistress 
of sunbeams shining in heaven, illuminate the earth and 
fill the wide skies with brilliance. I place you in the 
house of your husband — long live he ! I set you in the 
soothing shade of your protective man, in the very core 
of his heart deep in love as the bottomless sea. 


64. (Paramatma Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


ust ved cura: fae ardea uA 
frd wer frd dad es mo ned | fade 
wota eaaa ufasrdt uaftate a 
qteafuatd crum waren wíaur Àa dut 
ladar naa spp We deuil 


Paramesthi tva sadayatu  divasprsthe 
vyacasvatim prathasvatim divam yaccha divam 
drinha divam ma himsth. Vi$vasmai pranaya- 
panaya vyanayodanaya pratisthayai caritraya. 
Suryastvabhipatu mahya svastya chardisa 
Santamena taya devataya’ngirasvad dhruve 
sidatam. 


Lady light of the home, growing in generosity as 
the earth, rising in virtue as the sky, may the Lord 
Supreme establish you firmly in your heavenly home 
for full realisation of the joy of living, freedom from 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


454 YAJURVEDA 


suffering, attainment of knowledge, noble strength of 
character, honour and dignity and high performance of 
duty. Emanate the light of love and justice. Promote 
Dharma and piety. And do not pollute the heavens, do 
not damage the light of learning. 


May the Sun, supreme light of the world, wholly 
protect you and bless you with great good fortune, peace 
of mind and the light of truth. 


Noble man and virtuous wife, may both of you 
stay firm and steadfast with that supreme God of life 
and the universe as with the breath of life. 


65. (Vidwan Devata, Madhucchhanda Rshi) 


uec wait qea uff ueber 
mees weal car neg 


Sahasrasya pramasi sahasrasya pratima’ si 
sahasrasyonma’si sahasro’si sahasraya tva. 


Learned man, you are the master of a thousand 
facts of life and nature. You are the measure of a 
thousand confirmations of knowledge. You are the 
reference and judge for a thousand doubts and questions. 
You are the lord and authority over a thousand problems 
of science and existence. May the Lord Omniscient of 
existence grant you your rightful place in the world for 
a thousand achievements. 


gla usaagiseara: odi 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVI 455 


CHAPTER-XVI 


1. (Rudra Devata, Parameshthi Kutsa Rshi) 
d*d Se uwerdssdi dszus wd: 1 
Saga A AA: ngu 


Namaste rudra manyava’uto ta'isave namah. 
Bahubhyamuta te namah. 


Rudra, lord of justice and retribution /Ruler of 
the land, salutations to you for your righteous passion 
against the evil and the wicked. And salutations to you 
for your arrows and armaments. Salutations to you for 
your mighty arms (that wield the armaments). 


Thunderbolt to your enemies for their anger 
against you! Food and support for you! Salutations to 
your mighty arms to wield the thunderbolt! 


2. (Rudra Devata, Parameshthi Kutsa Rshi) 


" d wg frat arataa i 
wal ede vrduar fafisrarsretessiüfe usd 


Ya te rudra Siva tanuraghora ’papakasini. Taya 
nastanva santamaya girisantabhi cakasthi. 


Rudra, lord of justice, love and peace, lord 
sublime of the clouds and the mountains, commanding 
veneration and admiration, the manifestation of your 
presence is auspicious and blissful, free from fear and 
magnificent without a shade of sin and darkness. With 
that same gracious manifestation of your divinity, 
emanate the blessings of peace and mercy for us. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


456 YAJURVEDA 


3. (Rudra Devata, Parameshthi Kutsa Rshi) 


aad ARs ged aneia ad 

frat fif at be m fest: Gee ste nN 

Yamisum girisanta haste bibharsyastave. Sivam 

giritra tam kuru ma himsth purusam jagat. 

Lord of the showers of clouds, master of 

mountains of the challenges of existence, the arrow 
(arm) you hold in hand to shoot upon the enemy, make 
that an instrument of peace, benevolence and liberation. 


Saviour of showers and protector of knowledge, 
do not damage the living world of nature nor hit the 
world of humanity. 


4. (Rudra Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


faa acter car firiierest aerate à 


zat =: adiantan aa gni 


Sivena vacasa tva girisaccha vadamasi. Yatha 
nah sarvamijjagadayaksmam sumana 'asat. 


Rudra, life of the clouds and spirit of the mountain 
breeze, we praise you and pray to you in words of faith 
and fidelity so that by your gifts and grace we may be at 
peace in the heart and this whole world be free from 
depression and consumptive diseases. 


5.  (Ekarudra Devata, Brihaspati Rshi) 
sTezbei rera férererar ta coat Brae | 
srl ver welesuumeudiver urgism-ssureft:ud 


ya nui 


Adhyavocadadhivaktā prathamo daivyo bhişak. 
Ahinsca sarvan jambhayantsarvasca yatu- 
dhanyo' dharacth parasuva. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVI 457 


Rudra, lord of life, chief advisor and divine 
physician, speak to us on matters of health and, 
destroying all the snake-like deadly germs and viruses, 
root out all the debilitating and fatal diseases. 


6. (Rudra Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
ath aenisstaurssa ay: ume: 1a dees- 
aRt faa f2rar: vgureitsdure$adséua gu 


Asau yastamro 'aruna uta babhruh sumangalah 
Ye cainam rudra’abhito diksu $ritah sahasraso’- 
vaisain heda’imahe. 


And the sun which is copper red, bright red and 
reddish brown (in the morning, in the day and toward 
the evening) is auspicious and efficacious. And the 
thousands of heavenly bodies, planets and satellites, etc., 
sustained around in all the directions, we pray, be good 
and protective for all of us. 


7. (Rudra Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
ardt atsaatta iehi fereilfaa: 1e mars- 
sigsad sacar: w get dearfa a: non 


Asau yo’vsarpati nilagrivo vilohitah. Utainam 
gopa' adrsrannadrsrannudaharyah sa drsto 
mrdayati nah. 


And the sun which is descending dark-necked 
behind the clouds like a peacock and reddish toward 
the evening is auspicious and efficacious. The cowherds 
see it, the water-carriers see it, and seen thus it acts as a 
healing power for us. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


458 YAJURVEDA 


8. (Rudra Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


mts Aiea aen Arse i 

ar asst aealtise atsi AA: N 
Namo'stu nilagrivaya sahasraksaya midhuse. 
Atho ye'asya satvano'ham tebhyo'karam 
namah. 

Salutations to the blue-necked power of the 
healing sun. Salutations to the lord of the light of a 
thousand eyes. Salutation to the lord of the rain showers 
of health. And to those powers, too, which are floating 
around as planets and satellites bearing the essence of 
its healing power, we offer our salutations in homage. 


9. (Rudra Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


Wises erates rary | 
aise à eeassua: aa at drat aq ei 
Pramunca dhanvanastvamubhayorartnyorjyam. 
Yasca te hasta’isavah para ta bhagavo vapa. 


Glorious lord of power and defence, stretch and 
release the string at the two ends of the bow and shoot 
the arrows which are in your hand at the target yonder. 


10. (Rudra Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
fast et: auf fasten aota? USSA i 
srisracu arssdasaraea Fraga: Ngon 
Vijyam dhanuh kapardino visalyo banavan’ uta. 
Ane$nnasya ya’isava’abhurasya nisangadhih. 
May the awful bow of the lord of braided hair 
never be without the string. May his arrows never be 


without the point. May his arms be never destroyed. 
May his armoury never be void of arms. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVI 459 


11. (Rudra Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


"ur d Reigen get aya ow seii 
ware feverreeriuamem UIST 1g 2 


Ya te hetirmidhustma haste babhuva te dhanuh. 
Taya'saman vi$vatastvamayaksmaya paribhuja. 


Lord of the richest showers of health and joy, the 
thunderbolt that is in your hand and the mighty bow, 
with these weapons of defence against suffering, protect 
us all round and promote our health and prosperity. 


12. (Rudra Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


UR a eect efeceardurenq farad: 
ad usdufireremnrssrerfaidfg wu ue 


Pari te dhanvano hetirasman vrnaktu visvatah. 
Atho ya’isudhistavare’asmannidhehi tam. 


Lord of the bow, may the strike of your missile 
spare us and protect us from all sides. And your armoury 
in which you keep the missiles, keep it far from us to 
direct it on the enemy. 


13. (Rudra Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


aaqa Tae STAG d 
fei? srearat wat feat 4: gaat sta ean 


Avatatya dhanustvam sahasraksa satesudhe. 
Nisirya Salyanam mukha $ivo nah sumana 
bhava. 


Lord of a thousand eyes, wielder of a hundred 
arms, having sharpened the points of the arrows, having 
bent the bow and stretched the string, pleased and kind 
at heart, be good and gracious to us. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


460 
14. 


YAJURVEDA 


(Rudra Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


maserar gor |d 
sunatqa ob argent qa eph ue 


Namasta'ayudhayanatataya dhrsnave. Ubha- 
bhyamuta te namo bahubhyam tava dhanvane. 


Salutations to the warrior. Salutations to the force 


at rest in readiness. Salutations to the determined 
commander. Salutations to you, man of the bow, for 
both your arms of valour. 


15. 


(Rudra Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 

m at madga ar asanti ar a "T 
"ssf&rau 1 ur at esf: fugi ura ura ar od: 
iame wa S: ngn 


Ma no mahantamuta ma no’arbhakam ma na’ 
uksantamuta ma na 'uksitam. Ma no vadhih 
pitaram mota mataram ma nah priyastanvo 
rudra ririsah. 


Rudra, commander of the army, strike not our 


seniors, nor our children, nor our young married men, 
nor the nation in the womb. Kill not our father, nor 
mother, nor our dear ones. Strike not our women, the 
sick, the delicate and the weak. They must not suffer 
any harm or injury. 


16. 


(Rudra Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 
m seer aaa ur asard ar AY ing ur Assay 
tie: a a at e es waft asirfeed-a: 
aati cat Taras ugg 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVI 461 


Ma nastoke tanaye ma’na ayusi ma no gosu ma 
no 'a$vesu ririsah. Ma no viran rudra bhamino 
vadhirhavismantah sadamit tva havamahe. 


Rudra, strike not the babies, nor the children, 
damage not life, kill not our cows, nor our horses. Kill 
not our darling young people, handsome and so brave 
are they. Carrying libations of love and faith we always 
invoke you and pray. 


17. (Rudra Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 
"Hr featured Bra feet a udi aa oui 
ag eficngrenr: up ada Aa d: grfürosierer 
ferdlua usi uda ur ant zfensmarndifed 
Gert Uda AA: ngon 


Namo hiranyabahave senanye disam ca pataye 
namo namo vrksebhyo harikesebhyah pasunam 
pataye namo namah Saspinjaraya tvisimate 
pathinam pataye namo namo harike$ayopavitine 
pustanam pataye namah. 


Salutations to Rudra, warrior of the golden arms 
of steel. Salutations to the lord protector of the nation 
in all directions. Love and care for the trees of green 
foliage. All hail to the lord protector and promoter of 
animals. All reverence and faith for the light of justice 
and controller of wild passion. Salutations to the 
protector of travellers, and promoter of the highways. 
Love and reverence for the golden-haired wearer of the 
sacred thread initiated in learning. Salutations to the 
protector and promoter of the young and strong rising 
generation. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


462 
18. 


YAJURVEDA 


(Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 


ach S udi sar ait szratearfénr araton udi 
wat TH: Gatare<a enia uda cd: gen 


Namo babhlusaya vyadhine’nnanam pataye 
namo namo bhavasya hetyai jagatam pataye 
namo namo rudrayatatayine ksetranam pataye 
namo namh sutayahantyai vananam pataye 
namah. 


Salutations to Rudra, brown breaker of the 


enemies. Salutations to the protector and promoter of 
food. Salutations to the saviour warrior of existence. 
Salutations to the lord of the moving worlds. 
Exhortations to the warrior up in arms. Salutations to 
the regions of the world. Salutations to the pioneer of 
love and leader of humanity. Salutations to the lord 
protector of the forests. 


19. 


(Rudra Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 


dr Uieara wade qaron ude wal wal spend 
emfrereepareird efte ada «rit sat afat arfüursmra 
ator ada «rit mss arena utat ada 
mA: ues 


Namo rohitaya sthapataye vrksanam pataye 
namo namo bhuvantaye varivaskrtayau- 
sadhinam pataye namo namo mantrine vanijaya 
kaksanam pataye namo nama 'uccairghosaya- 
krandayate pattinam pataye namah. 


Salutations to Rudra, red-haired lover and 


promoter of art and architecture. All hail to the lord 
protector of trees. Salutations to the lord of the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVI 463 


expanding world and creator of wealth. Salutations to 
the lord of herbs and medicine. Salutations to the 
thoughtful planner, and the powers of commerce and 
industry. Salutations to the lord of woods and 
plantations. Salutations to the mighty roar against the 
enemies of life. Salutations to the lord protector of the 
pedestrians, wayfarers and the foot-soldiers. 


20. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 
frearfrdisomearferifat udà dt adi Frafect 


cept verrai udsr Aa «8t Praca ufrenan varii 
uda mA: mon 


Namah krtsnayataya dhavate satvanam pataye 
namo namah sahamanaya nivyadhina 'avya- 
dhininam pataye namo namo nisangine 
kakubhaya stenanam pataye namo namo 
nicerave paricarayaranyanam pataye namah. 


Salutations to the lord industrious of total growth. 
Salutations to the lord protector of assets. Salutations 
to the lord of challenge, endurance and victory. 
Salutations to the supersessor of challenging 
emergencies. Salutations to the lord of full armour in 
readiness. Salutations to the lord of hope and optimism. 
Salutations to the controller of thieves and corruption. 
Salutations to the lord of relentless work and 
development. Salutations to the lord of love and service 
of life and humanity. Salutations to the lord of forests 
and forest life. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


464 
21. 


YAJURVEDA 


(Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 


wa ced Cufresed wa uda wat cri 
Trafgulszufzr mekao adel At AA: venrférezm 
fsratesungnt yori ada aay aubsfurmngsit Aad 
ut fag ada ad: duse 


Namo vancate parivancate stayunam pataye 
namo namo nisangina’isudhimate taskaranam 
pataye namo namah srkayibhyo jighamsadbhyo 
musnatam pataye namo namo’simadbhyo 
naktancaradbhyo vikrntanam pataye namah. 


Salutations to the controller of thugs, superthugs 


and clandestine robbers. Salutations to the lord of 
constant watch and deployment of missiles. Salutations 
to the lord eliminater of smugglers. Constant watch over 
the killer men of the lance and thunderbolt to them. 
Salutations to the controller of swindlers. Watch and 
punishment to the swordsmen night walkers. All hail to 
the challenger and controller of national disunity, 
division and defilement. 


22. 


(Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 

"Hsssuftfüui Miia pasar uda wat 
"HsguHquE erage al AA asara: 
ideas at AA Asse suse gays 
at AA: een 


Nama usnisine giricaraya kuluncanam pataye 
namo nama’isumadbhyo dhanvayibhyasca vo 
namo nama 'atanvanebhyah pratidadha- 
nebhya$ca vo namo nama'ayacchadbhyo'- 
syadbhyasca vo namah. 


Salutations to the village chief of the turban of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVI 465 


distinction. Salutations to the chief of the mountainers. 
Salutations to the controller of the antisocial mischief. 
Salutations to the men of the arrow and the missile. 
Salutations to the men of the bow and the carrier rocket. 
Salutations to you again and again. Salutations to those 
who advance the line of defence and security. 
Salutations to the forces of offence in defence. 
Salutations to the keepers of law and order. Salutations 
to the marksmen who take on the target. 


23. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 


wat feasted faasiguya at war cH: veut 
wigs at ar a: yah asem aye dt 
AH TARAS sat sey at AA: RIN 


Namo visrjadbhyo vidhyadbhyasca vo namo 
namah svapadbhyo jagradbhyasca vo namo 
namah sayanebhya’asinebhyasca vo namo 
namastisthadbhyo dhavadbhyasca vo namah. 
Salutations to those who shoot at evil. Salutations 
to those who strike down the evil. Salutations to you 
all. Care and caution for those who sleep. Exhortation 
to those who wake. Salutations to all of you. Care for 
those who rest. Appreciation for those who sit in 
position. Salutations to those who stand fast. Cheers 
for those who run for humanity. 


24. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 
TH: aurea: Gardez et THE THESyanszrssd- 
"ufeaszrger at ir aserne rha ferferezi-drezroer 
wr Hr wussrumeeqezdisziser at ad: ux 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


466 YAJURVEDA 


Namah sabhabhyah sabhapatibhyasca vo namo 
namo ’svebhyo’svapatibhyasSca vo namo nama 
avyadhinibhyo vividhyantibhyasca vo namo 
nama uganabhyastrmhatibhyasca vo namah. 


Salutations to the councils of governance and 
administration. Salutations to the heads of councils. 
Salutations to you all. Salutations to the cavalry. 
Salutations to the cavalry commanders. Salutations to 
you all. Salutations to the forces of defence. Salutations 
to the forces in action. Salutations to you all. Salutations 
to the forces in reserve for reinforcement. Salutations to 
the advancing and routing forces. Salutations to you all. 


25. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 


val worst mda at aat sar ards 
wrdufaszrewr at var war acdeart s edufeszrger at 
wat aa fenex fayersteage at aa: usu 


Namo ganebhyo ganapatibhyasca vo namo 
namo vratebhyo vratapatibhyasca vo namo 
namo grtsebhyo grtsapatibhyasca vo namo 
namo virupebhyo visvarupebhyasca vo namah. 


Salutations to autonomous communities. 
Salutations to the heads of autonomous communities. 
Salutations to you all. Salutations to the dominions. 
Salutations to the heads of dominions. Salutations to 
you all. Salutations to the guilds of expert professionals. 
Salutations to the heads of expert associations. 
Salutations to the mixed and multiform communities. 
Salutations to the heads of multicultural communities. 
Salutations to you all. Salutations to the international 
associations. Salutations to the heads of world 
associations. Salutations to you all. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVI 467 


26. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 
wa: Gaba: ARNa at vat saat fats- 
sree at aur ad: ere: qendiaeive at 
var saat aeaissieesziver at ad: een 


Namah senabhyah senanibhyasca vo namo 
namo rathibhyo'arathebhya$ca vo namo namah 
ksattrbhyah sangrhitrbhya$ca vo namo namo 
mahadbhyo arbhakebhyasca vo namah. 


Salutations to the armies. Salutations to the 
commanders of the armies. Salutations to the fighters 
on rathas, tanks and warplanes. Salutations to the 
warriors without the rathas (warriors on foot). 
Salutations to you all. Salutations to the warriors and 
the administrators. Salutations to the supply corps. 
Salutations to you all. Salutations to the seniors, veterans 
and the great. Salutations to the small, the young and 
the recruits. Salutations to you all. 


27. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 


mag vereenteziyer at Tal cm: cetera: 
amaya at wa Hb Freres: ufos yet 
at THE aa: seb unge at ad: ud 


Namastaksabhyo rathakarebhyasca vo namo 
namah kulalebhyah karmarebhyasca vo namo 
namo nisadebhyah punjisthebhyasSca vo namo 
namah svanibhyo mrgayubhyasca vo namah. 


Salutations to the wood carvers and craftsmen. 
Salutations to the manufacturers of vehicles. Salutations 
to you all. Salutations to the manufacturers of ceramics. 
Salutations to the metallurgists. Salutations to you all. 
Salutations to the hill and forest rangers. Salutations to 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


468 YAJURVEDA 


the fishermen and pisciculturists. Salutations to you all. 
Salutations to the dog-squads and the canine experts. 
Salutations to the hunters and the experts of wild 
animals. Salutations to you all. 


28. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 
"TH: We: wedfqessnyer al cTHD wat vara a 
eat a aA: wala wr aguda a wat Aeta 
a Rrota w Rei 


Namah svabhyah svapatibhyasca vo namo namo 
bhavaya ca rudraya ca namah $arvaya ca 
pasupataye ca namo nilagrivaya ca Sitikanthaya 
ca. 


Food for the dogs, recognition and incentive for 
the breeders and trainers of dogs. Salutations to you 
all. Salutations to the lord creator of the world. Homage 
to the lord of maintenance with justice and retribution. 
Salutations to the ultimate destroyer. Salutations to the 
lord protector of the animals. Salutations to the lord of 
the blue clouds. Salutations to the lord of the mighty 
voice of thunder. 


29. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 
m: pt xr aes cupo: Weel a 
yada a HE fr erart a ferfafacert cr aut 
Agena Vasa wp 
Namah kapardine ca vyuptake$aya ca namah 
sahasraksaya ca Satadhanvane ca namo 


giris$ayaya ca Sipivistaya ca namo midhustamaya 
cesumate ca. 


Homage to the lord of braided hair. Salutations 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVI 469 


to the sage of shaven hair. Salutations to the lord of 
vision of a thousand eyes. Salutations to the wielder of 
a hundred bows. Homage to the sagely mountain 
dweller. Salutations to the protector and promoter of 
the animal wealth. Salutations to the lord supreme of 
showers for life. Salutations to the lord of arrows. 


30. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 


wal ga cp arvana cup ant ged cp adtaa a 
wat quart at age at Esau wr werd wo! 


Namo hrasvaya ca vamanaya ca namo brhate 
ca varstyase ca namo vrddhaya ca savrdhe ca 
namo 'gryaya ca prathamaya ca. 


Food and support for the child and the little 
darling. Salutations for the great and for the generous 
man of years. Reverence for the old and love for the 
youth growing together. Exhortation for the pathmaker 
and for the first among pioneers of initiative. 


31. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 


"Hsairrel arr a aa: sisata a vitare cer 
qasri cene cep wat areart cp greta 
"W UBM 

Nama’ aSave cajiraya ca namah Ssighryaya ca 
Sibhyaya ca nama’ urmyaya cavasvanyaya ca 
namo nadeyaya ca dvipyaya ca. 

All hail to men of instant response and to the men 
of spontaneous action. Cheers for the fast worker and 
incentive for the modes of speedy motion. Exhortation 
to the powers of rapid progress and to men of roaring 
business. All hail to the river projects and to the island 
explorers. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


470 
32. 


YAJURVEDA 


(Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 

wal eere at farsa a ad: ydd rursmd 
Waal wear Sareea Sl THE ATA ST SIMA 
A URI 

Namo jyesthaya ca kanisthaya ca namah purva- 
jaya caparajaya ca namo madhyamaya ca- 
pagalbhaya ca namo jaghanyaya ca budhnyaya 
ca. 


All hail to the oldest and the youngest. Honour 


and respect to the traditional and the modern. Full 
recognition and support for the average medium and 
the simple novice. All support for the lowest worker 
and reverence for the wise and generous. 


33. 


(Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 

7a: Greate at ulteata at Aa areata at green 
awa: Sede waar a adssdata a 
amta cw 3311 

Namah sobhyaya ca pratisaryaya ca namo 
yamyaya ca ksemyaya ca namah $lokyaya ca- 
vasanyaya ca nama urvaryaya ca khalyaya ca. 


Salutations to the prosperous and the virtuous. 


Salutations to the dispensers of justice and the preservers 
of happiness and welfare. Salutations to the scholar of 
vaidic voice and to the competent man of 
accomplishment. Salutations to the man commanding 
respect among the nobles, and to the master of creating 
means and materials for good living. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVI 471 


34. (Rudras Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
wW aaa a meata a ad: srart a ufasraret 
a msan agar a Aa: vprier aAA 


TH URS 


Namo vanyaya ca kaksyaya ca namah $ravaya 
ca prati$ravaya ca nama asusenaya ca- 
Surathaya ca namah suraya cavabhedine ca. 


Food and protection for the forest habitations and 
those living close thereby. Salutations to the reputed 
man of the Veda and to his listener disciple. Salutations 
to the warrior of the army on the fastest move and the 
commander on the fastest vehicle. Salutations to the 
brave soldier who breaks through the defences of the 
enemy. 


35. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 
"Hl fafeest a paR a aut affect a aafet 
a: att at seat ep CHÍ gaat Sea 


TH UREN 


Namo bilmine ca kavacine ca namo varmine ca 
varuthine ca namah $rutaya ca $rutasenaya ca 
namo dundubhyaya cahananyaya ca. 


Salutations to the warrior with the helmet. 
Salutations to the knight in armour. Salutations to the 
soldier in the bunker. Salutations to the force manning 
the fort of defence. Salutations to the reputed hero. 
Salutations to commander of the famous army. 
Exhortation to the drummer. Bravo to the martial man 
of music. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


472 YAJURVEDA 


36. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 
wat gored cr wgsmed a val Paigo erufznrd a 
-Tzdiaurdar arafa aw: eaat a g 


TH BU 


Namo dhrsnave ca pramrśāya ca namo nisan- 
gine cesudhimate ca namastiksnesave ca- 
yudhine ca namah svayudhaya ca sudhanvane 
ca. 


Salutations to the bold and fearless. Salutations to 
the shrewd and reflective man of thought and deliber- 
ation, and to the kind and the courteous. Salutations to 
the man of the sword and to the hero of the pointed arrow 
and quiver. Salutations to the man of mighty warriors of 
invincible arms. Salutations to the wielder of super- 
weapons and to the man of the mighty bow. 


37. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 
mw: goah a usala ep TH: areata cep Arata cer 
"TH: epeule peur at cmi rar at eran 


TWH URRY 


Namah srutyaya ca pathyaya ca namah katyaya 
ca nipyaya ca namah kulyaya ca sarasyaya ca 
namo nadeyaya ca vaisantaya ca. 


All hail and support for those who live by the 
side-walks, springs and trails. Welcome and hospitality 
for the travellers on the high roads and all support for 
the keepers of the roads. Care and caution for the 
mountain pass and the foot-hills and all support for those 
who live thereby. All love and care and reverence for 
streams and lakes, rivers and rivulets, pools and tanks, 
and all hail and hospitality for the users and keepers of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVI 473 


these. Salutations, exhortations and cheers to those who 
love and live by these ! 


38. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 


"TH: pale wae ep THE divas aaa a 
wal Tender at fadera a amt edi cata 
aT Ben 


Namah kupyaya cavatyaya ca namo vidhryaya 
catapyaya ca namo meghyaya ca vidyutyaya ca 
namo varsyaya cavarsyaya ca. 


Salutations to the specialist of well construction. 
Salutations to the drilling geologist. Salutations to the 
scientist explorer of the clear blue sky in the sunlight. 
Salutations to the expert of solar heat and energy. 
Salutations to the technologist of cloud formation. 
Salutations to the scientist and technologist of lightning 
and electricity. Salutations to the scholar and scientist 
of rain and water management. Salutations to the 
scientist of drought and drought management. 


39. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 
7a arate a teata a wat STWTegre cr areqaret 
a mw: aaa a egret a cTHedrurd cereum 
a Us 
Namo vatyaya ca resmyaya ca namo vastavyaya 


ca vastupaya ca namah somaya ca rudraya ca 
namastamraya carunaya ca. 


Salutations to the expert of wind and storm. 
Salutations to the scientist of cloud burst and thunder. 
Salutations to the specialist of surplus and waste 
management. Salutations to the man of housing and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


474 YAJURVEDA 


architecture. Salutations to the expert of health and 
power. Salutations to the minister of justice and equity. 
Salutations to the powers of security against violence 
and crime. Salutations to the promoters of Dharma and 
the good life. 


40. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 


mA: vrged a uguda a adssoe a id a 
"THE sireremed er tana a THÉ A a Staal ur at 
aan RNa wand won 


Namah Sangave ca paśupataye ca nama ugraya 
ca bhimaya ca namo'grevadhaya ca dure- 
vadhāya ca namo hantre ca hanīyase ca namo 
vrksebhyo harikeśebhyo namastaraya. 


Salutations to the lord of peace and protector of 
living beings. Salutations to the lord of power and awe. 
Salutations to the powers of preventive strike and 
consequent elimination. Punishment to the killer and 
the destructive terrorist. Water and care for the trees of 
green foliage. Salutations to the saviour from suffering. 


41. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 


"TH: yat cup regem a cH: vit a 
"renun wp ad: Pard a Brada cer wa 


Namah $ambhavaya ca mayobhavaya ca namah 
Sankaraya ca mayaskaraya ca namah $ivaya ca 
Sivataraya ca. 


Salutations to the lord of peace, and to the lord 
giver of peace and joy in life. Salutations to the lord of 
prosperity, and to the lord giver of prosperity. 
Salutations to the lord of peace, prosperity and grace, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVI 475 


and to the lord giver of peace, prosperity and grace more 
and ever more. 


42. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 
w: wta reme a aA: uium AA xr 
wriet a peaa a a: yreata a wala 


THA RIN 


Namah paryaya cavaryaya ca namah 
pratarnaya cottaranaya ca namastirthyaya ca 
kulyaya ca namah $aspyaya ca phenyaya ca. 


Salutations to the lord across the river, and to 
him this side of the flow. And salutations to the captain 
who steers all across the seas, and to him who steers 
across and above. And salutations to him who is both 
the guide and the goal and to him who awaits us on the 
shore. And salutations to him who shines green in 
vegetation, and to him who floats with the foam. 


43. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 
wd: fence cp vara a ad: ar a 
aad a ad: mufet a qed a asg Rara 


T WUSZTS ST USBI 


Namah sikatyaya ca pravahyaya ca namah 
kiinsilaya ca ksayanaya ca namah kapardine ca 
pulastaye ca nama 'irinyaya ca prapathyaya ca. 


Homage to the gold in the sand, and to him who 
flows with the flow. And homage to him who plays with 
the pebbles, and to him who dwells in the tranquil 
harbour. Homage to the lord of the braided hair and to 
him who shines with glossy hair. Homage to the lord of 
the desert and to the protector of the wandering sages. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


476 
44. 


YAJURVEDA 


(Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 
"THY arate a areata ep aerate cup tata a 
"THÍ gee cep aera pH: cHreata at uir 
aA WSs 

Namo vrajyaya ca gosthyaya ca namastalpyaya 
ca gehyaya ca namo hrdayyaya ca nivesyaya 
ca namah katyaya ca gahvaresthaya ca. 


Homage to the lord of the meadow and to the 


warmth of the cow-shed. Homage to the angels of the 
bed and to the inmates of the home. Homage to the spirit 
in the heart and to the lord of human settlements. 
Homage to the mountain mysteries and to the spirit of 
the darkest caves. 


45. 


(Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 
"TH: Vera a eke a ad: UrPueugra c 
TAER a an Aea ePeTUGTUD ep CH SSvedls a 
yeta w rsa 

Namah Suskyaya ca harityaya ca namah 
pamsavyaya ca rajasyaya ca namo lopyaya co- 
lapyaya ca nama urvyaya ca survyaya ca. 


Homage to the spirit of the desert breeze and 


vibrations of the greens. Homage to the life of the dust 
and atoms of fragrance in the flowers. Homage to the 
spirit of the invisible and the softness of the grass. 
Homage to the lord of ocean fire and the fire of 
annihilation. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVI ATT 


46. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 
"rH: uris er oiga cr assapora Shera 
a wissrfaaa cx ufisad a ad 
agresa eit Aa AG a: fep fiepszil caret avait 
mA faferacesan anal fafaroneeat asen- 
east: isan 


Namah parnaya ca parnasadaya ca nama’ 
udguramanaya cabhighnate ca nama’ akhidate 
ca prakhidate ca nama’ isukrdbhyo dhanus- 
krdbhyasca vo namo namo vah kirikebhyo 
devanain hrdayebhyo namo vicinvatkebhyo 
namo viksinatkebhyo nama' anirhatebhyah. 


Homage to the spirit of the green leaves and to 
the fall of the leaves. Homage to the clarion call of action 
and to the destroyer of evil. All help and sustenance to 
the wearied and the oppressed. Homage to the makers 
of arrows and missiles and to the makers of bows and 
firing rockets. Homage to the noble hearts and the 
sparkling showers of their grace. Homage to the powers 
of discrimination between good and evil. Homage to 
the destroyers of oppression and to the upliftment and 
redemption of the fallen and the destitute. 


47. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 
gasra «af Aea (Tur wsmatüui 
dep at fat tre at at a: fen wards ison 
Drape’ andhasaspate daridra nilalohita. Asam 
prajanamesam pasunam ma bherma ron mo ca 
nah kincanamamat. 


Redeemer of the fallen, lord of food and 
sustenance, saviour of the poor and down-trodden, lord 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


478 YAJURVEDA 


of growth and greenery, cause no fear to these people 
and these animals. Cause no ailment or injury. Let none 
of us suffer any disease or damage. 


48. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 


gm cg dad amulet gadha w wae Wd: 
am sda fgua eder fase we unissrudarn- 
TA sen 


Ima rudraya tavase kapardine ksayadviraya pra 
bharamahe math. Yatha $amasad dvipade 
catuspade vi$vam pustam grame'asminna- 
naturam. 


All our thoughts and intentions, all our songs and 
devotion, and all our man-power we hold and dedicate 
to Rudra, awful lord of the knotted hair, commander of 
our young and brave heroes, so that there may be peace 
and well-being among our people and our animals 
(bipeds and quadrupeds), and life in this whole habitable 
world may be healthy, strong and free from want and 
suffering. 


49. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 


"mr d wg frat aa: fete fasat Sasi i 

Brat mac Vast dab at ge sas ise 
Ya te rudra Siva tanith Siva visvaha bhesaji. Siva 
rutasya bhesaji taya no mrda jivase. 

Rudra, lord of health and well-being, your 
auspicious presence in body and mind, your knowledge 
and approach is gracious, a panacea for all ailments, 
universal antidote to suffering and disease. With that 
healing touch bless us with good health and happiness 
for life. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVI 479 


50. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 


ard ferm Here: rirgehedrenrar Si 
"Hs gon 
Pari no rudrasya hetirvrnaktu pari tvesasya 


durmatiraghayoh. Ava sthira maghavadbhya- 
stanusva midhvastokaya tanayaya mrda. 


May the thunderbolt of Rudra spare us. May the 
evil disposition of the sinful and the angry keep off from 
us. May the generous lord giver of life and prosperity 
elevate the intelligence and constancy of the munificent 
yajnics and be kind and gracious to our children and 
our youth. 


51. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 


tigre fsrdau frat 4: qaat wa 1 urH ags- 
ama Tera pa antasari farta 
tÈ egu 

Midhustama Sivatama sivo nah sumana bhava. 
Parame vrksa' ayudham nidhaya krttim vasana’ 
acara pinakam bibhrada gahi. 

Most generous lord, most gracious, be good at 
heart and kind toward us all. Taking up the arms, 
wearing the corslet, holding the great bow, come and 
take on the mighty force of the enemies of life. 


52. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 


fafeh Rig fereilfea mAs, MTA: I 
ard uweweiautsehmerfaeu-mp atk 21 


Vikiridra vilohita namaste’ astu bhagavah. Yaste 
sahasram hetayo' nyamasman nivapantu tah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


480 YAJURVEDA 


Salutations to you, Rudras, lords lustrous and 
glorious, shooting arrows to destroy evil. And the 
thousand thunderbolts you wield, they may spare us and 
fall elsewhere on mischief far away from us. 


53. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 


Gear wea altered dad: 1 
Area seta: Ue aad sper 14311 
Sahasrani sahasraso bahvostava hetayah. 
Tasamisano bhagavah paracina mukha krdhi. 


Lord of majesty and ruler of the world, hundreds 
and thousands are the arms and powers in your hands. 
Turn their shaft and direction away and elsewhere far 
from us. 


54. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi) 


atena uer à ngrssrf£r sped a 

anes amesa eal anf gue 

Asamkhyata sahasrani ye rudra’adhi bhumyam. 

Tesam sahasrayojane’va dhanvani tanmasi. 

Thousands are the Rudras (life-sustaining 

powers) and countless are the Rudras (pranis, living 
forms) which are on the earth. We use their powers and 
properties in a thousand ways and, (in cyclic order) 
extend their powers and properties a thousand fold over 
vast areas of space. 


55. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 


afer dgeuigs-aRet asart i 
wales were erat athe uuu 


Asmin mahatyarnave ’ntarikshe bhava’ adhi. 
Tesam sahasrayojane’va dhanvani tanmasi. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVI 481 


Countless are the Rudra powers in this great 
ocean of the sky between the earth and heaven. We use 
their powers and properties in a thousand applications 
and in cyclic order, extend their powers and properties 
a thousand-fold over vast areas in space. 


56. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 


"irelizfrar: f2rfereguar fad -narsadf2rar:i 
wule$ measa eat deu esi 


Nilagrivah $itikantha divam rudra'upasritah. 
Tesam sahasrayojane’va dhanvani tanmasi. 
Blue-necked and white-throated, countless are the 
Rudra powers of life and sustenance which abide in 
heaven and the light of the sun. We use their energies 
and powers in a thousand ways for a thousand purposes 
and, in a positive circle, extend their powers and 
properties a thousand-fold over vast areas of space. 


57. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 


“rehire: forfeepuel: yatsa: atarent:| 

atz agassa eat anf nou 

Nilagrivah Sitikanthah sarva’adhah ksamacarah. 

Tesam sahasrayojane’va dhanvani tanmasi. 

Blue-necked, white-throated are the violent powers 

and ferocious creatures which roam around on the earth. 
We counter and throw off their powers and forces 
countless leagues away from us with the bows we stretch 
to shoot the arrows. 


58. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 


a gard vrferssie Aiea fereil fear: i 
ales Geese aaltt deu usd 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


482 YAJURVEDA 


Ye vrksesu Saspinjara nilagriva vilohitah. Tesam 
sahasrayojane’va dhanvani tanmasi. 


We counter the Rudra powers, blue-necked, white 
throated, yellowish red, bright and green like blades of 
grass, which grow on trees as parasites, and, stretching 
our bows for the arrows (with insecticides etc.,) render 
their deadly action ineffective over vast areas of the 
earth. 


59. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 


3r yrfa fafgramd: ate: 
wales Geese erat aeu nee 


Ye bhutanamadhipatayo visikhasah kapardinah. 
Tesam sahasrayojane’va dhanvani tanmasi. 


The powers who are protectors, promoters and 
guardians of living beings, sanyasis and brahmacharis 
with shaven heads or wearing unshorn hair, we help 
and serve, and, with all our power and means, we extend 
their activities over vast areas of the earth. 


60. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 


a ust udfaretasterqarsatadet: i 
wales azea eat ante gon 


Ye patham pathirakshaya 'ailabrda 'ayuryudhah. 
Tesam sahasrayojane’va dhanvani tanmasi. 


The Rudras, noble people, who guard and 
promote the moral and spiritual highways of life, who 
maintain and develop the national highways and protect 
the travellers, who develop the resources of the earth, 
and who struggle for the betterment of life and age, we 
support and serve with all our might and extend their 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVI 483 
powers a thousand fold over vast areas of the earth. 


61. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 
a date wetha urenré var forafgul:i 
wWule$ agensa erat ahs used 


Ye tirthani pracaranti srkahasta nisanginah. 
Tesam sahasrayojane’ va dhanvani tanmasi. 


We do homage to the Rudras, sacred presences 
who cleanse the mind and sanctify the soul, heroes who 
go round wielding the thunderbolt and the bow and 
quiver in defence of humanity. We support and serve 
them with all our might and extend their power a 
thousand fold over vast areas of the earth. 


62. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 


asda fafa arty fad sat i 
tz azea eat aaa nee 


Ye’nnesu vividhyanti patresu pibato janan. 
Tesam sahasrayojane’va dhanvani tanmasi. 


The infectious germs and viruses in food and 
drink and in the cooking and dining ware which, in 
various ways, afflict the people through eating and 
drinking, we fight with all our might, and we eliminate 
their deadly power and presence over a vast area of the 
earth and the environment. 


63. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 


"rsudred-isu yatesara fast ear feas | 
wales mesa atA aA ie an 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


484 YAJURVEDA 


Ya’etavantasca bhuyainsa$ca di$o rudra 
vitasthire. Tesain sahasrayojane’va dhanvani 
tanmasi. 


And Rudra powers (of beneficence, affliction and 
retribution in nature) conceived and realized so far and 
even more exist variously in all the directions (on the 
earth, in the sky and in heaven). We deal with their arms 
and armaments appropriately with all our might and 
mind in faith (worshipping, extending, negating or 
fighting and eliminating) in a thousand ways over vast 
areas of time and space. 


64. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 
misa ws a fafa At adda: à 
wat aw wreidet afar ast udteirdvidtefrdsirear: | 
avant msa wd Use a al yea a a fus 
ase ur oft ater wet cen: nex 


Namo’stu rudrebhyo ye divi yesam varsa- 
misavah. Tebhyo dasa pracirdasa daksina dasa 
praticirdasodicirdasordhvah. Tebhyo namo’astu 
te no’ vantu te no mrdayantu te yam dvismo 
Yasca no dvesti tamesam jambhe dadhmah. 


Homage to the Rudras that abide in heaven. Rain 
is their power and gift to life. To them our salutations 
with folded hands with ten fingers joined, with ten 
senses and ten pranas. For them the ten directions east, 
ten directions south, ten directions west, ten directions 
north, and ten directions above; all these for them to 
pervade and operate. Salutations to them! May they 
protect us! May they bless us! Whosoever we hate, 
whosoever hate us, him we deliver unto their power for 
judgement and redress. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVI 485 


65. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 


wise SSM Ysa Aart emasgue: | avat sr 
urettést «farum ast udtretdoneteiteoneat: 1 az 
maser d aisa-d a at ysad a a fuum age 
"r oft adui wet cer: gN 


Namo’stu rudrebhyo ye’ntarikse yesam vata 
isavah Tebhyo dasa pracirdasa daksina dasa 
praticirdasodicirdasordhvah. Tebhyo namo astu 
te no'vantu te no mrdayantu te yam dvismo 
yasca no dvesti tamesam jambhe dadhmah. 


Homage to the Rudras that abide in the skies. 
Wind and air is their power and gift to life. To them our 
salutations with folded hands with the fingers joined, 
with ten senses and the pranas. For them the ten 
directions east, ten directions south, ten directions west, 
ten directions north, and ten directions above; all these 
for them to pervade and operate. Salutations to them! 
May they protect us! May they bless us! Whosoever we 
hate, whosoever hate us, him we deliver unto their power 
for judgement and redress. 


66. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi) 
"His wat p dient Gurus: 1 asat eer 
urcitdsi «ferum ast udtefrdsirdtetrd virer: 1 reir 
misa d sem wd at asad a a fuent ave 
"rt eft ater wm xen: ag 
Namo' stu rudrebhyo ye prthivyam yesamanna- 
misavah. Tebhyo dasa pracirdasa daksina dasa 
praticirdasodicirdasordhvah. Tebhyo namo’ 


astu te no’vantu te no mrdayantu te yam dvismo 
yasca no dvesti tamesam jambhe dadhmah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


486 YAJURVEDA 


Homage to the Rudras that abide on the earth. 
Food and energy is their power and gift to life. To them 
our salutations with folded hands with ten fingers joined, 
with ten senses and ten pranas. For them the ten 
directions east, ten directions south, ten directions west, 
ten directions north, and ten directions above; all these 
for them to pervade and operate. Salutations to them! 
May they protect us! May they bless us! Whosoever we 
hate, whosoever hate us, him we deliver unto their power 
for judgement and redress. 


sta Neyse: n 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 487 


CHAPTER-XVII 


1.  (Maruts Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


saat uda forf2rarummr arsi sttszir errefd- 
asaf wed wd: Vat asgi sn Wed: W- 
Tons apr ae asset ei famed et spresque u 


Asmannurjam parvate sisriyanamadbhya’ 
osadhibhyo vanaspatibhyo’adhi sambhrtam 
payah. Tam na’isamurjam dhatta marutah 
samrarana’asmanste ksun-mayi ta'urgyam 
dvismastam te $ugrcchatu. 

O Maruts (men and women), kind and generous 
powers, hold for us the energy and power contained in 
the mountain ranges of the clouds and the sky, and hold 
for us that energy and juices distilled from waters, herbs 
and trees, and bless us with that food and energy. 
Voracious eater, fire of yajna, may your hunger and 
energy be in me too, and may your displeasure reach 
someone we hate (i.e., none). 


2.  (AgniDevata, Medhatithi Rshi) 
gm dssrassean aad: uA a ast a ast a 
wad ot wd ot oes a ace rad mad e frat 
a fad a wad ured a ade cr Wave ue 
aya maram Asarasseat aad: Ut 
"Wargfedeees ua 


Ima me'agna 'istaka dhenavah santveka ca dasa 
ca dasa ca Satam ca $atam ca sahasram ca 
sahasram cayutam cayutam ca niyutam ca 
niyutam ca prayutam carbudam ca nyarbudam 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


488 YAJURVEDA 


ca samudrasca madhyam cantasca parardha- 
Scaita me'agna istaka dhenavah santvamutra- 
musminilloke. 


Agni, fire-lord of yajna, may these bricks of my 
altar (vedi), wanted values of life, one and all, be 
generous and productive and grow ten times in 
geometrical progression : May one grow to ten, and ten 
to one hundred (shatam), and one hundred to one 
thousand (sahasram), and one thousand to ten thousand 
(ayutam), and ten thousand to hundred thousand (one 
lac, niyutam), and hundred thousand to a million 
(prayutam), and one million to hundred million 
(arbudam), and hundred million to a billion (arba, 
nyarbudam), and one billion to ten billion (one kharba), 
and ten billion to a hundred billion (one nikharba), and 
hundred billion to a trillion (mahapadma), and one 
trillion to ten trillion (one shanku), and ten trillion to 
hundred trillion (one samudra), and hundred trillion to 
quadrillion (one madhyam), and one madhyam to ten 
madhyam (anta, ten quadrillion), and one anta to ten 
anta (hundred quadrillion), parardha. And these bricks, 
wanted values, be, like cows, the givers of fulfilment to 
me in this life and beyond, in this world and beyond. 


3. (Agni Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 
wae sagsag websaedrqel: (pavet 
aaret farsi ard apragarsatatiaarom: us 


Rtava stha’rtavrdha’rtustha stha’rtavrdhah. 
Ghrtas$cyuto madhuscyuto virajo nama kama- 
dugha’akstyamanah. 


Ladies of the home brilliant as yajna fire, holy as 
truth and universal law, reflecting the plenty and purity 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 489 


of distilled ghee and overflowing with the sweetness of 
honey, you are surely treasures of fulfilment beyond 
decay. Be vibrant as spring, stay inviolable as the cycle 
of the seasons and add to the sanctity of the laws of life. 


4. (Agni Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


Weed wardens ufiegarfu i 
uamsa r Wet inst 


Samudrasya tva'vakayagne pari vyayamasi. 
Pavako' asmabhyain Sivo bhava. 


Agni, brilliant power, we stand round and cover 
you as the shaivala grass of the sea. Cleanser and purifier 
of life, be good and gracious to us. 


5. (Agni Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


feet car sea Of rea à 
ursenrsasreesiefsretr sfer GU 


Himasya tva jarayuna'gne pari vyayamasi. 
Pavako’asmabhyam $ivo bhava. 


Agni, brilliant power, we cover you round as fire 
and clothing round the frosty cold of the season. Come, 
cleanser and purifier of life, and be kind and gracious 
to us. 


6. (Agni Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


su wad Asdan bem 1 art faaara 
mefa amit aa at ag uWamdofyra 
eft en 

Upa jmannupa vetase’ va tara nadisva. Agne 
pittamapamasi manduki tabhira gahi semam no 
yajnam pavakavarnam Sivam krdhi. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


490 YAJURVEDA 


Agni, clad in the brilliant flames of light, come 
upon the earth, descend in the midst of the earth's 
abundance. Descend into the streams of life. Since you 
are the life and lustre of the waters, come with that life 
and lustre. Come and bless this yajna of our home with 
peace and prosperity. 


7. (Agni Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


state seat Pest | staredsstendag 
gad: Waetsstert frat sie ten 


Apamidam nyayanam samudrasya nivesanam. 
Anyanste’asmattapantu hetayah pavako’ 
asmabhyai $ivo bhava. 


This home is the abode of peace as the sky is the 
abode of waters. It is an abode of the depth of life as the 
deep ocean is. May Agni, lord of yajna and life and 
lustre of the waters be kind and gracious to us in this 
home of yajna, and may the heat of his passion and 
displeasure be directed elsewhere away from us. 


8. (Agni Devata, Vasuyu Rshi) 


amt uwar Afat agal sa feat | 
at cardia afat a neu 


Agne pavaka rocisa mandraya deva jihvaya. A 
devan vaksi yaksi ca. 

Agni, generous lord of light, purifier and 

sanctifier of life, with your brilliant and exhilarating 


tongue of flames you call the noble yajnic devotees 
together and proclaim to them the truths of eternity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 491 
9. (Agni Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


ad: uae difeatset dat sged | 
sd aavefage a: eh 


Sa nah pavaka didivo'gne devan’ ihavaha. Upa 
yajnam havisca nah. 

Agni, power of light and lustre, purifier and 
sanctifier of life, you graciously call the noble powers 
of nature and humanity together here close to our yajna 
and let us all share the gifts of the fragrance of libations. 


10. (Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 


Warn ava por andy west 4 
at 1 qda aradera 4 vurssm at gut 4 
ATOS: Noll 


Pavakaya ya$citayantya krpa ksaman ruruca’ 
usaso na bhanuna. Turvan na yamannetasasya 
nu rana’ a yo ghrne na tatrsano’ ajarah. 

Agni, lord of light and power, commander of the 
army, with his cleansing, enlightening and splendid 
force, shines on the earth like the dawn blazing with 
the light of the sun. And young, unaging, unexhausted, 
hastening apace on the course of his chariot, thirsting 
for victory in the heat of the battle, blazes with his own 


glory. 

11. (Agni Devata, Lopamudra Rshi) 
ade gta snfeu adetssteafted 1 arared 
amq ad: watsa A ier oue 


Namaste harase $ocise namaste 'astvarcise. 
Anyanste asmattapantu hetayah pavako’ 
asmabhyam $ivo bhava. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


492 YAJURVEDA 


Salutations to Agni, lord of light and justice, 
radiant and pure, divine and adorable, and saviour from 
pain and suffering. Lord sanctifier of life and nature, 
be good and gracious to us. And may the heat of your 
passion and punishment for sin and injustice fall upon 
others far from us, i.e. different from real human nature 
and character. 


12. (Agni Devata, Lopamudra Rshi) 


wie asad ag sféua ag dyad de vafe 
aS ug 


Nrsade ved apsusade ved barhisade ved 
vanasade vet svarvide vet. 


Homage to Agni, lord present in and presiding 
over humanity. Homage to the lord present in and ruling 
over the waters. Homage to the lord governing within 
and over the business of society. Homage to the lord 
present in and ruling over the forests. Homage to the 
lord creator and giver of the joy of life. 


13. (Prana Devata, Lopamudra Rshi) 


à rem dart arfsrert arfsrermeseiererfrurqd. smrr- 
da i stgarat gfeui usssrfurexenmi füerq usb 
"eed ugs 
Ye deva devanam yajnhiya yajniyanam samvat- 
sarinamupa bhagamasate. Ahutado haviso yajne 
'asmintsvayam pibantu madhuno ghrtasya. 
Pranas (Sanyasis, those who are the life-breath 
of the spirit of society), those who are noblest among 
the nobles, adorable among those who adore Agni in 
yajna, serve and receive their part of the annual sessions 
of yajna, and, free from the performance of yajna before 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 493 


meals, themselves receive and enjoy the honey-sweets 
and drinks of the libations in this yajna. 


14. (Prana Devata, Lopamudra Rshi) 


X dar gaf aerea walur: arswantssren 
wat scd uda ara fra a a feat 7 
dfereurssif£r eT ues 


Ye deva devesvadhi devatvamayan ye brahmanah 
pura'etaro' asya. Yebhyo na’rte pavate dhama 
kificana na te divo na prthivya 'adhi snusu. 


Pranas, life-breath of the spirit of humanity, souls 
who have attained the state of divine grace among the 
nobles, who walk in the very presence of this Lord of 
the universe, without whom nowhere in the world 
anything moves nor is anything sanctified, they are not 
confined to any particular region of heaven, nor to any 
particular region of the earth, they are universal, 
everywhere. 


15. (Agni Devata, Lopamudra Rshi) 


moarta eathar dater diate: (21 «s- 
sterdusd Edd: ureenrssrenedefsret fer nea 


Pranada'apanada vyanada varcoda varivodah. 
Anyanste’asmattapantu hetayah pavako’ 
asmabhyarn $ivo bhava. 


Agni, Lord of light and power, you are the giver 
of vital energy, means of the removal of impurity and 
waste, universal knowledge, lustre of life and the light 
of truth and Dharma. Be good and gracious to us, lord 
purifier and sanctifier of life and soul, and let your 
displeasure and punishment befall somewhere else far 
away from us. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


494 YAJURVEDA 


16. (Agni Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi) 


ahaha virferer urafgss fotu à 
saat era RA esi 


Agnistigmena Socisa yasadvisvam nyatrinam. 
Agnirno vanate rayim. 


Agni, lord giver of light, knowledge and power, 
with its incessant waves of light and warmth ripens and 
begets all good nourishing foods for us. The same agni 
with the power of electric energy begets all the wealth 
for us. (So may the man of knowledge and scientific 
power produce food and wealth for humanity.) 


17. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro VishvakarmaRshi) 


"sgur fear yea spaafereiar -reftaferar H: à 
asra — wfdurfiresurd: wasa R S- 
atifaasr ungon 


Ya’ima vi$va bhuvanani juhvadrsirhota nyasidat 
pita nah. Sa'asisa dravinamicchamanah 
prathamacchadavaran avivesa. 

Our father, Vishvakarma, omniscient lord and 
cosmic sacrificer (yajamana), consumes all these worlds 
into His own fire of cosmic yajna and remains. And 
then He, self-moved by His own will to create the 
profuse variety of existence, projects and pervades the 
first evolutes and later continues the expansion and self 
pervasion on and on. 


18. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi) 
fe»$frarndraf£rsriunui caua Rea- 


ata iad sf sadayan fa emdron-ufzur 
fagat: eeu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 495 


Kim svid asidadhisthanamarambhanam katamat 
svit katha sit. Yato bhumim janayan vi$vakarma 
vi dyamaurnonmahina visvacaksah. 


What is the ultimate stay of the universe? What 
is the original cause of the creation? What sort? From 
which Vishvakarma, omnipresent seer who pervades 
the universe, created the earth and then heaven with 
His mighty potential? 


19. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi) 


favadyaaed farada favadtarged favad- 
ward 1 at ween eta wi udiXenernspb wrrda 
Vasu: ue su 


Visvatascaksurta visvatomukho visvatobahuruta 
visvataspat. Sam bahubhyam dhamati sam 
patatrairdyavabhumi janayan deva 'ekah. 


Vishvakarma, the one absolute self-effulgent lord 
of the universe, with universal eye to watch, and 
universal mouth to reveal the Word, and universal arms 
for action, and universal feet for omnipresence, having 
created the heaven and earth from dynamic particles of 
Prakriti, keeps the universe in constant motion with his 
mighty arms of omnipotence. 


20. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi) 
fesfegd ass a qassta «dr ratga Pe- 
qa: wlio ata gesdg dereud 
aay RoW 
Kimsvidvanam ka’u sa vrksa'asa yato dyava- 
prthivinistataksuh. Manisino manasa prcchatedu 
tadyad adhyatisthad bhuvanani dharayan. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


496 YAJURVEDA 


What is that original cause, that lovely tree, from 
which the lord maker shaped the heaven and earth and 
the whole dynamic world? Men of intelligence and 
conscientious mind ask the men of wisdom and vision: 
Who is that lord who holds and sustains the regions of 
the world and presides over all these and yet remains 
the sole lord above the universe? 


21. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi) 


ar à arate agerfar aser at vier fgata 
fren widest efaft eea: xeu xum wat 
"ET: NRN 


Ya te dhamani paramani ya'vama ya madhyama 
visvakarmannutema. Siksa sakhibhyo havisi sva- 
dhavah svayam yajasva tanvam vrdhanah. 


Vishvakarma, lord of your own omnipotence, lord 
of nature, heaven and earth, maker of the universe, 
enlighten us, your friends and devotees, about the worlds 
of your own creation, the highest, the lowest and 
youngest, and the middle ones. Lord of food and energy, 
expanding the material world of existence, you yourself 
provide for sustenance with constant inputs into the 
systemic growth of the universe. 


22. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi) 


femen gat erem: tad eure uferefüua 
"IT | asad: wuciszenren Wet gR- 
VET ou 


Visvakarman havisa vavrdhanah svayam 
yajasva prthivimuta dyam. Muhyantvanye’ 
abhitah sapatna 'ihasmakam maghava surirastu. 


Vishvakarma, lord maker of the universe, exalted 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 497 


by the celebration and offerings of yajna, bless the earth 
and heaven with your presence. May the others, enemies 
of life and progress all round, fail. And may Indra, lord 
of power and glory, of wealth and learning, be the 
harbinger of knowledge and wisdom. 


23. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi) 


area fasaad waste emstsarem gau 


ww t fava eda sieigvasiagda ure 
haft nes 


Vacaspatim viévakarmanamutaye manojuvam 
vaje’adya huvema. Sa no vi$vani havanani jasad 
visvasambhuravase sadhukarma. 


For our protection and progress in the battle of 
life to day we invoke Vishvakarma, lord of knowledge 
and speech, universal master of all karma working at 
speed faster than that of mind. May he, beneficent lord 
of unfailing action, kind and generous to all, be pleased 
to listen to our invocation and grant our prayers for 
protection and progress. 


24. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi) 


fesdad4 zfemm aga cranium | 
qÀ far: Geared yika fart ema uw 


Visvakarman havisa vardhanena tratara- 
mindramakrnoravadhyam. Tasmai visah 
samanamanta purvirayamugro vihavyo yatha’ 
Sat. 


Vishvakarma, lord President of the total activity 
of humanity/the nation, with the growth and 
advancement arising from the developmental activities 
of the people working with yajnic dedication in unison, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


498 YAJURVEDA 


we pray, appoint Indra, a man of power and glory as 
minister for defence who should be an inviolable 
defender of the world/the land, so that all the people 
bow to him in acceptance and reverence and (with that 
universal support) he becomes mighty and formidable 
in action. 


25. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi) 
aga: fac ater fe si gAs | 
maassa yasana umaedufertssiud- 
ATT dil 
Caksusah pita manasa hi dhiro ghrtamene’ 


ajanannamnamane. Yadedanta adadrhanta 
purva'adid dyavaprthivi aprathetam. 

When the ruler, Vishvakarma, is of calm and 
resolute mind, loves and protects men of vision and 
justice, and promotes the creation of food and wealth, 
and when the people bow to him in obedience and act 
in unison like parts of one organism, then only the people 
and the government strengthen each other and grow like 
the earth and heaven of yore together. 


26. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi) 
fasacheat facerssnigeter smar fear drura 
wee | rer finr daha ao arash, 
uisuchWm: UREN 
Visvakarma vimana 'advihaya dhata vidhata 
paramota sandrk. Tesamistani samisa madanti 
yatra sapta’ rsin para’ ekamahuh. 


Vishvakarma is the one lord maker of the world, 
sole treasure-home of universal knowledge, present in 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 499 


the universal variety of existence, creator and sustainer 
of the universe, all-seeing universal presence and 
supreme reality, whom the wise sages call one and 
absolute, wherein the humans with their five senses, 
mind and intelligence rejoice and wherein they realise 
their supreme ambitions. 


27. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi) 
wis: fuer ta at feterat erat aa spe 
feed | at dart emuemsushsus aaa spem 
SIT RSN 
Yo nah pita janita yo vidhata dhamani veda 
bhuvanani visva. Yo devanam namadha’ eka’ eva 
tam samprasnam bhuvana yantyanya. 


Vishvakarma is the lord who is our father and 
creator, law-giver and sustainer, who knows all the 
regions of the universe, who is one and absolute yet 
holds the names of all the powers of nature and His 
own potential. In Him enter all the worlds, and He is 
the eternal question and mystery for all the conscientious 
souls. 


28. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi) 


wsamdsrd zfdursmiumssda: ge wfrdut 4 
Wat 1 ange ae wife Pad 9r yah gakoa 
m Ren 

Ta'ayajanta dravinam samasma’rsayah purve 
jaritaro na bhuna. Asurte surte rajasi nisatte ye 
bhutani samakrnvannimani. 


They are the Rishis, visionaries of Divinity, who, 
like celebrants in worship, have offered songs and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


500 YAJURVEDA 


libations of rich materials to Lord Vishvakarma and 
who, residing in known as well as in unknown worlds, 
have directed and attracted the mind and soul of living 
beings to the lord. 


29. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi) 


wi frat ursus dísrem uit ead tak | 


axaq mf werd dass at wem: waded 
Get uu 


Paro diva para’ena prthivya paro devebhi- 
rasurairyadasti. Kainsvid garbham prathamam 
dadhra’apo yatra devah samapasyanta purve. 


The Lord Supreme, Brahma, is beyond the 
heavens, beyond this earth, beyond the gods of nature 
and beyond the evil and the lifeless. He is the One 
wherein the life-force bears the first grand and 
mysterious seed of the universe and whom the 
primordeal visionaries of divinity see directly as if face 
to face. 


30. (Vishvakarma Devata, Vishvakarma Rshi) 


afta mf vad dest at ear: unius fava 
org made aatavatt saath 
WY: dao! 

Tamid garbham prathamam dadhra’apo yatra 
devah samagacchanta visve. Ajasya nabha- 


vadhyekamarpitam yasmin visvani bhuvanani 
tasthuh. 


Therein surely the life-force bore that first seed 
of the universe wherein all the powers of nature and the 
visionary souls find their repose. He is the one sole lord 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 501 


seated at the centre of the mother force, Prakriti, and he 
is the lord presiding over existence, wherein reside all 
the worlds of the universe. 


31. (Vishvakarma Devata, Vishvakarma Rshi) 


ad felaTer asg VSIA dT STO | 
Tara wea secat ermqadssaersmdygeníst i32 1 


Na tam vidatha ya'ima jajananyadyusmakam- 
antaram babhuva. Niharena pravrta jalpya 
casutrpa ukthasasa$caranti. 


You don't know Him who has created all these 
worlds. He is different and distant from you all, and yet 
within you all. People sunk in darkness roam around 
quoting scripture but serving their own selfish ends with 
empty words void of vision. 


32. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi) 


fasachat athe gasan theratssivad fed: 
qid: fer sifrdrdefraraur wet emasmepesm 3RN 


Visvakarma hyajanista deva’adidgandharvo’ 
abhavad dvitiyah. Trtiyah pita janit- 
ausadhinamapam garbham vyadadhat purutra. 


Lord Vishvakarma, creator of the world, self- 
effulgent lord of light and life, first manifested in 
existence. Then after that was born the sun which holds 
the earth. The third was the cloud which, in its womb, 
holds the waters, offspring of the sky and the winds, 
vital air, and generates and sustains the herbs and trees 
in many ways. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


502 YAJURVEDA 


33. (Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 


SIT3T: förta gat 7 ara ara: arsturyadun- 
AM (Hon rsfrfirasueneitr: Mae saeh- 
fired: 13311 

Asuh $isano vrsabho na bhimo ghandghanah 
ksobhana$carsaninam. Samkrandano’nimisa’ 
ekavirah Satam sena’ajayat sakamindrah. 


He alone is Indra, worthy to be commander of 
the army, who is swift and instant in action and wields 
blazing deadly weapons in readiness, who roars with 
strength like a bull and strikes fear, terror and panic in 
the enemy force, who is constantly watchful and a 
fearless challenger, who is a matchless hero, rallies the 
force at the call and with us comes out victorious over a 
hundred armies of the enemy. 


34. (Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 


tesa fsrespri wpenrntui qa 


qoi | aao sed acest gett ay sdeeda 
wen Wasi 


Samkrandanenanimisena jisnuna yutkarena 
du$cyavanena dhrsnuna. Tadindrena jayata 
tatsahadhvam yudho nara isuhastena vrsna. 


Ye men of war, challenge, engage and defeat that 
enemy force and be victorious with that commander, 
Indra, bold and daring, alert and watchful, thirsting for 
victory, master of tactical deployment and engagement 
of forces, informidable, fully armed and overwhelming 
the enemy with a rain of arrows/bullets/missiles. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 503 


35. (Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 


aga: ow Pufstdet meer w qeseat 
Tat mye ahr agrega ufdfaar- 
fired nyn 


Sa 'isuhastaih sa nisangibhirvasi sarnsrasta sa 
yudha’indro ganena. Samsrstajit somapa 
bahusardhyugradhanva pratihitabhirasta. 


That warrior, router of the enemy, Indra, self- 
controlled, lover of exhilarating soma and defender of 
peace, creator and commander of the army, strong of 
arm, wielder of mighty weapons and awful marksman, 
supported by his well-selected and well-deployed army 
highly equipped with arms and armaments, defeats the 
collective forces of the enemies. 


36. (Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 
weed ufidrar tas taer saaana: | 
Wiss: WO ger aeh gaa Ta- 
APL NIAN 


Brhaspate pari diya rathena raksoha ’mitran’ 
apabadhamanah. Prabhanjantsenah pramrno 
yudha jayannasmakamedhyavita rathanam. 


Brihaspati, commander of the mighty army, 
destroyer of the wicked, repulsing the enemy, routing 
his force and causing havoc all round by your chariot, 
you come out victorious over the violent and the evil in 
the battle. Be the protector and defender of our chariots 
and the wheels of the nation's economy. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


504 YAJURVEDA 


37. (Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 


aaam: tafe: welt: Wetar emit gaS- 


35:1 aRts Rda Geist Settee vararfetes 
ma NoN 


Balavijnayah sthavirah pravirah sahasvan vāji 
sahamana' ugrah. Abhiviro’abhisatva sahoja 
jaitramindra rathamatistha govit. 


Indra, expert of army management, veteran 
tactician, admirable soldier, steadfast and resolute 
fighter, man of patience and endurance, mighty and 
victorious, fast and terrible, hero of heroes, admiration 
of the great and intelligent, lustrous and powerful, 
honoured by the victorious, master of effective 
communication and reconnaissance of territory, take to 
your chariot and ride across the earth, over the seas and 
into the skies. 


38. (Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 
zmeda dasamsa uus 
ts EYAL 


Gotrabhidam govidam vajrabahum jayanta- 
majma pramrnantamojasa. Imain sajata’anu 
virayadhvamindram sakhayo'anu sain 
rabhadhvam. 


Friends, countrymen, children of mother earth, 
with all your might and main, follow this Indra, 
commander of the army, hand in hand. Join him in battle 
and display your valour and heroism with him who is a 
master of tactical code of signals and reconnaissance 
of enemy territory, wields the thunderbolt in hand, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 505 


breaks through the enemy lines, routs the forces, 
destroys the enemy and wins the battle. 


39. (Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 
sif A wear mensa di: scade 
Re: qr: dedraréqespsenrenesrat stag W 
"p us 
Abhi gotrani sahasa gahamano'dayo virah 


Satamanyurindrah. Du$cyavanah prtanasad- 
ayudhyo’smakam sena avatu pra yutsu. 


Indra, valiant commander, relentless warrior of 
a hundred fold righteous ardour, penetrating deep into 
enemy defences with his strength of armour, irresistible, 
invincible, victor of enemy forces, may direct and defend 
our army and lead it to victory. 


40. (Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 


gu sat car Geeta Aon enr: ues eri: | 
teenies Sait medi axa wot 


Indra’asam neta brhaspatirdaksina yajnah pura’ 
etu somah. Devasenanamabhibhanjatinam 
jayantinam maruto yantvagram. 


The commander of those noble and enlightened 
armies which break down and conquer the forces of 
evil in life is Indra, a man of power and grandeur; he is 
Brihaspati, a man of grandeur, knowledge and 
magnanimity; he is Soma, the man of magnanimity, 
peace and joy; he is the candid expert on the right side 
of the nation; he is the clarion call for unity and progress, 
and he is the first among all to take the lead in advance 
in a crisis. At his call the Maruts, commandos of the 
first order, must storm the citadel of the enemy. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


506 
41. 


YAJURVEDA 


(Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 

sea quit akora vrabssmfacaril medressrg's- 
"UTH i werent yaaa uri tart satan — 
TATA Qe 

Indrasya Vrsno varunasya rajna’ adityanam 
marutam sarddha ugram. Mahamanasam 
bhuvanacyavanam ghoso devanam jayata- 
mudasthat. 


The battle cry of the bold and fierce army 


consisting of brilliant, stormy, magnanimous, noble and 
victorious soldiers of the powerful, virile and celebrated 
ruler should rise high to the sky shaking the enemy with 
fright. 


42. 


(Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 


Sade WIAA aaa ATT Fes ht (sa 
arabe ahea seat ag arat: sz 


Uddharsaya maghavannayudhanyutsatvanam 
mamakanam manansi. Udvrtrahan vajinam 
vajinanyudrathanam jayatam yantu ghosah. 


Lord of power and glory, destroyer of the darkest 


enemy clouds, refine and sharpen the arms and 
armaments of our forces, boost the morale of our 
soldiers, accelerate the speed and raise the fire power 
of our horses and rockets, and let the roar of our 
victorious tanks and chariots rise to the skies and rend 
the clouds. 


43. 


(Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 

amaia: www senrenereh asta SrA 
amma Assad? Waxaenreiss Parsataar 
BAT usu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 507 


Asmakamindrah samrtesu dhvajesvasmakam ya’ 
isavasta jayantu. Asmakam vira' uttare’ 
bhavantvasman u deva ’avata havesu. 


When the flags fly high and the battle rages, may 
our leader and commander, Indra, and our arms and 
arrows be victorious. May our valiant warriors win and 
live happy ever after. May the noble scholars and sages 
and the warriors and tacticians protect us through the 
challenges and battles of life and life’s values. 


44. (Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 
amiat fad darde zeromgi-na atte 1 air 
Ufa fee zc steerer areata Gera ss 


Amisam cittam pratilobhayanti grhananga- 
nyapve parehi. Abhi prehi nirdaha hrtsu 
Sokairandhenamitrastamasa sacantam. 


Valiant women's corps, dazzling and bewildering 
the mind of those enemies, engage their troops in action 
and overthrow them far. Advancing deep into their 
ranks, burn them at heart and afflict them so that they 
may regret and lie low covered with darkness and 
SOITOW. 


45. (Ishu Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 


adqger wad mà aaah | 
mara weet me enscrithesu: Ine t 
Avasrsta para pata Saravye brahmasainsite. 


Gacchamitran pra padyasva ma'misam 
kancanoccisah. 


Valiant women’s corps, trained by the military 
experts of the Vedas, commanded and exhorted by the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


508 YAJURVEDA 


leader, shooting like an arrow, go far and fall upon the 
enemies. Go deep and take them all, do not spare any 
one of them. 


46. (Yoddha Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 
Wa waar msg a: snb aes | 
SET d: GL ASaSATYEM TATA qns 


Preta jayata nara’indro vah Sarma yacchatu. 
Ugra vah santu bahavo' nadhrsya yatha’ satha. 


Valiant warriors, go, advance and win. May Indra 
grant you victory and joy. May your arms be strong and 
bold so that no one may be able to challenge you and 
you remain free and invincible. 


47. (Marutah Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 


ata ur Gat wea: uturesrfed assiistar eae arn 
wi ted qure usemirssr-s3T-mp TT sient 


Asau ya sena marutah paresamabhyaiti na'ojasa 
spardhamana. Tam guhata tamasa 'pavratena 
yatha’mi’anyo’anyanna janan. 


Warriors, intelligent, bold and fierce, yonder is 
that army of the others, rivals, which marches upon us 
out of jealousy to surround and overcome us with all 
their might. Cover that with repellent smoke in utter 
darkness so that they may fail even to perceive each 
other. 


48. (Indra Brihaspati, etc., Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 
at «mum: wah pant Afraga | qus 
qanra: srt «esq favarar sui esq isc 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 509 


Yatra banah sampatanti kumara vi$sikha ' iva. 
Tanna'indro brhaspatiraditih $arma yacchatu 
visvaha Sarma yacchatu. 


Where the arrows strike all round and young 
soldiers fall like children shorn of hair at play, there 
Indra, lord of power and glory, and Brihaspati, lord of 
this great world, and the Great Council of Mother Earth 
itself may grant us peace. May they grant us peace and 
well-being for all time. 


49. (Soma Varuna Devah Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 


mi d am sre rem xremeasri- 
aay | Raa eurer Hu sea card der 
Haq nsei 


Marmani te varmana chadayami somastva raja'- 
mrtenanuvastam. Urorvariyo varunaste krnotu 
jayantam tva’nu deva madantu. 


Noble warrior, victorious hero, I cover your vital 
limbs with a protective armour. May Soma, lord of 
health and well-being, ruler of all, wrap you round in 
happiness and immortality. May Varuna, lord supreme, 
grant you honour greater than greatness itself. May all 
the noble powers of the earth bless you with joy, 
victorious one. 


50. (Agni Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 


sea uri uds i 
xraedrdur ueber ust at ag eh uuo 


Udenamuttaram nayagne ghrtenahuta. Raya- 
sposena sain srja prajaya ca bahum krdhi. 


Agni, lord of life and progress, invoked and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


510 YAJURVEDA 


worshipped with libations of ghee and fragrant 
materials, take this yajamana, ruler, victor, to higher 
and higher states of honour and glory. Bless him with 
the wealth of life and good health. Let him rise and 
grow with a good family and noble children. 


51. (Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 
uH wat ouo wmmarüsugsi | 
"He ade gst tart masaa, uuu 


Indremam prataram naya sajatanamasadvast. 
Samenam varcasa srja devanam bhagada 'asat. 


Indra, lord of power and glory, take this warrior 
victor to that high state of ethics and policy whereby he 
may rise to organise, control and rule over his fellow 
citizens, children of the mother land. Bless him with 
the light and lustre of life and learning so that he is able 
to do his duty to the noble people, powers of nature and 
God. 


52. (Agni Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 


wed put Te gfe CUT Cu | 
wd asard speraret cor sredureafd: us su 


Yasya kurmo grhe havistamagne vardhaya tvam. 
Tasmai deva'adhi bruvannayam ca brahm- 
anaspatih. 


Agni, lord of light and learning, lead the man in 
whose home we perform the yajna to the high road of 
progress and prosperity. Let the noblest people speak 
high of him and to him. And so may this scholar of the 
Vedas speak to him and about him. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 511 


53. (Agni Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 
sd cat faye gasar avg Farah: | 
a oat wa Rearea ferred: uu a ti 


Udu tva visve deva’agne bharantu cittibhih. Sa 
no bhava Sivastvam supratiko vibhavasuh. 


Agni, lord of power and glory, may all the noble 
people of the land with their heart and soul accept, 
approve, support and raise you to the heights. And you 
too, so high and noble, a very image of nobility and 
magnanimity, be good and kind to us. 


54. (Disha directions Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 


usa favit dditiade-d edad «ufi area: 
Tae agdam maA sarf aats- 
SEAT ux 


Pañca di$o daiviryajnamavantu devirapamatim 
durmatim badhamanah. Rayaspose yajnapati- 
mabhajanti rayaspose 'adhi yajrio 'asthat. 


May all the five directions of space replete with 
the celestial generosity of nature protect and promote 
yajna. May the intelligent and pious women, 
brahmacharinis and wives of saints and scholars, 
preventing and dispelling ignorance and evil genius, 
supporting and serving the yajnapati in the growth of 
health and wealth, protect and promote yajna in the 
household. 


May the yajna and the household be established 
in good health, wealth and progress in well-being. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


512 YAJURVEDA 


55. (Agni Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 
fikassrefit amemssandasseat ita: i 
wd at usd aaa Sar: gu 


Samiddhe’agnavadhi mamahana’ukthapatra’ 
idyo grbhitah. Taptam gharmam parigrhyay- 
ajantorja yadyajnamayajanta devah. 


That yajna, adorable, praiseworthy, flying high 
on the wings of Vaidic verses, accepted and honoured 
of yore, which the ancient sages performed with 
libations of boiled ghee into the flaming fire, that same 
yajna, noble people, you also accept and perform with 
the same devotion and enthusiasm. 


56. (Agni Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 


gata at wie gasi: sitar: adar: 1 ufo 


-—— C 


wem agate sar sasatssreqe=atsateq: us 
Daivyaya dhartre jostre devas$rih $rimanah 
Satapayah. Parigrhya deva yajnamayan deva 
devebhyo 'adhvaryanto 'asthuh. 
Noble people sit with the noble people round the 
fire, performing yajna for the noble people in honour 
of the divine powers. 


Let the noble people take to the noble yajamana, 
aman endowed with wealth of virtue, generosity of heart 
and plenty of sumptuous food and drink, and let them 
perform the yajna in honour of the heavenly lord, 
sustainer of the world and loving father of his children. 


57. (Yajna Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 


Amga: vifirazsifirar ase qtrat «nir at gorifdi 
wdl arenrsaiferat AY AERA dil! 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 513 


Vitam havih samitain $amita yajadhyai turtyo 
yajno yatra havyameti. Tato vaka'asiso no 
jusantam. 

The dynamic and blissful libations of fragrant 
materials, offered by the peace-loving yajamana into 
the yajna fire for the highest yajna of the fourth (turiya) 
order where the libations ultimately reach, from there 
the Vaidic voices and the blessings of yajna come and 
reach us. 


58. (Agni Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 


wi vfoudficnsr: Geena verfus ATR us 
web wur ded ulfa aaas asa wart 
TNT: le M 
Suryarasmirharikesah purastatsavita jyoti- 
rudayan' ajasram. Tasya pusa prasave yati 
vidvantsampasyan vi$va bhuvanani gopah. 
Savita, lord creator, clothed in sun-rays, radiating 
the golden-green emanations (waves) of light is the light 
that arose at the dawn of creation. Lord omniscient, 


protector and sustainer, He goes on and on watching 
the worlds of existence. 


In His creation, the man of science too goes on 
watching and watching, collecting the endless light of 
knowledge about the worlds of the universe. 


59. (Aditya Devata, Vishvavasu Rshi) 
faurisug feat netsesos- 


sTftarq ia fasach garean gaat 
a AT I4 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


514 YAJURVEDA 


Vimana’esa divo madhya ’asta’apaprivan rodasi' 
antariksam. Sa vi$vacirabhicaste ghrtacirantara 
purvamaparam ca ketum. 


This sun, traversing like a divine car, remains in 
the midst of the regions of light and illuminates the 
heaven, the earth and the sky. It is the sustainer of the 
world, source treasure of waters, and watches and 
illuminates before, after and in-between (past, present 
and future). 


60. (Aditya Devata, Apratiratha Rshi) 


sum dugrssfuur: quot: een «rft trate i 
uel] feat ARa: yansa fada wise 
wr ngon 


Uksa samudro'arunah suparnah purvasya 
yonim pitura vivesa. Madhye divo nihitah 
prsnirasma vi cakrame rajasaspatyantau. 


The sun, seminal fertilizer of life, ocean of spatial 
waters, scarlet red at dawn, lord of manifold splendour, 
illuminator of the firmament, sustained in the midst of 
heaven, travels in space sustaining and binding the ends 
of the spheres and moving towards the womb of its 
original mother, eternal energy, from whence it came 
into being. 


61. (Indra Devata, Madhuchhanda Sutajeta Rshi) 
v fasetssreiqercaqsederd fin: 
Tata aatend ufdu us 9 u 


Indram visva’avivrdhantsamudravyacasam 
girah. Rathitamam rathinam vajanam satpatim 
patim. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 515 


Wider than oceans of space, supreme over the 
commanding and blissful powers of existence, lord 
sustainer of the universal energies and nourishments, 
lord ordainer of the truth and reality of the world and 
Himself the supreme reality, all the voices of nature, 
humanity and divinity celebrate the only one omnipotent 
sovereign power, Indra. 


62. (YajnaDevata, Vidhriti Rshi) 


aagdasan A agcqMedasan wb aard | 
agafada gate san at ARA nee 


Devahuryajna’a ca vaksat sumnahuryajfia'a ca 
vaksat. Yaksadagnirdevo devan'a ca vaksat. 


Yajna is the divine power which calls forth the 
noblest powers and people to the congregation. May it 
raise the voice of truth and give us the divine message 
and save us from untruth. Yajna stimulates life with 
pleasure and well-being. May it inspire us with pleasure 
and well-being. The fire of yajna and the lord of light 
feeds the powers of nature. May it augment and enrich 
the treasures of the environment and bless us with the 
same divine gifts. 


63. (Indra Devata, Vidhriti Rshi) 


ante ur wasser i 
stat aaret A fummis usare: 16 3 


Vajasya ma prasava’udgrabhenodagrabhit. 
Adha sapatnanindro me nigrabhenadharan’ 
akah. 


May Indra, lord creator of nourishment and 
energy and giver of knowledge, elevate me to the heights 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


516 YAJURVEDA 


of virtue with inspiration and ambition. And may he, 
for me, devalue the negative forces of jealousy and 
enmity with depression to the lowest depths towards 
elimination. 


64. (Indragni Devate, Vidhriti Rshi) 
sana wd Fost a wat xerssidtqum ad 
stat GU A fergefr-ar-emeara est 


Udgrabham ca nigrabham ca brahma deva’ 
avivrdhan. Adha sapatnanindragni me visucinan 
vyasyatam. 


May the powers of life strengthen and expand 
our capacity to rise high, and our capability to resist 
depression toward the fall. And may Indra, divine power, 
and Agni, divine light, throw out far off our dispersive 
tendencies and our jealousies and enmities. 


65. (Agni Devata, Vidhriti Rshi) 


Hea magee farsa: i 
feaerrotchticar frst ARRE us 


Kramadhvamagnina nakamukhyam hastesu 
bibhratah. Divasprstham svargatva misra 
devebhiradhvam. 


By virtue of Agni, lord of knowledge, light and 
energy, act and rise to the heights of joy, holding the 
gifts of yajna in your hands. In the company of the 
noblest people, favoured by the generous powers of 
nature, reach the heavens of bliss and establish 
yourselves in the regions of light. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 517 
66. (Agni Devata, Vidhriti Rshi) 


write ufasi of fasts qissifasag d 
favarssmsm drat fa cep a afe fae 
ade nggi 


Pracimanu pradisam prehi vidvanagneragne 
puro’ agnirbhaveha. Visva’asa didyano vi 
bhahyurjam no dhehi dvipade catuspade. 

Agni, man of knowledge and power, go ahead 
and move eastward to the rising sun. In front of Agni, 
lord of light and power, be agni yourself, a brilliant man 
of the front rank here and now. Shine, and around 
yourself illuminate the environment and create food and 
energy for our fellow humans and our animals. 


67. (Agni Devata, Vidhriti Rshi) 


yens RASS ARASH i 

feat area gerd vacuifdomae nan 
Prthivya'ahamudantariksamaruham anta- 
riksaddivamaruham. Divo nakasya prsthat 
svarjyotiragamaham. 

(With the knowledge of science and the discipline 
of yoga) I rise from the earth to the skies. From the 
skies, I rise to the regions of light, the sun. From the 
regions of the sun, lord of life and joy, I rise to the 
heavens, the regions of eternal bliss and light divine. 


68. (Agni Devata, Vidhriti Rshi) 


Taian mtaas ureszlefa teat i 
aa 3 feasedismreufegresutr fedt nee 


Svaryanto napeksanta'a dyam rohanti rodasi. 
Yajnam ye visvatodharam suvidvamso vitenire. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


518 YAJURVEDA 


Those virtuous men of knowledge who perform 
yajna and expand it, yajna which sustains the whole 
world, they expect nothing of the material world and, 
through yoga, rise above the earth and heaven and 
ascend to the regions of bliss and light divine. 


69. (Agni Devata, Vidhriti Rshi) 


ar Uf vat daaa agiata uela i 
gdan seit: Gira: verdi-q asta: Taher ou 


Agne prehi prathamo devayatam caksurdeva- 

namuta martyanam. Iyaksamana bhrgubhih 
sajosah svaryantu yajamanah svasti. 

Agni, man of knowledge and yajna, you are the 

first among men on way to godliness. You are the eye 


for the average humans as you have the vision of the 
men of divinity. 


May the people of faith and love full of devotion 
dedicated to yajna and performing yajna with men of 
knowledge and vision of divinity enjoy peace and 
happiness and ascend to the heaven of bliss and life 
divine. 

70. (Agni Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 
m wur feat sms fympHehenret d 
maaan watssrdanta dasa apa 
gfauttar: noon 


Naktosasa samanasa virupe dhapayete 
sisumekam samici. Dyavaksama rukmo’ 
antarvibhati deva'agnim dharayan dravinodah. 

Just as the mother and the nurse, different of 
character and status but of equal mind and common 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 519 


purpose, nurse one baby, so do the night and dawn, 
different in form as darkness and light but harmonious 
and equal of purpose, nurse one new born, the sun, Agni. 
The brilliant sun blazes between the earth and heaven 
as the source of light and symbol of cosmic yajna. 
Dedicated people who offer libations of holy materials 
sustain the yajna fire in honour of cosmic Agni for light 
and nourishment. 


71. (Agni Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 


art ageng yaoi d UOT: weet ST: od 
amaleri masih aet a fata anita 
xermel negu 


Agne sahasraksa $atamurdharichatam te pranah 
sahasram vyanah. Tvam sahasrasya raya īśişe 
tasmai te vidhema vajaya svaha. 


Agni, lord of a thousand eyes and hundred heads, 
hundred fold are your pranic energies of life, thousand- 
fold are your energies of action and volition in living 
beings and in nature. Thousand-fold is the wealth of 
the world you create and govern. To this generous lord 
of life and energy we offer our homage with libations 
into the fire with total dedication, without reservation. 


72. (Agni Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 
gasi ecd uei diem: ela (smar«afiarrdur 
SAR feaqdera asta fassaadi ern 


Suparno’si garutman prsthe prthivyah sida. 
Bhasa’ntariksama prna jyotisa divamuttabhana 
tejasa disa’uddrnha. 


Agni, lord of light and life, magnanimous of 
nature, settle on the face of the earth and bless it with 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


520 YAJURVEDA 


life. Fill the sky with light. Illuminate the heaven with 
light and glory. Enrich the directions of space with life 
and splendour. 


73. (Agni Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 


Ajuhvanah supratikah purastádagne svam 
yonimasida sadhuya. Asmintsadhasthe’ 
adhyuttarasmin vi$ve deva yajamanasca sidata. 


Agni, lord of light and life, invoked and invited 
in yajna, splendid and gracious in form, come and settle 
in your own seat in front, in the east. The yajamana and 
all the noble souls may sit and grace this home now as 
well as later. May Agni shower divine grace upon us, 
the yajamana, and all the noble souls in this life and 
hereafter. 


74. (Savita Devata, Kanva Rshi) 


vresdfergeitueres ferarare dut gaf farata 
TA West 


Tam saviturvarenyasya citrama’ham vrne 

sumatim visvajanyam. Yamasya kanvo aduhat- 

prapinam sahasradharam payasa mahim gam. 

I dedicate myself to this chosen Lord Savita’s 

rich, generous and wonderful divine intelligence which 

gives a thousand showers of universal knowledge and 

which the man of vision distils from the mother 

knowledge of the Vedas just like milk from the great 
mother cow. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 521 


75. (Agni Devata, Gritsamada Rshi) 
feed a aa eden fade aire? cert oa 
weHrErinarfem at od w a wdtesfd wert 
aià "eun 
Vidhema te parame janmannagne vidhema stom- 
airavare sadhasthe. Yasmadyonerudaritha yaje 
tam pra tve havinsi juhure samiddhe. 

Agni, supreme of manifestation in the highest 
region of existence, we honour and worship you. In this 
world, in this home, this side of that supreme region we 
celebrate and worship you. The place you emerge from, 
and the state whence you arise, we sanctify and love to 
join. And when you are ablaze in flames of glory, we 
offer fragrant libations in honour and homage to you. 


76. (Agni Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


watsa difats gt atssterar grat weno | 
vares$sr9d-assderfza atat: mes 

Preddho agne didihi puro no' jasraya surmya 
yavistha. Tvain $a$vanta'upayanti vajah. 


Agni, brilliant and most youthful power, arise in 
flames and blaze with incessant waves of light right in 
front of us. And may a perpetual line of worshipful 
devotees and a continuous flow of fragrant food come 
to you in homage. 


77. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi) 


aT Taga HANA: hos NT, | 
»meguTHÍ ass: noon 


Agne tamadya$vanna stomaih kratunna 
bhadrain hrdispr$am. Rdhyama ta'ohaih. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


522 YAJURVEDA 


Agni, like a beautiful horse, like a darling 
ambition nursed in the heart, like a blissful yajna 
sustained with holy chants, we celebrate you in the fire 
and perpetuate you with homage, and we pray we too 
may advance in life and virtue. 


78. (Vishvakarma Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


Fatt were water gaa wed asgari- 
glarssearael:i uci faser yet agit farserchrir 
fasareratszrezfer: wedi 


Cittim juhomi manasa ghrtena yatha deva’ 
ihagaman vitihotra’rtavrdhah. Patye vi$vasya 
bhumano juhomi visvakarmane visvaha’ 
dabhyam havih. 

With concentrated mind and thought I offer 
homage to Agni with libations in the fire, so that the 
noblest people, lovers of yajna and promoters of truth, 
come here (and join in homage for advancement. And 
in company) every day I offer sacred and intrepidable 
libations of havi to Vishvakarma, lord maker and 
sustainer of the great good universe. 


79. (Agni Devata, Saptarshi Rshis) 
"ud tern udt: xa Bret: aasta: uud 
amt Aat | act erat: regem ved asta aa 
arintgura yet wemet nos 


Sapta te’agne samidhah sapta jihvah sapta’ 
rsayah sapta dhama priyani. Sapta hotrah 
saptadha tva yajanti sapta yonira prnasva 
ghrtena svaha. 


Agni, seven are the samidhas (sticks of sacred 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 523 


fuel) whereby you rise and shine. Seven are your tongues 
of flame whereby you devour the food. Seven are the 
Rishis, visionaries of knowledge and piety who invoke 
you for homage. Seven are your darling places, contexts, 
wherein you love to shine and play. Seven are the priests 
who seven-ways do homage and seven-fold extend your 
blessings. Seven are the places, vedis, where from you 
manifest and grow. Fill all these places with ghee and 
your blessings, grow and prosper and let us too grow 
and prosper. This is the divine voice. 


80. (Maruts Devata, Saptarshis Rshis) 


wera fares aearatfaga wurfd- 
CIITA | MRVASHAAPSARET: UCM 
Sukrajyotisca citrajyotisca satyajyoti$ca jyoti- 
smansca. Sukrasca’rtapascatyamhah. 

Lord of pure light, and lord of wondrous light, 
and lord of the light of truth, and lord of light and the 
lord light itself, lord pure and immaculate, and the lord 
protector of truth, the Law and the cosmic yajna of 
existence and the lord sinless of infinite virtue is He. 


(May the Maruts, heroes of the speed of lightning, 
grace our yajna). 
81. (Maruts Devata, Saptarshi Rshis) 
$qx cetur eb aga a RE ow od 
faasa aaga wu 22 


Idrn canyadrn ca sadrn ca pratisadrn ca. 
Mitasca sammitasca sabharah. 


Men of single vision, men of others’ (objective) 
vision, men of comprehensive vision, men of discreet 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


524 YAJURVEDA 


vision, men of measure, men measured around by all, 
and men who support and sustain all — they are the 
men, they are the Maruts who succeed at top speed. 


82. (Maruts Devata, Saptarshis Rshis) 


Edge uem seu smuivu | 
at at faat wd ferma: iz su 


Rtasca satyasca dhruvasca dharunasca. Dharta 
ca vidharta ca vidharayah. 


The man of the knowledge of truth and law, the 
man of reality dedicated to truth, the man stable and 
steadfast, the man support-column of the stable and 
steadfast, the man who bears and forbears, the man who 
bears and forbears the variety of reality, and the man of 
versatility who faces all and bears all in a variety of 
ways — this man is one of the Maruts who move at top 
speed. 


83. (Maruts Devata, Saptarshi Rshis) 


sEdfsred casted rre Weal d 
adiasa qissifimwr Tur: te 3 0 


Rtajicca satyajicca senajicca susena$ca. Anti- 
mitrasca dure 'amitra$ca ganah. 


The man master of the Law and reality, master of 
the truth of reality, master of his forces, the man with 
close friends around and the man whose enemies are 
few and far — this is the man, one of the Maruts, who 
wins at top speed, with his comrades. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 525 


84. (Maruts Devata, Saptarshis Rshis) 


$qsusudrgasdusm w ul: agate: ufdugams- 
uds à adsa ufidardr asara asia meat 


WASARA ux 

Idrksasa’ etadrksasa’u su nah sadrksasah prati- 
sadrksasa'etana. Mitasa$ca sammitaso no’adya 
sabharaso maruto yajne’asmin. 


Men of this character and vision, men of similar 
character and vision, men of comprehensive character 
and vision, men of equal character and vision for 
everyone, men of balanced mind and men of definiteness 
and ascertainment in all matters — these are the Maruts 
among humanity who may, to-day, come and join this 
yajna of ours. 


85. (Maruts Devata, Saptarshi Rshis) 


vadatga wart A oureauase edt i 

met cb vment ase cai 

Svatavansca praghasi ca santapanasca grha- 
medhi ca. Kridi ca Saki cojjesi. 

The man inherently valiant and firmly rooted, 
who maintains good health with nourishments, who 
endures and gives a hot pursuit to the enemy, who is 
dedicated to the home, who loves sports, is powerful, 
and who is ambitious to win, such a man is Marut, a 
live wire. May the Maruts join our yajna. 


86. (Maruts Devata, Saptarshis Rshis) 


se adifast vedisdanhisuaaag drefrfémil 
Tedstaatttstery | waft astra dete fait 
Aaa Wed ug il 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


526 YAJURVEDA 


Indram daivirvi$o maruto'nuvartmano 'bhavan 
yathendram daivirviso maruto'nuvartmano'- 
bhavan. Evamimam yajamanam i daivi$ca viso 
manusis$canuvartmano bhavantu. 


The noble scholars of virtue and wisdom, the 
distinguished citizens and the smartest warriors should 
follow Indra, in the manner in which all noble scholars, 
noble citizens and smart warriors ought to follow Indra, 
the ruler of the land. 


All the noble scholars, noble citizens and the 
smartest warriors should follow Indra, the ruler of the 
universe. 


Similarly all the noble scholars, distinguished 
citizens and the average people should follow this 
yajamana. 


(The ruler too should act and behave in a noble 
manner so that all the noble scholars, distinguished 
citizens and the average people follow him 
spontaneously and faithfully.) 


87. (Agni Devata, Saptarshis Rshis) 
Bae cer sarai wdl-aur uz uel i 
sed wu Bebe anfgacedaarfaerest uon 


Imam stanamurjasvantam dhayapam prapina- 
magne sarirasya madhye. Utsam jusasva 
madhumantamarvantsamudriyain sadanama- 
vis$asva. 


Agni, lord of light and power, in the midst of this 
world, drink of this nature's motherly breast of energy 
replete with the nectar of life. Foremost among the 
fastest heroes, drink deep at this fountain head of honey- 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 527 


sweets. Enter this oceanic house of yajna, (expand and 
go round the world). 


88. (Agni Devata, Gritsamada Rshi) 


"d ffugr eden arta ferar wee ast a 
arpedirHIdg madea caretpd qor afar 

T ucc 

Ghrtam mimikse ghrtamasya yonirghrte Srito 

ghrtamvasya dhama. Anusvadhamavaha 

madayasva svahakrtam vrsabha vaksi havyam. 


I wish to mix and go deep into water/ghee for 
offering it into the fire. Fire arises from water/ghee, 
which is its birth-place. It is latent in water/ghee. Water/ 
ghee is its place of rest. Prepare the materials for the 
libation and call up Agni. Generous power of rain 
shower, prepare the materials for the offering and make 
us all rejoice. (The indication is to prepare the waters 
and produce fire/energy from this rich source.) 


89. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


quaga us satrauresypm GHATS 
Ee TH Wel erar fid Brat Partha ea ATP: ues 


Samudradurmirmadhuman ’udaradupamsuna 
samamrtatvamanat. Ghrtasya nama guhyam 
yadasti jihva devanamamrtasya nabhih. 

Honey waves of energy arise from the sea/vedi 
and, mixing with the rays of the sun, ascend to a state 
of divine vitality. These rising waves are tongues of the 
gods (divine powers of nature), and the central birth- 
place of nectar. These are the mystical names of the 
mysterious but still scientific powers of ghrta/the sea 
through the process of yajna. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


528 YAJURVEDA 


90. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 
aa "TH wam Tae Ga ara AAT: |d 
sd gen Jasen ud: Tgisatita_ S- 
Wad Soll 
Vayam nama pra bravama ghrtasyasmin yajne 
dharayama namobhih. Upa brahma srna- 
vacchasyamanam catuhsrngo’vamid gaura 'etat. 


In this yajna we chant and meditate upon the 
mystical name of ‘yajna’, of ghee, waters and the spirit 
of fertility, and with all reverence, salutations, faith and 
holy offerings, observe, perform and internalize yajna 
as name and as the creative act that it is. May Brahma, 
the presiding priest, man of the Vedas and generous 
teacher, hear the celebrated name and expound its 
meaning and value to others. 


91. (Yajna Purusha Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


Aa Tet AaSSNa ura g vire wur evatarssreri 
fat ast Aa Givdifa wet car wedsus 
amfetasrim g u 


Catvari srnga trayo’asya pada dve Sirse sapta 
hastaso’asya. Tridha baddho vrsabho roraviti 
maho devo martyan'a vivesa. 


(i). Yajna is a purusha, a living person, a metaphor. 
Just as a person is a living human being, and he/she has 
a name which is identical with the person, so is yajna, a 
living act and a name, and the name-word is identical 
with the act. (1) This person, the living act of yajna, has 
four heads, the four Vedas. It has three legs/sessions: 
morning, mid-day and evening. It has two heads, the 
prayaniya ceremony (inauguration), and the udayaniya 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 529 


ceremony (valediction or conclusion). It has seven arms 
in the form of seven chhandas, gayatri and other metres. 
It is tied three-ways, structured in three parts: Mantra, 
the original vedic texts, Brahmana, expositions 
containing rules and explanations, and kalpa, rules of 
ritual performance. It is Vrishabha, that which showers 
joy and prosperity. It roars with the voice of the Vedas. 
It is great, it is brilliant and divine, and it is seated in 
the deepest layers of the human mind. 


(ii). Now the name ‘Yajna’, the word in language: 
It has four heads: Nama, nouns or substantives, Akhyata, 
the roots and verbs, Upasarga, the affixes, and Nipata, 
particles, indeclinables and irregulars. It has three legs: 
past, present and future tenses. It has two heads: the 
eternal Word and the structured words of language in 
use, and the word and its meaning (signification). It has 
seven arms: the seven cases and case endings or case 
forms. It is tied three ways: in the mind/intellect, in the 
chest, and in the throat/mouth. It is a Vrishabha, it 
showers the thoughts and emotions in communication, 
and it roars through the medium of sound. It is great, it 
is rich and brilliant and it is seated in the deepest layers 
of the human mind. 


(This mantra gives a comprehensive abstract of 
the linguistic structure of any language, and on the basis 
of this abstract a universal grammar of human language, 
any form of it, can be written.) 


92. (YajnaPurusha Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 
fet fed Rheni r carat qand- 
fae | ggu wasn areca 
Frag: ue 2 u 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


530 YAJURVEDA 


Tridha hitam panibhirguhyamanam gavi devaso 
ghrtamanvavindan. Indra’ ekam surya’ ekam 
jajana venadekain svadhaya nistataksuh. 

The mystique of yajna/ghee/waters, three-way 
hidden and three-way studied in quietude by 
knowledgeable people, the visionaries sought and found 
it in the cow, the Veda and nature. One was found and 
revealed by Indra, specialist of electric energy, one by 
the specialist of solar energy, and one was received from 
the scholars of the Vedas and enacted with oblations by 
the devotees of yajna. 


93. (YajnaPurusha Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


warssidf«r galeqgresdaasr Raunt areal od 
"aeg smdsarfrenenvyffu füruse eur nets- 


SITHTH lS 31 


Eta'arsanti hrdyat samudracchatavraja ripuna 
navacakse. Ghrtasya dhara’abhicakasimi 
hiranyayo vetaso madhya'asam. 


These waves of cosmic energy, these vibrations 
of the cosmic boom of the Word, issue from the oceanic 
depths of the Eternal Mind. In countless streams they 
flow all round, not even an enemy can deny them. And 
I, a soul wrapped in golden hue, stand in the midst of 
these waves like a reed and feel the power and the 
beatitude blowing through me. 


94. (YajnaPurusha Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


wae Gata fidt + Atsara Aa WETHÉRT: | 
vissie gered gysga farmurmirdarum: esl 
Samyak sravanti sarito na dhena’antarhrda 
manasa puyamanah. Ete’arsantyurmayo 
ghrtasya mrga’iva ksipanorisamanah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 531 


These waves of divine energy, vibrations of the 
divine voice issue forth from yajna and, purified by the 
mind in faith, flow serene and quiet like streams through 
the heart within, away from the fluctuations of the outer 
world, as deer fly away from the fear of a tiger/hunter. 


95. (YajnaPurusha Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


Reratha wear slate adaa: uaafwa cr: 
"deu smdssreur Cp anit aret fire: 
für: usu t 


Sindhoriva pradhvane $ughana$o vatapramiyah 
patayanti yahvah. Ghrtasya dhara’aruso na vāji 
kastha bhindannurmibhih pinvamanah. 


The mighty streams of ghrita, waves of cosmic 
energy and vibrations of yajnic voice, issue forth (from 
the divine) and flow incessantly (into the universe) as 
the turbulent streams of a river blown upon by the wind 
hasten through their course and fall into the sea, or, as a 
fearless troop of horse breaking through the enemy 
defences goes forth to victory winning over the field 
with the speed of its motion in the heat of action. 


96. (YajnaPurusha Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 

ahead ata art: neun: cudurnmus- 
aR (gau ant: afhett wera at aaron eater 
wear: ues 
Abhi pravanta samaneva yosah kalyanyah 
smayamanaso 'agnim. Ghrtasya dharah samidho 
nasanta ta jusano haryati jatavedah. 

Just like young women of equal mind and 


pleasing, noble and generous, smiling in festive mood, 
the streams of ghrita (ghee) flow from all round and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


532 YAJURVEDA 


join Agni to feed the holy fuel. And Agni, pleased with 
the offering, blazes with heat and light. 

So do the waves of energy and the vibrations of 
the divine voice of yajna meet the dedicated man who 
happily receives them and shines with the light of 
knowledge. 


97. (YajnaPurusha Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


aasa üdgHdsrs3sasreresmrar53Tf3rerton- 
wirft 1 aa curd: gad at ast wp mts 
weder ngen 


Kanya’iva vahatumetava'u anjyanjana’abhi 
cakasimi. Yatra somah suyate yatra yajno 
ghrtasya dhara’abhi tat pavante. 

Just as a lovely maiden dressed in luxurious finery 
at her wedding goes to meet her groom, so do the streams 
of ghrita flow from all sides to meet Agni where yajna 
is performed and soma is generated for the light and 
energy of life. 

I perceive the flow of light and energy and I feel blest. 


98. (YajnaPurusha Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


anada qefi vredurfsrenrd wer ufetumf era à 
Ba aa dad gaat ouem INT Hela use 


Abhyarsata sustutim gavyamajimasmasu bhadra 
dravinani dhatta. Imam yajnam nayata devata 
no ghrtasya dhara madhumat pavante. 


Powers of Divinity, bless us with creditable 
praise, plenty of food and drink and knowledge, and 
victory in the battles of life. Bless us with auspicious 
and excellent wealths of the world. Carry this yajna of 
ours to a noble finale. Let the honey streams of ghrita 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVII 533 
flow to Agni in our homes. 


99. (YajnaPurusha Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


arta fava yaf fara: das gear od 
stare ahs asemaa wetted as- 
HW eeu 


Dhamam te visvam bhuvanamadhi $ritamantah 
samudre hrdyantarayusi. Apamanike samithe 
ya’ abhrtastamasyama madhumantam 
ta'urmim. 

Yajna Purusha, Agni, Lord of the universe, in your 
domain, under your law and power rests the entire world 
of existence. In this domain, whatever is contained in 
the oceans of space, in the splendour of the skies, in the 
heart, in life, in yajna, to that we may attain. May we 
have the taste of the honey-sweets of that cosmic yajna, 
may we have the feel of that universal energy. 


gla maas: di 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


534 YAJURVEDA 


CHAPTER-XVIII 


1. (Agni Devata, Devas Rshis) 


aniva d vaasa d udaya A ufdfasa A 
efrferg el À mdra À ratsa À yehya À sry À 
afiva À sira À ara À ast Re 112 11 


Vājaśca me prasavaśca me prayati$ca me 
prasitisca me dhiti$ca me kratuśca me svarasca 
me $loka$ca me $rava$ca me $ruti$ca me Jyoti$ca 
me svasca me yajnena kalpantam. 


By yajna, by the Grace of God, by virtue of our 
joint action, by virtue of my own performance: food is 
mine and energy is mine; prosperity is mine and the 
way to prosperity is mine; effort is mine and the will to 
effort is mine; management is mine and preservation is 
mine; faith is mine and firmness is mine; vision is mine 
and resolution is mine; freedom is mine and discipline 
is mine; praise is mine and the tongue is mine; the heard 
is mine and the spoken is mine; shruti (Veda) is mine 
and Smriti (law and tradition) is mine; light is mine and 
illumination is mine; joy is mine and supreme bliss is 
mine; all these may grow, all these be favourable; all 
these be auspicious for all, by yajna. 


2.  (Prajapati Devata, Devas Rshis) 
wora Assad A asa Asdsa A fad d 
uss a À are a A aya À ouais A smd 
a À adra À ad a Hour Heo s 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 535 


Prana$ca me’ pana$ca me vyana$ca me’ susca 
me cittam ca ma'adhitam ca me vak ca me 
manasca me caksu$ca me $rotram ca me 
daksasca me balam ca me yajnena kalpantam. 


By yajna, by the Grace of God, by the blessings 
and goodwill of the community, and by virtue of my 
own discipline: my life and the breath of life, the 
outgoing air and systemic cleansing, the joints and 
suppleness of the body, my will to live and the spirit of 
joy, my mind and my memory, my resolution and 
meditation, my speech and listening, my thought and 
self-image, my eye and love of direct truth, my ear and 
search for confirmation, my expertise and my smartness, 
my strength and prowess, all these may grow, be 
favourable and auspicious for all, by yajna. 


3. (Prajapati Devata, Devas Rshis) 


sinter À mesa usenet od À aye À et a 
Rat a Assit a Ase aw a oudse$fu a 
a wth a ussmdse À wa ad A cun 
HCO NN 


Ojasca me sahasca ma’ atma ca me tanu$ca me 
Sarma ca me varma ca me’ ngani ca me’ sthini 
ca me parunsi ca me Sarirani ca ma’ ayu$ca me 
jara ca me yajnena kalpantam. 


My vigour and my power, my victory and my 
moral courage, my soul and my potential, my body and 
health, my home and my family, my defence and my 
weapons, my limbs and their functions, my bones and 
my blood, my generation and my vitality, the bodies 
and health of my people, my life and longevity, my old 
age and self-dependence, all these may grow, be good 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


536 YAJURVEDA 


and auspicious, for me and for all by yajna, observance 
of Dharma, law and joint and individual discipline. 


4.  (Prajapati Devata, Devas Rshis) 


wem] c nsen uod mard À ana 
Asse assiva À der a aie e 3p afer di 
"p uferar cci a afer d a ghar a A ag a a 
afara douane aeons isi 


Jyaisthyam cama’ adhipatyam ca me manyusca 
me bhamasca me’masca me’mbhasca me jema 
ca me mahima ca me varima ca me prathima ca 
me varsima ca me draghima ca me vrddham ca 
me vrddhisca me yajnena kalpantam. 


By yajna, joint action and observance of Dharma 
and law, community and participative discipline of my 
freedom : my fame and my wealth, my self-rule and my 
ruler, my passion and my love of peace, my righteous 
anger and moral discipline, my honour and my sense of 
justice, my waters and my fruitfulness, my valour and 
my victories, my grandeur and my reputation, my 
greatness and my conduct, my expansion and my 
domain, my seniority and my humility, my loftiness and 
my depth, my riches and sense of values, my growth 
and sense of limitations, all these may be strong and 
firm, grow and be good for me and for all, by yajna. 


5. (Prajapati Devata, Devas Rshis) 
aa cb Hp aa t A tea d ot a À fag a 
d mdra d mist d d Hsu Awd dod 
aem a À gad cd A yd cd A aad 
PAAT dis I 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 537 


Satyam ca me Sraddha ca me jagacca me 
dhanam ca me visvam ca me mahasca me krida 
ca me moda$ca me jatam ca me janisyamanam 
ca me suktam ca me sukrtam ca me yajnena 
kalpantam. 


By yajna, Grace of God and observance of 
Dharma: Truth is mine and the good of all is mine to 
work for, faith is mine and the reason and basis of faith 
is mine, the dynamic world is mine and the sense of 
change is mine, the wealth is mine and the sense of 
value is mine, all life is mine and all its opportunities 
are mine, glory is mine and the respect for glory is mine, 
fun is mine and games are mine, joy of the world is 
mine and the freedom of liberation is mine, all that is 
born is mine and I am for it, all that is being created is 
for me and I am for it, all that will be created will be for 
me and I shall be for it, all that has been said well is for 
me and I am for it, all that has been well done is for me 
and I am for it, all these and all my good words, thoughts 
and deeds may grow and be firm and favourable for me 
and for all by virtue of yajna. 


6.  (Prajapati Devata, Devas Rshis) 
Ed ot Asad a Asagi cu Asaa À wien 
a dead wb aaa a asda aA ga aa 
was a A geet 8 ga a A Gat eneusdns t 
Rtam ca me’mrtam ca me’yaksmam ca me’- 
namayacca me jivatusca me dirghayutvam ca 
me’ namitram ca me’ bhayam ca me sukham ca 


me Sayanam ca me susasca me sudinam ca me 
yajnena kalpantam. 


My knowledge and practice of truth and Dharma, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


538 YAJURVEDA 


my immortal spirit and meditation, my freedom from 
illness and exercise, my freedom from suffering and 
my medication, my vitality and tonics, my longevity 
and yoga, my freedom from enmity and love for all, my 
freedom from fear and self-confidence, my joy and 
means of comfort, my sleep and freedom from tension, 
my beautiful dawn and early prayers, my happy day and 
good fortune, may all these grow, be firm and favourable 
for all and for me by yajna, corporate action and the 
Grace of God. 


7. (Prajapati Devata, Devas Rshis) 
aa da gat da ades a gfive a fard wr 
A ése À aired d arta À gee d wqgd a 
at a a cava À our neum wei 


Yanta ca me dharta ca me ksema$ca me dhrtisca 
me vi$vam ca me mahas$ca me samvicca me 
jnatram ca me su$ca me prasuca me siram ca 
me laya$ca me yajnena kalpantam. 


My ruler and my observance of the rules, my 
sustainer and supports, my security and the protector, 
my constancy and self-protection, my world around and 
my behaviour, my nobility and noble actions, my 
awareness and self-knowledge, my field of 
specialisation and my achievement, my inspiration and 
initiative, my potency of generation and my children, 
my agriculture and the farmers, my house and my 
property, all these may grow, be strong and firm and 
good and auspicious for me and for all by yajna, personal 
endeavour, corporate action and the Grace of God. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 539 


8. (Atma Devata, Devas Rshis) 


wd À ndra À fue wd Ass A ard À 
Amase A ya A gidoi a a ag A A Adra 
a ata À usse À aA peA edi 


Sam ca me mayas$ca me priyam ca me'- 
nukamasca me kamas$ca me saumanasasca me 
bhagasca me dravinam ca me bhadram ca me 
Sreya$ca me vastyas$ca me yasas$ca me yajnena 
kalpantam. 

My peace and well-being, and my comfort and 
happiness, and my love, and my desire, and my ambition, 
and the good cheer of my mind, and my dignity, and 
my wealth, and my worldly good, and my ultimate good, 
and my advancement, and my honour and glory, may 
all these grow and be good and auspicious by yajna for 
all. 


9.  (Atma Devata, Devas Rshis) 


web da gid a À ads À sa À ud ub oW 
"Web frufisiyer A adhara A paret À after 
a St a ussite a A aad eneusW ue 


Urk ca me sunrtà ca me payasca me rasas$ca me 
ghrtam ca me madhu ca me sagdhis$ca me 
sapiti$ca me krsi$ca me vrsti$ca me jaitram ca 
ma’audbhidyam ca me yajnena kalpantam. 
And my food pure and delicious, and my speech 
true and pleasing, and my milk and drink, and my tonics 
and herbal essences, and my ghrita and butter, and my 
honey and sweets, and my food and dessert, and my 
drinks and dressings, and my farming and special 
breeding, and the rains for us and the libations, and our 
man-power and our accomplishments, and our minerals 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


540 YAJURVEDA 


and the tonic roots, may all these grow and be good and 
firm and auspicious by yajna for all. 


10. (Atma Devata, Devas Rshis) 
tase À dya d ws ot À yiya d fay ot A 


uy t a gaa uuidi aa ende a Asad a 
ast a Aseter round Hea gol 


Rayi$ca me raya$ca me pustam ca me pusti$ca 
me vibhu ca me prabhu ca me purnam ca me 
purnataram ca me kuyavam ca me’ksitam ca 
me nnam ca me’ ksucca me yajnena kalpantam. 


My wealth of knowledge and power of action, 
my wealth of possessions and all round prosperity, my 
health and growth, our public health and nourishment, 
my mental expansion and intellectual growth, my self- 
mastery and meditation, my fulfilment and its relevance 
to life, my worldly advancement and philanthropy, my 
management of damage and pollution of crops, my foods 
and my delicacies, and our management of hunger and 
thirst and shortages, may all these grow and be strong 
and auspicious for all by yajna. 


11. (Shrimadatma Devata, Devas Rshis) 
fad dA ad aa ad d Gdpowfered A aT 
ub a quad wo uses wb useidesd d aad 
bd ugfdss 4 ouf a quiet d usd 
HUA 9 9 M 


Vittam ca me vedyam ca me bhutam ca me 
bhavisyacca me sugam ca me supathyam ca ma’ 
rddham ca ma’rddisca me klrptam ca me 
klrpti$éca me mati$ca me sumati$ca me yajnena 
kalpantam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 541 


All my thought and whatever I have thought out, 
all that I know and ought to know, my past and my 
present, all my future and all my timeless, all my short- 
cuts and my proper actions, my treatments and my 
diagnoses, my riches and my achievement, my spiritual 
wealth and my fulfilments, my intentions and my 
imaginations, my reflections and my reasons, my 
understanding and my analyses, my intelligence and my 
faith and commitments, all these may grow, and be 
strong and auspicious by yajna for all. 


12. (Dhanyada Atma Devata, Devas Rshis) 


Jedra a aatra A matsa À faciva A qanm 
ù aalsa UO Aagaaya Asutaya A yaniv 
Ud Aana À masa d omnia d at 
HOOT NRN 


Vrihayasca me yavasca me masasca me tilas$ca 
me mudgasca me khalvasca me priyangavasca 
me’ nava$ca me $yamaka$ca me nivaras$ca me 
godhumas$ca me masuras$ca me yajnena 
kalpantam. 


My paddy and rice, and my barley, and my beans, 
and my sesamums, and my mungo beans, and my 
legumins, and my long pepper, and my small grains, 
and my millet, and my wild grains, and my wheat, and 
my lentils and all other grains, and their preparations, 
may all these grow in plenty, rich and delicious, by yajna 
and scientific treatment for all. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


542 
13. 


YAJURVEDA 


(Ratnavandhanavanatma Devata, Devas Rshis) 


spat a À ude a a fides d udaya d 
fuaeharsur À madara À fedus a üsdsc A 
va od A eee A dt a a ad a A ue 
HOUT UVB U 

Asma ca me mrttika ca me giraya$ca me 
parvatasca me sikataSca me vanaspatayasca me 
hiranyam ca me’ ya$ca me $yamam ca me loham 


ca me sisam ca me trapu ca me yajnena 
kalpantam. 


Our stones and gems, and our clay and its 


varieties, and our clouds and crops, and our mountains 
and hills and valleys, and our sands and pebbles, and 
our herbs and trees, and our gold and minerals, and our 
iron and steels, and our sapphires and other gems, and 
our copper and bronze, and our lead and its varieties, 
and our zinc and brass, all these may develop by the 
yajna of scientific treatment and grow good and 
auspicious for all of us. 


14. 


(Agnyadiyukta atma Devata, Devas Rshis) 


anasa ussmdyer d dieedsa usstdeaga d 
perad Hsq;euempe Uum ussds- 
siuare À fads À fakiva À yace A spfdiyer 
Ù At RAA NgZ 

Agni$ca ma’apasca me virudhasca ma’osadh- 
ayasca me krstapacyasca me’ krstapacya$ca me 
gramya$ca me pasava’aranyasca me vittam ca 
me vittisca me bhutam ca me bhuti$ca me 
yajnena kalpantam. 


My fire (heat) and electricity, and my waters and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 543 


aquatic wealth, and my shrubs and creepers, and my 
herbs and trees, and my cultivated grains and 
specialities, and my wild fruits and berries, and my 
domestic animals and pets, and my wild beasts and 
animals, and my wealth and dearest possessions, and 
the sweets and dear forms of my past and present, and 
my honour and glory and all the efforts required, all 
these may develop and grow auspicious for all of us, by 
yajna. 


15. (Dhanadiyukta atma Devata, Devas Rshis) 


ad a a aafasd Hou coU whee Asiya 
"suHse asgen «bu Rise À ast Heo u 


Vasu ca me vasati$ca me karma ca me Saktisca 
me 'rtha$ca ma’emasca ma'itya ca me gatisca 
me yajnena kalpantam. 


My assets and articles, and my house and 
community, and my work and workers, and my power 
and love, and my capital and the subscribers, and my 
management and knowledge and competence, and my 
working and technique, and my progress and new 
ventures, all may develop and grow auspicious by 
managerial yajna. 


16. (Agni adividyavid atma Devata, Devas Rshis) 


anase usz-vyu À Adya usse dfe at 
agara À mad UT usgar A Wr Ut USS AIT 
d geaftvs sz À usd ewm ues 


Agni$ca ma 'indra$ca me somasca ma'indra$ca 
me savita ca ma'indra$ca me sarasvati ca ma’ 
indra$ca me pusa ca ma indra$ca me brh- 
aspati$ca ma 'indra$ca me yajnena kalpantam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


544 YAJURVEDA 


Agni, solar energy and magnetic force of the earth 
is mine, and Indra, lord controller of power and energy 
is mine. Soma, nature's power of rain and generosity is 
mine, and Indra, lord justice controller of rain and 
generosity is mine. Savita, power of generation and 
prosperity is mine, and Indra, lord and controller of 
generation and prosperity is mine. Saraswati, divine 
spirit of knowledge, art, and the system of education is 
mine, and Indra, lord and power controller of the value 
and application of knowledge is mine. Pusha, power of 
food and production is mine, and Indra, enlightened 
controller of good nourishment and production is mine. 
Brihaspati, great lord of social activity, manners and 
culture is mine, and Indra, lord controller of social and 
moral values is mine. May all these powers of nature 
and society for development, direction and control grow 
strong and auspicious for me and for all by yajna, social 
action in unison, enlightened guidance and by the Grace 
of God. 


17. (Mitra-aishvaryavan atma Devata, Devas Rshis) 
frase uszuvu À adore usgsu d sm cd 
usara À ast a Hsguiyer À ede UssAVT 
A farà a À xerszwyu À uad neum uu 


Mitraśca ma 'indra$ca me varunasca ma 'indra- 
Sca me dhata ca ma'indra$ca me tvasta ca ma’ 
indra$ca me maruta$ca ma indra$ca me visve 
ca me deva 'indra$ca me yajnena kalpantam. 


Mitra, my pranic energy of breath and energy of 
the system, and Indra, my lustre and electric energy; and 
Varuna, pranic energy ofthe throat and blood circulation, 
and Indra, solar energy of sustenance; and Dhata, my 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 545 


controller and ordainer, and Indra, giver of prosperity; 
and Tvashta, catalytic energy of my system, and my 
endeavour, and Indra, the breaker of my negative forces 
and giver of scientific energy; and the Maruts, cosmic 
wind and body vitality, and Indra, universal energy and 
its scientific use; and all the powers of nature such as 
earth and great powers of humanity, and Indra, lord giver 
of all glory and success; may all these powers grow 
strong and auspicious for me and for all by yajna, joint 
action in the service of nature and by the Grace of God. 


18. (Rajya-aishvaryadiyukta atma Devata, Devas Rshis) 
yrei «i sever s-dféni er usgar À eive 
ussave À wien useave À agafà er sgy 
d fasse usse À uad eus ec 


Prthivi ca ma’indrasca me’ntariksam ca ma’ 
indra$ca me dyau$ca ma 'indra$ca me samasca 
ma 'indra$ca me naksatrani ca ma 'indra$ca me 
dis$as$ca ma indra$ca me yajnena kalpantam. 


The earth and her fertility, and the power that 
controls and regulates that fertility; the sky and the riches 
that exist therein, and the powers that control those 
riches to shower on the earth; and the regions of light 
and the energy therein, and the sun that presides over 
the light; and the yearly rounds of time and its divisions 
and their effects, and the supreme lord of time; and the 
stars and planets and their movements with their effects 
on our environment, and the operative powers of natural 
law that control the movements; and the directions of 
space and the currents of wind and energy therein, and 
the powers that control the weather and the atmosphere; 
may all these regions of space and heavenly bodies and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


546 YAJURVEDA 


the operations of mother Prakriti grow strong and firm 
and be good and auspicious for me and all by yajna, the 
process of replenishment, renewal and enrichment. 


19. (Padarthavid atma Devata, Devas Rshis) 


ares Gi tava Asahaga Asfa us 
sawp Asaatasd ustgarasd dr Aa- 
anya ussiarsd À urease A sphyd 
A me at A ast Heo ee 


Ain$u$ca me rasmisca me’dabhyasca me’- 
dhipatisca ma’ upamsusca me ntaryama$ca ma’ 
aindravayavasca me maitradvarunasca ma’ 
asvinasca me pratiprasthanasca me $ukra$ca me 
manthi ca me yajnena kalpantam. 


The pervasive sun and its light, and the foods 
ripened by the sun rays, the fearless man and the 
protector of the law-abiding, and the presiding power 
and the office thereof, and my holy-chant in meditation 
and concentration on the secrets of mysteries, my mid- 
breath and inner strength, my vital heat that controls 
the winds and electric currents of the body system and 
the water, the pranic vitality related to prana and udana 
(breath and the upper motions of energy wind), and the 
inner light between the solar and the lunar plexi and its 
effects on health, and the energy for movement and my 
movements, and my purity of mind and vital energy, 
and my churner and dairy foods and apparatuses, may 
all these grow strong and be good and auspicious for 
me and for all by yajna. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 547 


20. (Yajna-anushthanatma Devata, Devas Rshis) 


staat A Gygdeyd 8 save A avai 
userad d uerdvadasa d ecce À 
fene Tr ufaave A uRcaave À ureitaageat 
a ethane UJ ast Heo Rott 


Agrayanasca me vaisvadevasca me dhruvasca 
me vai$vanara$ca ma aindragna$ca me 
mahavaisvadevasca me marutvatiyasca me 
niskevalya$ca me savitra$ca me sarasvatasca me 
patnivata$ca me hariyojana$ca me yajnena 
kalpantam. 


My special yajna of the month of Margashirsha, 
and my guests of this noble assembly at the yajna, and 
my settled behaviour and universal hospitality and 
reverence, and my yajna for the development of wind 
and fire energy, and my reverence for the noblest people 
of the world, and my dedication to the yajna of the 
liberation stage of yoga, and my yajna for solar energy, 
and my dedication to the eminent scholars of science 
and literature, and my love and regard for the married 
couples, and my travels, transport and transporters, may 
all these grow and be good and auspicious for me and 
for all by yajna. 


21. (Yajnangavanatma Devata, Devas Rshis) 


adra T ume À arent cr À drones 
À matora Asfa at A Gayest nsona ida 
ù Afira À oaféseb Asewperye Ù eater À 
p RAA NRU 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


548 YAJURVEDA 


Srucasca me camasas$ca me vayavyani ca me 
dronakalas$as$ca me gravana$ca me'dhisavane 
ca me putabhrcca ma 'adhavaniya$ca me vedi$ca 
me barhisca me’vabhrthasca me svagakarasca 
me yajnena kalpantam. 


My ladles and their cleaning, my bowls and their 
contents, my aerial apparatuses and their maintenance 
and function, and my soma vessels, and my urns and 
jugs, and my stone presses and mortars and pestles, and 
my handpress and the soma plants, and my urns of pure 
soma, and the vessels for clearing and filtering soma, 
and the yajna altar, and my holy grass and the feather 
broom, and my holy bath and ablutions, and my 
valedictory chant of joy at the completion of yajna : 
may all these grow and be good and auspicious for me 
and for all by yajna. 


22. (Yajnavanatma Devata, Devas Rshis) 


anast à ative Asche d Give d moret 
Assada À ouferdt a Asara a fafdyor 
a ded Aseda: mah fassa d aad 
HOUT URI 


Agnisca me gharma$ca me'rka$ca me suryasca 
me pranasca me '$vamedha$ca me prthivi ca 
me 'diti$ca me ditisca me dyau$ca me’ngulayah 
Sakvarayo disasca me yajnena kalpantam. 


My fire and my use of fire, my hymns of worship 
and the singers, my passion and cool of mind, my 
sunlight and my warmth of living, my vital breath and 
air-energy, my nation and its policy and governance, 
my earth mother and her riches, my ethics and self- 
control, my imperishable wealth and my earthly life, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 549 


my spiritual light and my days and nights, my fingers 
and their hold and my powers and potentials, and my 
directions and my reach there, all these may grow, be 
good and auspicious for me and for all by yajna. 


23. (Kalavidyavidatma Devata, Devas Rshis) 
ad od usseedsu À adya Ù wanye Ases- 
sda degeaat wb A ast PRAAT e301 


Vratam ca ma’rtavasca me tapasca me samvat- 
sarasca me ’horatre’urvasthive brhadrathantare 
ca me yajnena kalpantam. 

My holy vows and my commitments, and my 
seasons and my solstices with change of the seasons, 
and my observance of Dharma and my practice of yoga, 
and my yearly rounds of the sun and the planets and the 
ages of time, and my days and nights and my daily work 
and prayers, and my thighs and knees, and my grandeur 
and nobility, and my heavenly lights and spaces and 
the cosmic periods, may all these grow by days and 
nights by yajna, and may all these be good and 
auspicious for me and for all. 


24. (Vishamanka-ganitavidyavid atma Devata, Devas Rshis) 
Wenb aH rene Gp frayed À usd a À used a 
Ù aa A Aaa d aad a a ad a oususniayt 
a uuan a À aan cep GT walagl a A 
usay a A Usdast a A Geo a À aaa eT 
WY adan a d aday a s Uchfaxefave 
usuchfarsiiava À aatfavsrfava Tr walfarerfaver 
A ustara À usdfecsrage A cafes 
ù gafra A -rdferzsrferser À aaye 
usuka usuchsred AÀ adaya A 
Gat RAA gx 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


550 YAJURVEDA 


Eka ca me tisra$ca me tisra$ca me parica ca me 
panca ca me sapta ca me sapta ca me nava ca 
me nava ca ma 'ekada$a ca ma’ekadasa ca me 
trayodasa ca me trayodasa ca me pancadasa ca 
me pancadaSsa ca me saptadasa ca me saptadasa 
ca me navadasa ca me navadasa ca ma’ 
ekavimSatisca ma’ekavimsatisca me trayo- 
viins$ati$éca me trayoviin$ati$éca me panca- 
viin$ati$éca me pancavimsatisca me sapta- 
viin$ati$éca me saptaviins$ati$éca me nava- 
viinsati$ca me navavimsatisca ma 'ekatrims$acca 
ma’ ekatriin$acca me trayastrimsacca me 
yajnena kalpantam. 

By yajna, the process of addition and collection, 
may the numbers increase and be good and auspicious 
for me and for all: One is mine and unity is mine. (And 
one and one becomes two, and one plus two becomes 
three. In this way, in this progression) three is mine, 
and three is mine, and five is mine, and five is mine, 
and seven is mine, and seven is mine, and nine is mine, 
and nine is mine, and eleven is mine, and eleven is mine, 
and thirteen is mine, and thirteen is mine,‘ and fifteen 
is mine, and fifteen is mine, and seventeen is mine, and 
seventeen is mine, and nineteen is mine and nineteen is 
mine, and twenty one is mine, and twenty one is mine, 
and twenty three is mine, and twenty three is mine, and 
twenty five is mine, and twenty five is mine, and twenty 
seven is mine, and twenty seven is mine, and twenty 
nine is mine, and twenty nine is mine, and thirty one is 
mine, and thirty one is mine, and thirty three is mine, 
and so on the numbers may increase and be good and 
auspicious for me and for all by the process of yajna in 
progression till infinity. 

Also: By implication, by the same process of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 551 


yajna which also means 'dana', giving away, we have 
the progression in the reverse direction by subtraction. 
The meaning of the mantra then would be: 


Thirty-three is mine, give away two and thirty 
one is mine, thirtyone is mine, minus two, twenty nine 
is mine and so on. 


In the same way, by implication, we can work 
out the process of multiplication, and division and the 
process of squaring and cubing and square-root, etc. 
Further, we can move from arithmetic to algebra and 
other branches of mathematics. 


25. (Samanka-ganitavidyavid atma Devata, Devas Rshis) 


adara Às eb Ase ub À gray cur Hp gay a 
Bas aa wide a A facofave À farorfaget 
Tr adfexetiaga À adfeaxetara Aserre 
Tswerfdesreaver d gitkerer A uwrBiesres d 
wefisresg À weBbsres A aaye À 
aarre A erc ereritsgreor A ayaa gerer 
serdara Hp Gat Hea URI 


Catasra$ca me'stau ca me’stau ca me dvadasa 
ca me dvadasa ca me sodasa ca me sodasa ca 
me viinsati$ca me virnsati$ca me caturvimsatisca 
me caturvimsatisca me'staviins$ati$ca me’- 
stavimSatisca me dvatrimscca me dvatriinsacca 
me sattriin$acca me sattriin$acca me catva- 
riin$acca me catvarimsacca me catuscatvarim- 
Sacca me catuscatvarimscca me’ stacatvariin- 
Sacca me yajnena kalpantam. 


By yajna, the process of addition and collection, 
may the numbers increase and be good and auspicious 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


552 YAJURVEDA 
for me and for all: 


Four is mine, and four is mine, eight is mine. Eight 
is mine, and four, twelve is mine. Twelve is mine, plus 
four, sixteen is mine. Sixteen is mine, add four, and 
twenty is mine. Twenty is mine, and twenty four is mine. 
Twenty four is mine, and twenty eight is mine. Twenty 
eight is mine and thirty two is mine. Thirty two is mine, 
and thirty six is mine. Thirty six is mine, and forty is 
mine. Forty is mine, and forty four is mine. Forty four 
is mine, and forth eight is mine. And so on the numbers 
may increase till infinity by yajna, for me and for all for 
the good of life and joy. 


Also: By implication, the mantra can be applied 
to the process of yajna by ‘dana’, gifting away, 
subtraction, by four, from forty-eight down to four and 
so On. 


The mantra can also be applied to the process of 
multiplication. In fact, the mantra itself gives the 
multiplication table upto twelve times four and so on. 


So too the mantra may be interpreted as showing 
the process of division since it gives a table of the 
division of forty eight by four upto twelve times. 


26. (Pashuvidyavid atma Devata, Devas Rshis) 


afra a wet oH d fear uod facerc a 
usalfasa A wssrer = A fece À Brea cd 


dp quere bp aA t 8 wur Hear iret 


Tryavi$ca me tryavi ca me dityavat ca me 
dityauhi ca me pancavisca me pancavi ca me 
trivatsa$ca me trivatsa ca me turyavat ca me 
turyauhi ca me yajnena kalpantam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 553 


By yajna, veterinary science and the science of 
animal husbandry: 


My man of three breeds of sheep and their 
maintenance, the woman of three breeds of sheep and 
their milk, etc., the man in-charge of damage control 
and his knowledge, and the woman in-charge of 
maintenance against damage and her stores, and the man 
of five grades of sheep and his staff, and the woman of 
five grades of sheep and her assistants, the man of three 
breeds of calf and his knowledge, and the woman of 
three breeds of calf and her knowledge, the bull of the 
fourth year of age and its training and maintenance, and 
the cow of the fourth year of age and its maintenance, 
may all these grow in number and quality and be good 
and auspicious for me and for all. 


27. (Pashuvidyavid atma Devata, Devas Rshis) 
usat cb ù aA cd nss cb od agen od 
used À Agee Usqasise À peu usd 
HUTT URI 


Pasthavat ca me pasthauhi ca ma’uksa ca me 
vasa ca ma’rsabhasca me vehacca me’- 
nadvansca me dhenu$ca me yajnena kalpantam. 


And my beasts of burden both male and female 
and the articles and materials for trade and transport, 
and my virile bull and my infertile cow, and my strong 
bull and my miscarrying cow, and my bullock and my 
milch cow, may all these grow by the yajna of animal 
husbandry and veterinary science and may all these be 
good and auspicious for me and for all. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


554 YAJURVEDA 


28. (Sangramadivid atma Devata, Devas Rshis) 

amta art Weare Taretshista vele vnde velTET 
wd varetseddad tatetse meara waet wren 
afr caret feraefordssrrarerara vererss«tar 
waa emer sper ada eorerfivaa taet 
werd eret (gei et fear aisha aasi 
ver quest cat wsmai catssfatucaray ren 

Vajaya svaha prasavaya svaha’pijaya svaha 
kratave svaha vasave svaha’harpataye svaha’ - 
hne mugdhaya svaha mugdhaya vainainsinaya 
svaha vinamsina’ antyayanaya svaha" ntyaya 
bhauvanaya svaha bhuvanasya pataye svaha’- 
dhipataye svaha prajapataye svaha. Iyam te 
ranmitraya yanta’si yamana 'urje tva vrstyai tva 
prajanam tva" dhipatyaya. 

For the warrior and the battle, all hail and honest 
action! For progress and prosperity, virtuous living and 
hard work! For acceptance and acclaim, commendable 
action! For knowledge and practical application, 
dedication and meditation! For housing and settlement, 
work, money and materials. For the lord of the day, 
knowledge of time and chronology. For the day- 
bewildered and lost, sympathetic action. For the 
misguided and destructive, proper counselling. For the 
man settled but on way to destruction, forceful voice of 
truth. For the lowest and meanest man of the world, 
strongest counselling. For Lord of the universe, hymns 
of praise and worship. For the protector of the world, 
correct knowledge. For the protector of the nation, 
correct policy. For the protector of the people, correct 
knowledge of Raj Dharma. This is your brilliance of 
governance. You are generous, selfless guide and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 555 


controller of your friends. We accept, respect and admire 
you for your prowess and action, showers of favours, 
the support and sustenance of the people, and for the 
government of the people. 


29. (Yajnanushthatatma Devata, Devas Rshis) 


anit coat wort wat acadt uatdat 
SRECUGTHIGIT Gat edad Tan Gat Head AAA 
Head! ys ayaa A Ud cep Gee 
v9ravocizedersasrmT ual s2TqH Garda: WATS: 
we vert us 


Ayuryajnena kalpatam prano yajnena kalpatam 
caksur yajnena kalpatam Srotram yajnena 
kalpatam vag yajnena kalpatam mano yajnena 
kalpatamatma yajnena kalpatam brahma 
yajnena kalpatam jyotiryajnena kalpatam 
svaryajnena kalpatam prstham yajanena 
kalpatam yajno yajnena kalpatam. Stomasca 
yajusca’rk ca sama ca brhacca rathantaram ca. 
Svardeva’ aganmamrta’abhuma prajapateh 
praja’abhuma vet svaha. 


a= 


Man of the yajna of governance, to accomplish 
your task, may health and age grow by yajna, may pranic 
energy grow by yajna, may the eye and vision grow by 
yajna, may the ear and information grow by yajna, may 
the tongue and communication grow by yajna, may the 
mind and morale and national confidence grow by yajna, 
may the soul grow strong by yajna, may the man of 
universal knowledge and the sense of higher values 
grow by yajna, may the light of justice and wisdom grow 
by yajna, may comfort and joy grow by yajna, may the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


556 YAJURVEDA 


questions, heights and foundations of life grow by yajna, 
may the yajna of Dharma grow by the yajna, pursuit of 
Dharma, may the hymns of praise and celebration of 
the Divine, the Yajus, the Riks, and the Samans, the 
Brihat Sama and Rathantara Sama also grow by yajna. 
May the noble people attain to the eternal joy of 
immortality. May we all attain to you and immortality. 
May we all be the children of the Lord and father of the 
universe by the truth of word and deed. 


30. (Rajyavanatma Devata, Devas Rshis) 


anter 3 tad urat adtafefa ara acter enit 
wifi faya yira wei at da: daar 
eni wrfemmr uz0l 


Vajasya nu prasave mataram mahimaditim 
nama vacasa karamahe. Yasyamidam visvam 
bhuvanamavivesa tasyam no devah savita 
dharma savisat. 


In this Lord Omnipotent's yajna of life and 
sustenance, we celebrate with holy songs of Divinity, 
the Veda, the great inviolable Mother Nature in whom 
reside the entire worlds of existence. May Savita, lord 
creator and generator of life strengthen and promote 
our Dharma in the lap of the mother within the Law. 


31. (Vishvedevas Devata, Devas Rshis) 
fasdssra med fasdsadt fasd waar: 


"wiftzgr: | faye At asrama asda gfaut 
amsar usc 


Visve’adya maruto vi$va'uti vi$ve bhavant- 
vagnayah samiddhah. Vi$ve no deva'avasa 
gamantu visvamastu dravinam vajo’asme. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 557 


May all the airs and winds come to us. May all 
the powers of protection and promotion, all the noblest 
people of the world, come to us with all the means of 
protection and advancement. May all the fires of life’s 
yajna light and shine for us. May the entire wealth of 
the world, food and energy be available to us by the 
Grace of Savita. 


32. (Annavan Vidvan Devata, Devas Rshis) 
amit 4: arr wfasrsadenr at ured: | 
act at fevdddsidurarfegrdq use 


Vajo nah sapta pradisascatasro va paravatah. 
Vajo no visvairdevairdhanasatavihavatu. 


May our food and energy, power and prosperity, 
spread over the seven regions of the world, and may it 
extend even beyond in all the four directions. And may 
our power and knowledge, with the noblest people of 
the world, guide and protect us here in the acquisition 
and distribution of the wealth of life. 


33. (Annapati Devata, Devas Rshis) 


anit asst wderfa am anit xetsusseqfu: 
aama | art fa ar oue wer favarssien 
erstufesize 113311 


Vajo no’adya pra suvati danam vajo devan’ 
rtubhih kalpayati. Vajo hi ma sarvaviram jajana 
vi$va asa vajapatirjayeyam. 

It is food, energy, power, wealth, which inspires 
us to give in charity. With the seasons, according to 
need, it feeds the powers of nature and humanity. It is 
food and energy which produces and promotes our 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


558 YAJURVEDA 


children and young people. By virtue of the same food 
and power, may I, producer and promoter of food, 
energy and wealth, attain all my hopes to fruition in all 
directions. 


34. (Annapati Devata, Devas Rshis) 


ast: quta Headt At arsit cary ferat aegarfat 
ani fe ur wd wer weissmsm antufa- 
WAG uss 


Vajah purastaduta madhyato no vajo devan 
havisa vardhayati. Vajo hi ma sarvaviram 
cakara sarva’asa vajapatirbhaveyam. 


Food with oblations in yajna takes us forward in 
the beginning and in the middle of home life. With 
oblations it feeds and enriches the powers of nature and 
the noblest people too. It is food which blesses me with 
the best and the bravest powers and people everywhere. 
I pray I may be the producer, promoter and protector of 
food in all directions and realize all my hopes and 
ambitions. 


35. (Rasavidyavid vidvan Devata, Devas Rshis) 


wi at gA usur uísrur a at wmrafaurd- 
ent: 1 aise aera nae 


Sam ma srjami payasa prthivyah sam ma 

srjamyadbhirosadhibhih. So'ham vajain 
saneyamagne. 

Agni, I invigorate and enrich myself with the milk 

and juices of the earth. I invigorate and enrich myself 


with the waters and herbs of the earth. So I invigorate 
and enrich myself with food and energy. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 559 


36. (Rasavidvidvan Devata, Devas Rshis) 
ud: yfi masod uet faeg-fiar wat sm: | 
uka: ufasi: wp Wehr uas 


Payah prthivyam paya’osadhisu payo divy- 
antarikse payo dhah. Payasvatih pradisah santu 
mahyam. 


Agni, man of medicinal herbs and juices, take 
on, hold on to, the juices and tonics in the earth, in the 
herbs, in the regions of light and in the sky and study 
them. And may all the worlds and directions of space 
be full of juices and tonics for me too. 


37. (Samrat Raja Devata, Devas Rshis) 


Serb var ufad: Astat went get- 
SZITH | atte arent aque: arabes 
fisarfe mon 


Devasya tva savituh prasave’ $vinorbahubhyam 
pusno hastabhyam. Sarasvatyai vaco yantur- 
yantrenagneh samrajyenabhisificami. 


In this socio-political yajna of the land in Lord 
Savita's creation, I in-vest you with the power and 
presidency of Agni, the Ruler, and consecrate you with 
the arms of Ashvinis (the heat and passion of the sun 
and the peace and cool of the moon) and the hands of 
Pusha (power of the nation's sustenance with the 
positive and negative current's of the systemic circuit). 
I vest in you the constitution of the sovereign nation 
and sanctify you with the voice of the people in the 
service of Sarasvati, the wisdom and culture of 
humanity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


560 YAJURVEDA 


38. (Rituvidyavid vidvan Devata, Devas Rshis) 


sEdrergdenurfeTb-erdededrWerWsuredt À 
"TH 1a dsga sd api ute qu Cael ate, ats: 
mgt ncn 


Rtasadrtadhama'gnirgandharvastasyau- 
sadhayo 'psaraso mudo nama. Sa na'idam 
brahma ksatram patu tasmai svaha vat tabhyah 
svaha. 

Agni, Lord of the earth and defender of the land, 
Observes truth, defends the truth, and abides in the truth. 
His pleasure and joy is the herbs which grow and play 
in the waters like water nymphs. May he protect and 
promote our Brahma system of education and 
knowledge, and our Kshatra system of defence and 
administration. Homage to him in love and reverence. 
All hail and care for the herbs and waters! 


39. (Surya Devata, Devas Rshis) 
mfra fasaata waft madee mtes- 


andsa ad 1a dsgs aat ga utg qui 
Tal ATE AIA: AE da 


Samhito vi$évasama suryo gandharva-stasya 
maricayo ’psarasa’ayuvo nama. Sa na'idam 
brahma ksatram patu tasmai svaha vat tabhyah 
svaha. 

Surrounded by lights and joining day and night, 
that lord of universal peace and celebrated in all the 
Sama hymns, the sun, is the lord sustainer of the earth. 
His pleasure and joy is the rays of light which play and 
exult in the sky joining and disjoining things in space. 
May he protect and promote our Brahma system of light 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 561 


and education. May he protect and promote our Kshatra 
system of defence and administration. Homage to him 
in truth and faith! AII hail and love to the rays of the 
sun! 


40. (Chandrama Devata, Devas Rshis) 


qor: aaa wader abarseu rdi 
Vata wae ia asge sl at ulq ae carer era 
asa: xemel on 


Susumnah suryarasmiscandrama gandharva- 
stasya naksatranyapsaraso bhekurayo nama. Sa 
na’idam brahma ksatram patu tasmai svaha vat 
tabhyah svaha. 

The moon, blissful at heart and blest by the sun- 
rays with light, is the lord sustainer of the earth. May 
he sustain and promote our Brahma system of peace 
and education. May he sustain and promote our Kshatra 
system of law and administration. His pleasure and joy 
surely is the rays of light which play and exult with the 
planets and satellites. Homage to him! Homage to his 
rays, to light! 


41. (Vatah Devata, Devas Rshis) 


stat faseretur erdt weaderearatssteanrasaait 
art iu dsga srl at ulq qu emer are, dre: 
wrat sei 

Isiro vi$vavyaca vato gandharvastasyapo 
apsarasa urjo nama. Sa na idam brahma 
ksatram patu tasmai saha vat tabhyah svaha. 


The wind, fast in motion and pervading the whole 
world, is the lord and sustainer of the earth. His pleasure 
and joy is the waters which, for sure, create energy. May 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


562 YAJURVEDA 


he sustain and inspire our Brahma system of education 
and advancement. May he sustain and excite our Kshatra 
system of defence and expansion. Homage to him! 
Homage to his waves of waters and energy! 


42. (Yajna Devata, Devas Rshis) 


yey: viuit sat eadera afatorsarcace vara 
ar a dsga wet at ulg ae caret ale area: 
marat isan 


Bhujyuh suparno yajno gandharvastasya 
daksina’apsarasa stava nama. Sa na’idam 
brahma ksatram patu tasmai svaha vat tabhyah 
svaha. 

Yajna, creator and giver of joy and prosperity, 
health and nourishment, is the sustainer of the earth, 
cows and the Word of the Vedas. His pleasure and joy 
is the gifts for the priests and the devotees and the bliss 
of the holy chants which play around in ecstasy. May 
the yajna sustain and promote our Brahma system of 
knowledge and generosity of light and creativity. May 
yajna sustain and advance our Kshatra system of defence 
and development. Homage and libations for yajna! 
Homage and libations for charity and holy chants! 


43. Vishvakarma Devata, Devas Rshis) 


wwmdfeaféaseehui i madee- 
qase ad ia cisgs aat api ulg qui 
Fae ATS AFA: vemed rss 

Prajapatirvi$vakarma mano gandharvastasya’ 
rksamanyapsarasa 'estayo nama. Sa na idam 


brahma ksatram patu tasmai svaha vat tabhyah 
svaha. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 563 


Father and guardian of His children, lord maker 
of the universe, universal Mind, Vishvakarma is the 
sustainer of the earth and master of universal knowledge, 
the Veda. Riks and Samans, Vedas, are the vibrations 
of His omniscience ever on the move across space which 
are the love and desire of the devotees. May He protect 
and promote our Brahma system of education and 
scientific yajna, and our Kshatra system of enlightened 
and modern administration and defence. Homage and 
libations to Him! Homage and libations for the divine 
voice of the Veda! 


44. (Prajapati Devata, Devas Rshis) 


a at *penreg ud cuwmud ced dssufi Wer 
wed ae 1 ate aaltise aaa afe vni ues 
Carat ww 


Sa no bhuvanasya pate prajapate yasya ta'upari 
grha yasya veha. Asmai brahmane'smai 
ksatraya mahi $arma yaccha svaha. 


Father guardian of your children, lord protector 
of the world, all your homes and habitations up above, 
and all your homes and householders down here, bless 
them all. Bless our Brahma system of education and 
enlightenment and our Kshatra system of administration 
and employment with good homes and great peace and 
joy. Homage and libations to the Lord! 


45. (Prajapati Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi) 
wugrsfa wharigaty: ea at aris 
wt i| meds redi wor: srespara at 


ae mrt | sre qharan A at 
arfe carat isu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


564 YAJURVEDA 


Samudro'si nabhasvanardradanuh $ambhur- 
mayobhurabhi ma vāhi svaha. Maruto'si 
marutam ganah $ambhurmayobhurabhi ma vahi 
svaha. Avasyurasi duvasvanchambhurmayo- 
bhurabhi ma vahi svaha. 

Prajapati, father and guardian of creation, vast 
and deep as the ocean, oceans roll around in you. Lord 
of spaces and spatial waters, showering the earth with 
rain and the mind with virtue, you are peace yourself 
and the giver of peace, bliss yourself and the giver of 
bliss. Come and fold me into bliss all round. 


Tempestuous lord of the winds, lord of the stormy 
scholars of the world, you are goodness yourself and 
the giver of universal good. You are prosperity and joy 
yourself and the giver of universal joy and prosperity. 
Come and fold me into the tempestuous storm of 
knowledge and discovery all round. 


You are the supreme lord of protection and 
universal help. You are both lord and object of honour 
and worship, peace and joy yourself and the giver of 
joy and total freedom. Come and fold me into the bliss 
of worship and acceptance all round. 


46. (Agni Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi) 


mdsasr wa we fadurretd taft: 

aNs adhi wet sate ege usd 

Yaste'agne surye ruco divamatanvanti rasmi- 

bhih. Tabhirno' adya sarvabhi ruce janaya 

naskrdhi. 

Agni, lord of the universe, that beauty, light and 

love of yours which shines in the sun and fills the 
heavens and all other spaces of the world with its rays, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 565 


with all those rays of light and beauty and all those 
vibrations of love, bless us today for the people and 
their love. 


47. (Brihaspati Devata, Shunah-shepa Rshi) 


a at dar: gat wet Narda at wet: od 
gehi ata: adhi eet AT erat rud ison 


Ya vo devah surye ruco gosva$vesu ya rucah. 
Indragni tabhih sarvabhi rucam no dhatta 
brhaspate. 


Brihaspati, lord of the great wonderful world, 
brilliant powers of divinity, saints and sages, that light 
and love of yours which shines in the sun, and that which 
reflects in the sun-beams, the earths, fires, sense organs, 
cows and horses, with all that light and love, may Indra, 
lord of universal energy, and Agni, power of universal 
heat and light, and the saints and scholars of the world 
bless us. 


48. (Brihaspati Devata, Shunah-shepa Rshi) 


wet AT ate aa waste menfa | 
wu fagdy veg afl afe war wen wea 


Rucam no dhehi brahmanesu rucam rajasu 
naskrdhi. Rucam visyesu $udresu mayi dhehi 
ruca rucam. 


Brihaspati, lord of the universe, eminent teacher 
and master of vast knowledge, inspire our Brahma 
section of the community—scholars, scientists, teachers 
and researchers with brilliance and love. Infuse 
brilliance, love and justice into our Kshatrias, defence, 
administration and justice section of the community. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


566 YAJURVEDA 


Bless with light, love and generosity our Vaishyas, 
producers and distributors among the community. And 
bless our Shudras, the ancillary services, with light, love 
and loyalty. Bless me with light and love toward us all. 


49. (Brihaspati Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi) 


reat arf sradum erai uraeaarers ersturdr z fef: 
SSSA AGUS ALGO Al ASST: WATT: SF t 


Tattva yami brahmana vandamanastadasaste 
yajamano havirbhih. Ahedamano varuneha 
bodhyurusamsa ma na ayuh pramosih. 


The yajamana, singing Vedic hymns of praise in 
honour of the lord, offers libations of fragrant materials 
with absolute dedication in the hope of self-fulfilment. 
The same I come to you, Varuna, Lord of our love and 
choice, universally worshipped and celebrated. Here I 
am at your door. Kind and favourable lord, know, accept 
and enlighten us, let not life slip through our fingers 
into the sands of time. 


50. (Surya Devata, Shunah-shepa Rshi) 


wot uH: caret 1 equitch: caret 1 equ vr: 
wrat | equt Safa: t | eqqut Wa: Carat uuo 


Svarna gharmah svaha. Svarnarkah svaha. 
Svarna sukrah svaha. Svarna jyotih svaha. 
Svarna suryah svaha. 


Warmth is heavenly, soothing, use it well, for 
yajna. Fire is heavenly, generous, use it well, for yajna. 
Air is heavenly, energy, use it well, for yajna. Light is 
heavenly, power, use it well, for yajna. Sun is heavenly, 
life, miss it not, use it well, for yajna. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 567 


51. (Agni Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi) 


ah daa oder at aenga aden ged 
at aa dae end faeau] velonsatiit 


ATH d?! 


Agnim yunajmi Savasa ghrtena divyam supar- 
nam vayasa brhantam. Tena vayam gamema 
bradhnasya vistapain svo ruhana'adhi 
nakamuttamam. 


I feed the fire with powerful oblations of ghee, 
fire which is divine power and sustainer of life, feeding 
on food and growing higher, mightier and more and 
more pervasive. And thereby, desiring and increasing 
the joys of life, may we rise to the regions of the 
illustrious lord of light, the sun, and ultimately attain to 
the highest level of bliss, the freedom and ecstasy of 
Moksha, beyond all suffering. 


52. (Agni Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi) 


gar d umant wafa memeta erag 
Eh me ude xpendiu cle ASR N: 
Yams: Yo: (di 


Imau te paksavajarau patatrinau yabhyain 
raksansya-pahansyagne. Tabhyam patema 
sukrtamu lokam yatra rsayo jagmuh pratham- 
ajah puranah. 


Agni, lord of light and life, cause and effect, 
consumption of food and creation/production of energy 
and new forms, these are the two wings, ever young, 
constant, and never decaying, of your systemic catalysis 
in the process of evolution and development, by which 
you negate the forces of counter-evolution and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


568 YAJURVEDA 


destruction. By virtue of these two, may we rise to the 
regions of the noble heroes of action to which arose the 
visionary seers first-born and ancient. 


53. (Indu Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi) 


Sada: Amsa tvang: wept dry: | 
mran gasart fub adeisste at at 
fedt: uisu 


Indurdaksah $yena 'rtava hiranyapaksah $akuno 
bhuranyuh. Mahantsadhasthe dhruva a nisatto 
namaste astu ma ma himsth. 


Cool as the moon, versatile and brave, fast as an 
eagle, committed to truth and law, powerful and brilliant, 
generous as the sun, great, steadfast, firmly seated in 
this house of the nation, salutations to you. Forbear, do 
not violate me, do not injure me. 


54. (Indu Devata, Galava Rshi) 


feat yai uferear -mferesrarardetrara à 
Arama: vri uae AAT uuu 


Divo murdha'si prthivya nabhirurgapam- 
osadhinam. Visvayuh śarma sapratha 
namaspathe. 


Brilliant man of peace and power, you are on top 
of the light of knowledge, at the centre of the life on 
earth, the essence of waters and herbs, life of life, shelter 
home for all, celebrated through the land, guide, path 
and destination for all. Salutations and homage to you! 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 569 
55. (Indu Devata, Galava Rshi) 


farde qegatet fasta fora: Hag er ederent 
amare fied | farerarsi-atarafieragrf2reareqat At 


wee uw 


Visvasya murdhannadhi tisthasi $ritah samudre 
te hrdayamapsvayurapo dattodadhim bhinta. 
Divasparjanyadantariksat prithivyastato no 
vrstyava. 


Brilliant power of light and life, you are on top 
of the world, steadfast and presiding over all! Your heart 
is deep in infinity. Your energy is one with universality. 
Break through the oceans of space and hold the waters 
of life for gift. And then, protect and promote us with 
the rain of light from heaven, showers from the clouds 
and the sky, and honey sweets from the earth. 


56. (Yajna Devata, Galava Rshi) 


ger ad qini adi: 
wel asset uitae sfelurenia: us u 


Isto yajno bhrgubhirasirda vasubhih. Tasya na’ 
istasya pritasya dravinehagameh. 

Yajna, wealth and power of the world, source of 
benediction and fulfilment, loved and performed by top 
scientists and scholars of the highest order, come and 
bring us here and now all that we love and all that we 
desire. 


57. (Agni Devata, Galava Rshi) 


seissifared: Trad asgeexeta: | 
Tare dem AA: uen 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


570 YAJURVEDA 


Isto’ agnirahutah pipartu na istam havih. Svage- 
dam devebhyo namah. 


May Agni, invoked and fed with love and fragrant 
materials, protect and promote us with the desired 
comfort and joy. And may this food and homage which 
comes to its own reach the noblest powers of nature 
and humanity. 


58. (Agni Devata, Vishvakarma Rshi) 


marha mAg em Ata at wet ends 
al dad Wd uendhu edes aassadal arg: Uer: 
UOT: neei 


Yadakutat samasusroddhrdo va manaso va 
sambhrtam caksuso va. Tadanu preta sukrtamu 
lokam yatra’ rsayo jagmuh prathamajah 
puranah. 

Lovers of truth and action, whatever you have 
thought and imagined and whatever has issued forth 
from your intention or heart or mind or from your actual 
experience of the eye, and whatever stays held up within, 
follow that and achieve, and rise to the heavenly regions 
of the meritorious to which arose the divine visionaries 
first born and ancient. 


59. (Prajapati Devata, Vishvakarma Rshi) 
START aadtaatsata aah wm UL edu. 


Etam sadhastha pari te dadami yamavahacche- 
vadhim jatavedah. Anvaganta yajnapatirvo’ atra 
tain sma janita parame vyoman. 


Lovers of Divinity sitting in this heavenly home 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 571 


of yajna, I pass on to you this supreme treasure of 
knowledge and joy which Jataveda, Agni, and the 
devoted scholar of the Veda brought down hitherward 
from the highest heavens, and to which the yajamana 
also attains following upon the yajna. Know him, and 
know and experience that supreme presence and that 
supreme joy which abides in the highest heavens. 


60. (Prajapati Devata, Vishvakarma Rshi) 
Ud sia UA cata sat: Tera faq Bane | 
"anrestaferfsiderarifiergs churaremfen ét o i 


Etam janatha parame vyoman devah sadhastha 
vida rupamasya. Yadagacchat pathibhir- 
devayanairistapurte krnavathavirasmai. 

Lovers of Divinity, noblest scholars and sages, 
sitting together in this heavenly home of yajna, know 
and realise this supreme creative presence which 
pervades the highest and the ultimate spaces of the 
universe. Realise its form and power, and feel the bliss 
that emanates from this presence. Perform the acts and 
observe the devotions prescribed by the Vedas and the 
Vedic Traditions for the attainment of this presence 
which comes to those who travel by the paths followed 
by the godly men and women of divinity. 


61. (Prajapati Devata, Galava Rshi) 


sasiserearer vfs after essere ed 
| arfereaenstssrepdifur4 fend «er eire 
ew ge 

Udbudhyasvagne prati jagrhi tvamistapurte sam 
srjethamayam ca. Asmintsadhasthe 'adhyutta- 
rasmin vi$ve deva yajamanasca sidata. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


572 YAJURVEDA 


Agni, fire and power of light and life, man of fire 
and knowledge, awake, arise, and let the yajamana arise 
and act. And both of you together enact the holy rites 
and offer the devotions to the Lord. Men and women of 
divinity and the yajamana, all be seated in this blessed 
house of yajna on the holy seats around the vedi. 


62. (Vishvakarma/Agni Devata, Devashrava, Devavata 
Rshis) 


a aefa weet Grp udaau i 
rH Ua At e cadag rede nage 


Yena vahasi sahasram yenagne sarvavedasam. 
Tenemam yajnam no naya svardevesu gantave. 


Lord of fire and knowledge, by the power you 
conduct the yajna of a hundred gifts, and the yajna of 
total Vedic knowledge, and all the worldly wealth, by 
the same power lead on this yajna of ours to reach the 
regions of bliss among the noblest souls of divinity. 


63. (Yajna Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 
wero ufrfzrid eer dent a afeat | 
wan ud al wa erem We g3 


Prastarena paridhina sruca vedya ca barhisa. 
Rcemam yajnam no naya svardevesu gantave. 


Lord of yajna, by the sacrificial seat (asana), 
vedi’s girdle of fire-sticks, the ladle, the vedi, the kusha 
grass and the light of fire, and by the chant of Vedic 
hymns, take our yajna on and forward to lead us to reach 
the joy of life and the bliss of divinity among the blessed 
souls. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 573 


64. (Yajna Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 


aed ahan aqd area afo: 
wafiTdseeur: xddem Al aA new 


Yaddattam yatparadanam yatpurtam yāśca 
daksinah. Tadagnirvai$vakarmanah svardevesu 
no dadhat. 


Whatever is given, whatever is received from 
others for others, whatever works are raised for charity, 
whatever gifts are given to priests, may versatile Agni 
of universal action carry all that to the heavenly powers 
in the regions of bliss for our sake. 


65. (YajnaDevata, Vishvakarma Rshi) 
"mp smusariugr Fest A AT: | 
data veendur: vdd At eer ue 


Yatra dhara anapeta madhorghrtasya ca yah. 
Tadagnirvaisvakarmanah svardevesu no dadhat. 


Where streams of nectar honey flow 
uninterrupted and where flow streams of purest milk 
and ghee, there among the noblest souls, may Agni, lord 
of universal yajnic action, lead us into the heaven of 
bliss. 


66. (Agni Devata, Devashrava & Devavata Rshis) 
sie sed weder yd A uatrad us- 


ser | atehRaarg tte ferarirssteir wat gfer- 
fer ar ngan 


Agnirasmi janmana jataveda ghrtam me caksur- 
amrtam ma asan. Arkastridhatu rajaso vimano’ 
jasro gharmo havirasmi nama. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


574 YAJURVEDA 


I am fire, so by birth, present in all that is born. 
Ghee is my light of the eye. Nectar is my mouth. What 
I consume turns into nectar. Loved and adored with 
Riks, Yajus and Samans, I am threefold in constitution, 
my elements being akasha (ether), vayu (wind and 
energy), and agni, fire that I am. I pervade and cover 
the sky, I am perpetually active and moving. I am the 
heat and light of the sun and summer. I am havi, the 
food of yajna, and I am a name, I have an identity of my 
Own. 


67. (Agni Devata, Devashrava & Devavata Rshis) 


su Uni astesfe arerfer aratf mif à 
sama: Ureesrrssreu: dfererrafet 1 wuiufau 
adan: uw at sitarda qa ngon 
Rco namasmi yajunsi namasmi samani namasrmi. 
Ye’ agnayah pancajanya’ asyam prthivyamadhi. 
Tesamasi tvamuttamah pra no jivatave suva. 

I am Riks by name (Rigveda), I am Yajus, that's 


my name (Yajurveda), I am Samans, that's my name 
(Samveda) for sure. 


Yajnagni, five are the sacred fires that are on this 
earth (namely, Anvaharya-pachana or Dakshina, 
Garhapatya, Ahavaniya, Sabhya, and Avasthya), which 
are good and auspicious for all the people without 
discrimination. Of them, you are the supreme. Awake, 
arise, come and inspire us for a full life on earth, 
dedicated to yajna. 


68. (Agni Devata, Indra Rshi) 


wr zT saa gaararata uod 
se warddarmfa nec 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 575 


Vartrahatyaya Savase prtanasahyaya ca. Indra 
tva" vartayamasi. 


Indra, lord of blazing power and prowess, for your 
power to break down the anti-life clouds of darkness, 
for the sake of strength and superiority in advancement, 
and for your potential to rout the forces of the enemies 
of humanity, we turn to you, abide by you and act under 
your command. 


69. (Indra Devata, Indra & Vishvamitra Rshis) 


wes egs araea afore quer | 
AR qa aga atend irg dert rrr ts e 


Sahadanumpuruhuta ksiyantamahastamindra 
sampinak kunarum. Abhi vrtram vardhamanam 
piyarumapadamindra tavasa jaghantha. 


Indra, lord of lightning power, disarm, wither and 
crush the rival negative forces, lurking within, 
mischievous, growing, vociferous, and like the cloud, 
withholding the waters of progress. Indra, blazing with 
the thunderbolt like the sun, break up the cloud and 
destroy the mischief with your might. 


70. (Indra Devata, Shasa Rshi) 


fa dss ue afe Aber des gaa: 
assem usstfitaracrat Aa aa: eo tt 


Vi na'indra mrdho jahi nica yaccha prtanyatah. 

Yo’ asman abhidasatyadharam gamaya tamah. 

Indra, lord of might in command, eliminate the 

battles of blood. Take them down to those who rise with 

violent force and come upon us to fight. Whoever wish 

to enslave us, take them down to utter darkness of 
misery. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


576 YAJURVEDA 


71. (Indra Devata, Jaya Rshi) 
"rr sfr: eben ARE: kaasama WET: | 
qad ufefnt- fun fa see fer eit 
A UO? I 
Mrgo na bhimah kucaro giristhah paravata'a 


jagantha parasyah. Srkam samsaya pavimindra 
tigmam vi Satrun tadhi vi mrdho nudasva. 


Like a terrible lion of the mountain forest, 
roaming around freely, go far and fall upon the hostile 
forces. Having tempered and sharpened the point of your 
steel, drive off the enemies and eliminate the battles of 
blood. 


72. (Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 
avant Hs saasa wate used: i 
shat: gedet mez 


Vaisvanaro na'utaya'a pra yatu paravatah. 
Agnirnah sustutirupa. 


All commanding power, reaching everything and 
everyone like the light of the sun and the heat of fire, 
come to us from afar for our protection. Fire of life, 
listen to our songs of praise and prayer and come. 


73. (Agni Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 
geet fafa yesan: yfai get femems- 
sirdsfrarfslasri ava: aden qotsa: a At 
fear a Rata vad 930 


Prsto divi prsto’ agnih prthivyam prsto vi$va 
'osadhiravive$a. Vaisvanarah sahasa prsto’ 
agnih sa no diva sa risaspatu naktam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XVIII 577 


Agni, universal fire, Vaishvanara, omnipresent, 
omnificent vitality, which blazes in heaven as the sun 
is worth knowing. The fire in the earth is worth knowing. 
The fire that has entered the entire herbs and trees of 
the world is worth knowing by research. May this Agni 
protect and sustain us against violence day and night. 


74. (Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 
aram d HMA qedtssrgard Teta: Tay 
aaa arstafsr asrebdisyart ererdsnrsnt qt ies 


Asyama tam kamamagne tavoti'a$yama rayiin 
rayivah suviram. A$yama vajamabhi vajayanto’- 
'$yama dyumnamajarajaram te. 


Agni, lord defender, protector and sustainer, 
under your umbrella, may we get the benefits we desire. 
Lord of wealth and plenty, may we get the wealth and 
the valorous heroes we need. Fighting the battles of life, 
may we achieve the victories we prize. Lord ever young, 
unageing, may we also share and achieve your 
imperishable glory and majesty. 


75. (Agni Devata, Utkeela Rshi) 
aa dsara ther fe amade Hune | 
ahea cur fer eameaa dar feuls- 
3ST Neal 
Vayam te’adya rarima hi kamamuttanahasta 


namasopasadya. Yajisthena manasa yaksi 
devanasredhata manmana vipro’ agne. 


Agni, lord of light, knowledge and power, with 
hands raised up in homage, we come to you today with 
a dedicated, concentrated, thoughtful and faithful mind 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


578 YAJURVEDA 


and make the loved-most offerings. With the same 
dedicated, concentrated and committed mind,you too 
do honour to the powers of divinity. 


76. (Vishvedevas Devata, Utkeela Rshi) 


smmesafeiu sm dat agente: 
adam fae der aa ure T: du Mogu 


Dhamacchadagnirindro brahma devo brh- 
aspatih. Sacetaso vi$ve deva yajnam pravantu 
nah subhe. 


Agni, lord protector of regions and places, lord 
of knowledge, Indra, lord of power and honour, Brahma, 
lord of creative Vedic vision, Deva, lord of generosity 
and brilliance, Brihaspati, lord of learning and teaching, 
may all these and other noble powers of the world, 
enlightened and magnanimous, protect and promote our 
yajnas of life for the good of all for ever and onward. 


77. (Vishvedevas Devata, Ushana Rshi) 


vd fess qa f: ulfe soe Fre: | 
Tat Aaa wat ion 


Tvam yavistha dasuso nrnh pāhi srnudhi girah. 
Raksa tokamuta tmana. 


Lord of life and humanity, ever young, generous 
giver, listen to the voice and prayers of the people. 
Protect and promote humanity, and preserve the race 
with the breath of life. 


fq ateetastseara: N 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 579 


CHAPTER-XIX 


1. (Soma Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
wi wat verat dat dicongatagds à Weird 
Raa si ears | aaiseahvavat wear 
Waa were wanut wat uad 


Svadvim tva svaduna tivram ftivrenamrtam- 
amrtena. Madhumatim madhumata srjami sam 
somena. Somo’syasvibhyam pacyasva 
sarasvatyai pacyasvendraya sutramne pacyasva. 


Tonic of life, panacea for health, delicious in 
taste, sharp in action, honey sweet and healing like 
nectar, I mix and develop you with soma, delicious 
sharp, honey sweet and nectar-like in healing. Integrated 
with soma, you are now soma itself. Mature and ripen 
for the Ashvins, powers of health and men and women 
of learning. Ripen and mature for Sarasvati, woman of 
the divine voice. Mature and ripen for Indra, man of 
power and honour who protects and promotes humanity 
against suffering. 


2. (Soma Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 
uta fisarat aaa assag fA: 
Sear At Aa Stee XTSTED GAAS: R N 


Parito sincata sutam somo ya’uttamam havih. 
Dadhanvan yo naryo apsvantara susava 
somamadribhih. 


Soma, extracted, richly reinforced and distilled 
thus is the best for life and yajna. Let the best person 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


580 YAJURVEDA 


among humans develop and produce it mixed with the 
waters and matured on the mountains with the clouds. 


3. (Soma Devata, Abhuti Rshi) 


a: Ya: ufecur aesa: | zu 
ara: wal pem ya: ufendur urecrararsattega: | 
eH aa: Tat dad 


Vayoh putah pavitrena pratyank somo’ 
atidrutah. Indrasya yujyah sakha. Vayoh putah 
pavitrena prank somo atidrutah. Indrasya yujyah 
sakha. 


Soma, freshly extracted, fully filtered, highly 
refined, and seasoned in westerly wind, instant and 
usable is a friend of Indra, man of power and honour, 
for concentration of mind. 


Soma, old extracted, fully filtered, highly refined, 
and seasoned in easterly wind, instant and effective is a 
friend of Indra, man of power and honour, for 
concentration of mind. 


4. (Soma Devata, Abhuti Rshi) 


guid c vara gaT à 
«nur syda aat si 


Punati te parisrutam somain suryasya duhita. 
Varena Sasvata tana. 


Lover and maker of soma, the dawn, daughter of 
the sun, constantly purifies and vitalizes the streams of 
your soma with an uninterrupted flow of the currents of 
its celestial light and eternal energy. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 581 


5. (Soma Devata, Abhuti Rshi) 


wal at dad asisshgaxatar ur: gasade 
nate | gèut ta gaat: fugfier cara astra 
af wei 


Brahma ksatram pavate teja’indriyam suraya 
somah suta’asuto madaya. Sukrena deva 
devatah piprgdhi rasenannam yajamanaya 
dhehi. 


Soma, extracted and taken, purifies and energizes 
the Brahmana community of intellectuals, and the 
Kshatra community of warriors, defenders and 
administrators, and inspires them with passion and 
enthusiasm for action and achievement. It sharpens the 
senses with sensitivity and the mind with brilliance. 


Deva, man of science and yajna, with the purity 
and energy of yajna and soma, please and serve the 
powers of nature and humanity and enhance the 
production of food for the yajamana with vital juice 
treatment. 


6. (Indra Devata, Abhuti Rshi) 


cepere ad ad fase aree ferri glen 
yr waists Xr wféur adssfaa acta | 
samisena wat wae erate cat Garats 


Tre a ARAA vem data cT aca vem gil 


Kuvidanga yavamanto yavam cidyatha dantya- 
nupurvam viyuya. Ihehaisam krnuhi bhojanani 
ye barhiso nama uktim yajanti. Upayamagrhito’ 
syasvibhyam tva sarasvatyai tvendraya tva 
sutramna’ esa te yonistejase tva viryaya tva 
balaya tva. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


582 YAJURVEDA 


O friend, ruler and administrator, those farmers 
who produce grain and harvest the crop for strength 
and sustenance, and those brilliant ones who, 
accordingly, study, analyse and pronounce their 
judgement on food production, for all these provide food 
and maintenance. 


Accepted and sanctified you are for the Ashvins, 
earth and sunlight (for production), scientific 
knowledge, strength and power and defence and 
protection. This is your value and justification for life. 
I consecrate you for splendour, power and prowess, and 
solid strength. 


7. | (Soma Devata, Abhuti Rshi) 
"mr fe at derfécacadsend m rudem wo esti 
pr wane Ra urdsuuw ar at fest: cat 
Afas wei 


Nana hi vam devahitain sadaskrtam ma sain 
srksatham parame vyoman. Sura tvamasi 
Susmint soma'esa ma ma himsth svam 
yonimavi$antt. 
Many are the things for you in this wide world. 
They are different, each in its own place good for the 
noble people. Don't confuse one with the other in your 
own understanding: “You are sura, intoxication. And 
you are sura, stimulation for life's energy. This is soma, 
life's energy, passion for action, peace and pleasure for 
the mind. Coming to your own in your own place, don't 
violate soma, don't injure me." 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 583 
8. (Soma Devata, Abhuti Rshi) 


summissa ast: urea dite at i 


WW a athlete carat al Wea AT ct 


Upayamagrhito’syasvinam tejah sarasvatam 
viryamaindram balam. Esa te yonirmodaya tva" 
nandaya tva mahase tva. 


Indra, accepted and initiated you are in the laws 
of life, vested with splendour of the sun and beauty of 
the moon, power and prowess of the world on the move, 
and the thunderbolt of lightning. This world is your 
home and justification for existence for the experience 
and creation of joy, spiritual bliss, universal honour and 
glory. I consecrate you in your place and position by 
virtue of Soma. 


9. (Soma Devata, Abhuti Rshi) 


erit sfer ast af ate diate dig aft ate acai 
ate aetsha wer aft Afè ue 


Tejo'si tejo mayi dhehi viryamasi viryam mayi 
dhehi balamasi balam mayi dhehyojo’syojo mayi 
dhehi manyurasi manyum mayi dhehi saho’si 
saho mayi dhehi. 


You are the light of life, put light into me. You are 
the vigour and vitality of life, put vigour and vitality 
into me. You are the strength and force of life, put 
strength and force into me. You are the lustre of health 
and energy of life, bless me with the glow and lustre of 
health and energy. You are the passion for life, put 
passion into me. You are the challenge and victory of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


584 YAJURVEDA 


life, bless me with the spirit of challenge and the 
ambition for victory. 


10. (Soma Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 


a care faders weh wr A od 
vad dafeni«fasgeAmu urer2gu: ueol 


Ya vyaghram visucikobhau vrkam ca raksati. 
Syenam  patatrinaim simham semam 
patvamhasah. 


That secret agency which watches and keeps off 
both the tiger and wolf, the eagle and other birds of 
prey, and the lion, the same may warn and protect this 
ruler from sin and wrong-doing. 


11. (Agni Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 


atid uri ua: wdfedt re | ueadvissrTuit 
darsedt fret wat | ae veru wb sU ux 
fere ea fa at waat uz een 


Yadapipesa mataram putrah pramudito dhayan. 
Etattadagne' anrno bhavamyahatau pitarau 
maya. Samprca stha sam ma bhadrena prnkta 
viprca stha vi ma papmana prnkta. 


Agni, lord of light and yajna, when my child sucks 
its mother with joy and hugs her almost crushing her 
with love, then I feel free from my filial debt to nature 
and my parents, since then are my parents saved through 
me. 


Stay one with the parents, with nature and with 
God. Join me with piety and goodness. Stay away and 
keep me away from sin and evil. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 585 


12. (Vidvan Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 
wer wadaaa Nas Rrra | 
"rer mead faahretatearfer «sta: ue su 


Deva yajnamatanvata bhesajam bhisaja'$vina. 
Vaca sarasvati bhisagindrayendriyani dadhatah. 


The healing powers of nature and the two 
Ashvins, positive and negative currents of universal 
energy, enact the medicinal yajna of evolution in the 
service of Indra, lord of the universe. So do the 
physicians, men and women both, holding their mind 
and senses in order, carry on the yajna of health and 
healing with their knowledge and advice. (So too should 
we all work for health and healing in the service of God 
and humanity.) 


13. (Yajna Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 


dart xeuesredifor urate drauf i 

suu waar cist: uiure$yret ws ugg 
Diksayai rupam Saspani prayaniyasya tokmani. 
Krayasya rupam somasya lajah somamsavo 
madhu. 


Blades of grass are symbols of initiation. Shoots 
of barley are symbols of yajnic inauguration. Roasted 
rice treated with soma is the symbol of exchange. Honey 
is the essence of soma plant. Develop these for yajna. 


14. (Atithya/Hospitality Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 
amfaezneu undi eret AE: 
xewHueetnaferem vr cuperem usui 


Atithyarupam masaram mahavirasya nagnahuh. 
Rupamupasadametattisro ratrih sura" suta. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


586 YAJURVEDA 


Roasted barley and masara drink is the mark of 
hospitality. Gift of food, drink and clothes is the mark 
of heroes. Three nights stay is courtesy to the guests. 
The secret of soma drink is three nights distillation and 
maturity. Observe these in the hospitality yajna. 


15. (Soma Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 


iren cad sitet ued | 
afat «rei Sasthr ghee UG 


Somasya rupam kritasya parisrut parisicyate. 
Asvibhyam dugdham bhesajamindrayaindrain 
sarasvatya. 


The juice of soma fully distilled and prepared by 
the expert physician, mixed with milk and approved 
and accepted by a learned woman of Vedic knowledge 
of medicine, matures into a panacea fit to be the 
favourite tonic for the sophisticated Indra, lord of 
strength, power and governance. 


16. (Yajna Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 


ame warts sel pest dere d 
srdxssuredEm ceu cer free iesi 


Asandi rupain rajadsandyai vedyai kumbhi 
suradhani. Antara 'uttaravedya rupam karotaro 
bhisak. 


The seat of soma is the mark of governance. The 
flask of soma drink is the mark of an auspicious altar. 
Invigorating food is the mark of an auspicious northern 
altar. The filter that separates the essence of soma from 
waste is the symbol of a good physician. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 587 


17. (Yajna Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 


aan afa: water aféat aféitigar i 
qda uwdssmur Wottdtssiharhaat ngon 


Vedya vedih samapyate barhisa barhirindriyam. 
Yupena yupa’ apyate pranito’ agniragnina. 


By vedi and performance of yajna, yajnic land is 
acquired and sanctified. By yajna seats of grass and 
noble work, wealth and prosperity is obtained. By the 
pillar of yajnic celebration and social cooperation, 
honour and celebrity is achieved. And by the yajna fire 
and creative work, advancement and honourable 
leadership is attained. 


18. (Grihapati Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 


gaat wafseareids aeateact | 
sahede deíremei We ae: ue N 


Havirdhanam  yada$vina"gnidhram yat 
sarasvati. Indrayaindrain | sadaskrtam 
patnisalam garhapatyah. 


The Ashvinis, husband and wife, prepare the 
yajna chamber and collect the holy materials. Sarasvati 
the learned house-wife, is the lady of yajna and the host 
for the priests and the guests. The house is the seat of 
yajnic prosperity for the master of the house. And the 
home is the lady’s forte. This is the house-hold, a socio- 
economic yajna in operation. 


19. (Yajna Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 
wate: Areh aet | 
warsifsieTarsm, AHSAN AT: ue « u 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


588 YAJURVEDA 


Praisebhih praisanapnotyapribhiraprir- 
yajüasya. Prayajebhiranuyajan vasatkare- 
bhirahutth. 


In all yajnic activities of life : By courteous 
invitations and orders, you get responsive audience and 
assistants. By obliging favours, you get pleasing help 
and cooperation. By careful planning and preparation 
of the preliminaries, you reach the finale with credit 
and success. And with the pronouncement of a holy 
offer, you get the divine acceptance. 


20. (Yajamana Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 


ust: uefa uwirerstéefresvur | 
sala: aftertatatideea NR oN 


Pasubhih pasunapnoti purodasairhavinsya. 
Chandobhih samidheniryajyabhirvasatkaran. 
By love and care of animals, you beget the wealth 
of animals. By oblations of rice cakes and generous gifts, 
you get the wealth of holy materials. By the knowledge 
and practice of sacred verses, you get the secrets of fire 
kindling. And by sacrificial chants and actions, you 
collect holy people around you. 


21. (Soma Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 
amt: ehirsT: Gera: Utena: War afi i 
ater was gfensamfasm asst usi ngu 


Dhanah karambhah saktavah parivapah payo 

dadhi. Somasya rupam havisa’amiksa vajinam 
madhu. 

Roasted rice, pudding, barley meal, fried grain, 

milk, curds, mixed milk and curds, best of grains and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 589 


honey, these are forms of soma, vital energy, and they 
are holy foods for the sacred fire. 


22. (Yajna Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 
armies xeu cadet Uttara irm: 
Gates xeu aetquarel: rarest RRN 
Dhananam rupam kuvalam parivapasya 
godhumah. Saktunam rupam badaramupavakah 
karambhasya. 
Seed of water-lily is symbol of rice and grains. 
Wheat is symbol of puddings. Cotton seed/jujube fruit 


is symbol of roasted grain powder. And barley is symbol 
of gruel. 


23. (Soma Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 


"usur xu uere «tH xau chal gd 
iren seu ass: red xsunrfier 12311 
Payaso rupam yadyava dadhno rupam 
karkandhuni. Somasya rupain vajinain 
saumyasya rupamamiksa. 


Barley is the form of milk. Jujube berry is the 
form of curd. Grain is the form of soma. And mix of 
milk or curd is the the form of the essence of soma. 


24. (Vidvan scholar Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 
ar staat Reat: wearstrats T 
wd smemeu were Gb sme: uid 


A Sravayeti stotriyah pratyasravo'anurupah. 
Yajeti dhayyarupam pragatha ye yajamahah. 


"Speak to us of knowledge", say the disciples to 
the teacher. And let what is spoken, heard and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


590 YAJURVEDA 


understood be in conformity and unison. “Conduct the 
yajna", say the yajniks. And conduct of the yajna is the 
function of the priest, the singers and the performers, 
all in unison. 


25. (Soma Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 


aiseanna udcivirfe fafa: 
wà: sremure$xu usur urmssmenrp usui 


Ardha’rcairukthanam rupam padairapnoti 
nividah. Pranavaih sastranam rupam payasa 
soma apyate. 


By half-Riks you get to the form and meaning of 
Uktha verses. By phrases you get to the Nivids, 
invocatory verses and formulae. By the chant and 
worship of Om you get to the form and meaning of 
mystic powers. By water and milk rejuvenation is 
achieved as by soma. 


26. (Yajna Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 


afani ura: Wana aretha i 
àa wean gidi aaa ura 


A$vibhyam pratahsavanamindrenaindram 
madhyamdinam. Vai$vadevain sarasvatya 
trttyamaptain savanam. 


The morning Soma-yajna is performed with 
hymns to the Ashvinis, the dawn, the sun and the moon. 
The mid-day Soma-yajna is performed with hymns to 
Indra for energy, power and honour. And the third, 
evening Soma-yajna, is accomplished and completed 
with hymns to Sarasvati, spirit and word of universal 
knowledge and inspiration for the sake of universal 
peace and happiness. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 591 


27. (Yajna Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 
amaA ada ANPA, | 
gaia Ud Tacha: verefrcteirfa usw 


Vayavyairvayavyanyapnoti satena drona- 
kalasam. Kumbhibhyamambhrnau sute 
sthalibhih sthalirapnoti. 


With the properties of wind and air you get the 
energy of wind and air in the soma in the vayavya air- 
vessels. With filtration you get to the drona-measure 
vessel of soma. With two jars of corn and water, you 
get two water-jar measures of soma, one for stirring 
and cleansing and the other for the pure and distilled 
soma. And then by cooking cauldrons you get the 
finished cauldronfuls of soma offerings for the yajna. 


28. (Yajna Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 


miine Wet oe: Eaves fared: 
DASA GATT ATM ATASSTAAAT URL A 


Yajurbhirapyante graha grahaih stomas$ca 
vistutth. Chandobhirukthasastrani samnava- 
bhrtha’apyate. 


With verses of Yajurveda, you take ladlefuls of 
soma, learn the ways of the world and knowledge of 
the stars and planets. With the knowledge and libations, 
you come to stomas, hymns of praise and qualities of 
things and facts of life. With metres of verses and from 
singers, you come to formula hymns of the Veda and 
the secrets of weapons. And then with the recitation of 
Samans, you come to the valediction of yajna and the 
holy bath. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


592 YAJURVEDA 


29. (Ida Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 


zenia gareT: i 
eee ee cm 


Idabhirbhaksanapnoti suktavakenasisah. Sarn- 
yuna patnisamyajantsamistayajusa samstham. 


With the sacred Word and worship you get food 
from the fields of earth. With sweet words and songs of 
reverence one gets all the good wishes and success to 
the heart’s desire. With a peaceful and generous mind 
the husband gets the best conjugal relations with his 
wife. And with the performance of yajna with the desired 
Yajurvedic hymns, you come to the consummation of 
settled life in a happy home. 


30. (Yajna Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 


aat dramateirfa dtaratsonta fara | 
afaton sieraicifa sgat aerate ison 


Vratena diksamapnoti diksaya 'pnoti daksinam. 
Daksina $raddhamapnoti $raddhaya satya- 
mapyate. 


By the observance of discipline and celibacy, the 
child comes to initiation and consecration into learning 
and education. By learning and education, the young 
man/woman comes to settlement, wealth and honour. 
Settlement, wealth and honour begets faith. And through 
faith one comes to attain the ultimate truth and values 
of life and existence. 


31. (Yajna Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 


yada wd Gas aANT Hay | 
maadam at Maa we use 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 593 


Etavad rupam yajnasya yaddevairbrahmana 
krtam. Tadetat sarvamapnoti yajne sautramant 
sute. 


This is the form of yajna with its meaning and 
values which has been described and prescribed by God, 
the Vedas and the Rishis. If a person is consecrated in a 
Sautramani yajna, performed in honour of Indra, i.e., in 
the service of God and for the good of the world, with 
the yajnopavita and the knots of dedication and 
commitment of oneself in faith, he/she is blest with all 
that and this, that is, in this life and hereafter. 


32. (Indra Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 


qirda aand: Ga ers fafa fau wath: i 
«ear: AA fafa daatg vate asta: cart: u3 3 


Suravantam barhisadam suviram yajnain 
hinvanti mahisa namobhih. Dadhanah somam 
divi devatasu mademendram yajamanah 
svarkah. 


Great enlightened people, with rich libations of 
havi, promote yajna, source of joy, operative in space 
and maker of the brave. 


Let us too, blest with enlightenment, holding 
libations of soma for the divinities of heaven and earth, 
performing yajna in honour of Indra, lord of the 
universe, and ruler of the earth, rejoice with heavenly 
bliss on earth. 


33. (Indra Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 


aed w: mjas urne Spe: GLa YA 
wt fra asta ada ateadtafanfada- 
FAT 1311 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


594 YAJURVEDA 


Yaste rasah sambhrta'osadhisu somasya $usmah 
suraya sutasya. Tena jinva yajamanam madena 
sarasvatimas$vinavindramagnim. 


Spirit of life, Indra, of your essence which is 
contained in the herbs and plants, that which is extracted 
from the soma plants and reinforced with energy (by 
cleansing and distillation) is most powerful and 
exhilararing. With that elixir of life, delight and inspire 
the yajamana, Sarasvati, lady of learning, Ashvinis, 
scholars and students of health and medicine, Indra, the 
ruler and administrators, and Agni, the leader and 
defenders of the land. 


34. (Soma Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 


«fer AHERN ae RASA ATS à 
gH aie na eA siaremfa wasn 


Yamasvina namucerasuradadhi sarasvatya- 
sunodindriyaya. Imam tain sukram madhu- 
mantamindum somarn rajanamiha bhaksayami. 


Here for the sake of inspiration, I take this pure, 
honey sweet, bright and soothing soma drink of the 
supreme order which the experts of bio-science and the 
lady scholar of nutrition have extracted from the plants 
growing among the clouds on the mountains and 
distilled for the sake of exhilaration and rejuvenation 
of the mind and senses. 


35. (Soma Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi) 
wed Reh: qeea afa-rsarfderaseilfur: | 
ae dde wur fore Ahas sderarfanis« u 


Yadatra riptain rasinah sutasya yadindro’ 
apibacchacibhih. Aham tadasya manasa $ivena 
somam rajanamiha bhaksayami. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 595 


Of the delicious and powerful soma juice of 
purest extraction available here, which the sun too draws 
up (and releases) with its rays, the soothing supreme 
and most inspiring part I drink with a happy and blessed 
mind here and now. 


36. (Pitara Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
faq: waarna: waT d: faaragszl: war: 
ma wa: iama: vaerfaset: caer aA: 1 
aaa asiaa asiga aa: fudr: 
ypa Be 


Pitrbhyah svadhayibhyah svadha namah pita- 
mahebhyah svadhayibhyah svadha namah 
prapitamahebhyah svadhayibhyah svadha 
namah. Aksan pitaro'mimadanta pitaro’- 
titrpanta pitarah pitarah sundhadhvam. 


To our parents and seniors, we offer their own 
share of food and reverence. To our grand-parents and 
seniors, we offer their own share of food and reverence. 
To our great-grand-parents and seniors, we offer their 
own share of food and reverence. Parents, partake of 
your own share we offer and rejoice. Rejoice and give 
us the pleasure of joy. Parents, teachers, seniors, enjoy 
yourselves to your full satisfaction and give us the 
satisfaction of service and reverence. Parents, teachers, 
seniors, be pure yourselves, and purify and sanctify us 
with the service we offer and your blessings. 


37. (Sarasvati learning Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
yq at fiat: area: Gad our fudrHET: Grd 
uiae: uferdur srardur | aed our füerer: 


up amer: 1 ufestur ware fasana- 
SPAT Ue 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


596 YAJURVEDA 


Punantu ma pitrah somyasah punantu ma pita- 
mahah punantu prapitamahah pavitrena 
Satayusa. Punantu ma pitamahah punantu 
prapitamahah pavitrena $atayusa vi$vam- 
ayurvyasnavai. 
May my parents, grand parents, and great grand 
parents, kind, beneficent and honourable, purify me and 


sanctify me with the purity of discipline and education 
for a life of hundred years. 


May my grand parents and my great grand parents 
purify me and sanctify me with the purity of moral life 
and learning for a full life, so that with their blessings I 
may live for a full age of hundred years. 


38. (Indra Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi) 


srTTSamdeifu vaasan Yarsifad at A: | 
an Tea TAA N3 


Agna 'ayuinsi pavasa'a suvorjamisam ca nah. 
Are badhasva ducchunam. 


Agni, father, mother, ancestors, saints and sages, 
purify and sanctify our years of life, purify and vitalize 
our food and energy, sanctify and bless our desires and 
ambitions. Keep off all mischief, evil and calamity far 
from us. 


39. (Vidvan Scholar Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi) 
y ur east: uer cnr fin od 
urs fasat sorta wd: wife at nen 


Punantu ma devajanah punantu manasa dhiyah. 
Punantu vi$va bhutani jatavedah punihi ma. 


Jataveda, lord of light and knowledge, purify and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 597 


enlighten me. May all the saints and sages purify me. 
Purify my intelligence and understanding with divine 
knowledge and science. May all the living beings, in 
fact everything of the wide world, lead me to knowledge 
and purity. 


40. (Agni Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi) 
uferiur gi ur yout de dete | 
ST Hea MALUSTH wol 


Pavitrena punthi ma $ukrena deva didyat. Agne 
kratva kratun’ranu. 


Agni, blazing lord of light and fire, generous giver 
of knowledge and purging power, purify me with the 
purity and power of life's vitality. With your light and 
sacred action, lord of action and holiness, purify and 
sanctify our knowledge, understanding and action. 


41. (Agni Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi) 
ad uferduferer feram i 
sr dd usn AT se 


Yatte pavitramarcisyagne vitatamantara. 
Brahma tena punatu ma. 


Agni, self-luminous lord of omniscience, within 
the holy light of your eternal consciousness shines the 
universal knowledge, the Veda. With that holy light of 
knowledge, enlighten, purify and consecrate me. 


42. (Soma Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi) 
udma: Asem 4: uferdur faret: i 
a: Ua a Wem AT use 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


598 YAJURVEDA 


Pavamanah so'adya nah pavitrena vicarsanih. 
Yah pota sa punatu ma. 


Lord omniscient, that is pure, immaculate, saviour 
and purifier of all of us, may He with His purity and 
holiness purify and consecrate us here and now. 


43. (Savita Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi) 
sure 2a afaa: ufestor uen ua 
"wi Uris feme: neg 


Ubhabhyam deva savitah pavitrena savena ca. 
Mam punthi visvatah. 


Savita, lord of light and life, generation and 
inspiration, lord luminous of purity and holiness, with 
both your purity and holiness purify me wholly, and 
sanctify me with knowledge and good action. 


44. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi) 


àra dat rerrerear fira sega eitadeor: i 


wur aaa: Gea yg eere Cate uda xem ies 


Vaisvadevi punati devyagadyasyamima bahvya- 
stanvo vitaprsthah. Taya madantah sadhama- 
desu vayam syama patayo rayinam. 


Of the widest range of intelligence and education 
among women, a most virtuous and brilliant personality 
may come and oblige us as teacher so that these many 
girls may be trained in wide knowledge and rational 
living for home life and we, as householders, happy 
and rejoicing in the corporate life of the community, 
may become masters of wealth and honour. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 599 
45. (Pitara Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi) 
a darn: wm: fud mel | 
ul cies: were val agit xau Hota gud 


Ye samanah samanasah pitaro yamarajye. 
Tesamllokah svadha namo yajno devesu 
kalpatam. 


May the parents, seniors, guardians of the people 
and officers who are under the governance of the ruler 
of the world be harmonious and agreeable in thought, 
word and deed, and may their home life, social status, 
standard of living and yajnic (creative) performance of 
duty be of the highest order of nobility and 
responsibility. And may they prosper and rise to the 
heights of divinity. 

46. (Shri Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi) 
a dart: adsat sitar wild aren: | 
mz std encuarafueeiren 9ra« mt: wes u 
Ye samanah samanaso jiva jivesu mamakah. 
Tesain $rirmayi kalpatamasminlloke $atain 
samah. 

My people who are living among the people 
around are of equal mind and noble action in thought, 
word and deed. May their honour, wealth and grace be 


vested in me and live on in me to grow for a hundred 
years in this world. 


47. (Pitara Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi) 


& yist faqurae Rata very à 
arate ferserirsreadifer ad-art frat arat on 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


600 YAJURVEDA 


Dve srti'aérnavam pitrnamaham devanamuta 
martyanam. Tabhyamidam visvamejatsameti 
yadantara pitaram mataram ca. 


I have heard of two paths of the existential travel 
of mortals, all that is born of father and mother between 
earth and heaven: One, the path of the ancestors, and 
the other, the path of the divines. By these two paths 
does this world on the move moves on and on to its 
destination. 


48. (Agni Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi) 
Bax gfe: USM Asared astada d 
sae ma user cease 1 atta: 
ust agent H enia wal taser aa Use 


Idain havih prajananam me'astu da$avirain 
sarvaganain svastaye. Atmasani prajdsani 
pasusani lokasanyabhayasani. Agnih prajam 
bahulam me karotvannam payo reto'asmasu 
dhatta. 


May this fertility of mine, the married life, be a 
generative yajna, productive of ten brave children with 
all the virtues for the well-being of society. 


May this yajna and its production be the source 
of spiritual enlightenment, progress of the people, 
protection of animals, advancement of society and 
creation of fearlessness. 


Agni, lord of life and fertility, create for me lots 
of noble children. Bless us with plenty of food, milk 
and water, energy and generative vitality. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 601 
49. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 
sdhamdrssanrtasstteaar: frat: drmd:i 
ate asinga RIA seq fugi TAT ise 


Udiratamavara'utparasa'unmadhyamah 
pitarah somyasah. Asum ya’tyuravrka ’rtajnaste 
no’ vantu pitaro havesu. 


May all our seniors, guardians of the nation, far 
and near, old and new, high and low, and all those of 
the middle rank, settled in peace, prosperity and power, 
inspire us with passion and energy. May our parents 
and seniors dedicated to truth and rectitude, far from 
violence and exploitation, who raise the pranic energy 
of life, guide and protect us in our battles of the world. 


50. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 
ARRA a: frat ererssrelatuir sra: areard: 
wat cada erfarat-arfd ae ler eat ou 


Angiraso nah pitaro navagva’atharvano 
bhrgavah somyasah. Tesam vayam sumatau 
yajniyanamapi bhadre saumanase syama. 


Our parents and seniors, guardians of the nation, 
are seers and sages of the facts of holistic knowledge 
and law, scholars of the latest sciences, and experts of 
technology and engineering, all dedicated to universal 
love, non-violence and spiritual values and settled in 
mind for the peace and prosperity of mankind. 


Let us concentrate and dedicate ourselves to their 
wisdom, grace and excellence, and magnanimity and 
benevolence, for the reason of their devotion to yajna 
and their contribution to the progress of society. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


602 YAJURVEDA 

51. (Pitarah Devata, Shankha Rshi) 
aa: ue fart: araratsafet atadtet after: | 
aaa: GON geitescqeragrfa: wee t 9 u 


Ye nah purve pitarah somyaso'nuhire soma- 
pitham vasisthah. Tebhiryamah samrarano 
havinsyusannusadbhih pratikamamattu. 


May our parents, seniors and ancestors, great 
lovers of life and divinity, settled in peace and 
prosperity, rich and generous at heart, come and join 
our soma-yajna in person or in memory. With their 
blessings and with their guidance may we, their children, 
fair and just in conduct, loving the gifts of life and keen 
to create happiness and share it with the community, 
realize all our aims and ambitions in the world. 


52. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 
verediu ufefesdt crite cerexfsteeu Ae ae i 
ver Wott fact asgat emp vefawrer ffe 


Tvam soma pracikito manisa tvain rajisthamanu 
nesi pantham. Tava praniti pitaro na indo devesu 
ratnamabhajanta dhirah. 


Soma, lord of light, peace and prosperity, spirit 
of yajna, brilliant you are, wide-awake and responsive. 
With your vision and wisdom, you lead us on by the 
noblest and simplest paths of nature to divinity. Lord 
of beauty and blessedness, inspired by your grace and 
guidance only do our parents, seniors and guardians of 
the community reach the coveted seats of joy and 
celebrity among the noblest souls of the world. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 603 
53. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


wat fe 4: fued: urn get adto umen: dena 
emt: | a-aaata: ufrsi e uscatet Aanst 
WaT A: UGB 


Tvaya hi nah pitarah soma purve karmani 
cakruh pavamana dhirah. Vanvannavatah 
paridhin’rapornu virebhirasvairmaghava bhava 
nah. 


Soma, lord of peace and power, by you alone our 
early forefathers, brave and constant all, performed their 
acts of glory. 

Inspiring spirit of commonalty, purging, 
purifying, unshaken and unviolated, be like Indra of 
the thunderbolt for us. Arise with passion for action 
and with your warriors of the horse throw off the forces 
of violence ranged around us. 


54. (Soma Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 
waa fagfsl: afaamisy eretuferdrssm da à 
wet vassal fast fata eeu udat cit 
UITH ixl 


Tvain soma pitrbhih samvidano'nu dyava- 
pirthivi'a tatantha. Tasmai ta’indo havisa 
vidhema vayam syama patayo rayinam. 


Soma, power of peace and prosperity, in covenant 
with the senior guardian spirits of humanity, grow and 
expand from earth to heaven. 


Spirit of beauty and joy, it is for the sake of growth 
and expansion that we offer fragrant oblations to your 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


604 YAJURVEDA 


worship in yajna, so that we may create, protect, master 
and enjoy the riches of the world. 


55. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


afgua: assqa at gear Ap sme à 
asamtarcar srdaarat 4: sranzar garg uL 


Barhisadah pitara'utyarvagima vo havya 
cakrma jusadhvam. Ta'agatavasa $antamenatha 
nah $ariyorarapo dadhata. 


Parents, seniors and guardians of humanity in 
yajnic seats of power, here are these refreshing 
presentations we have prepared for you which you 
please accept graciously and enjoy. Come to us and 
bring us peace and protection. Bless us with comfort 
and prosperity free from mischief and remove all the 
sins and evil from our life. 


56. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


ame aqai usarferfea ula a amoi a 
Rat: afévat à oxerered ge asta ras- 
gertat: us t 


A'ham pitrntsuvidatraR'avitsi napatam ca 
vikramanam ca visnoh. Barhisado ye svadhaya 
sutasya bhajanta pitvasta' ihagamisthah. 


I know the parents, seniors and guardians of life 
so kind and generous. I also know the dynamics of Lord 
Vishnu's immanence in His creation. 


May the venerable seniors in yajnic seats of 
knowledge and vision, who in their own right enjoy the 
fragrant drinks distilled from the essence of life, come 
here and bless this place and me. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 605 


57. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


sdgsr: fuc: drearet aféc fefe fum à 
asarhrg” asse Aaaf qad ASAT, dell 


Upahutah pitarah somyaso barhisyesu nidhisu 
priyesu. Ta' agamantu ta' iha $ruvantvadhi 
bruvantu te'vantvasman. 


Senior guardians of life and the human spirit 
established in inner peace and spiritual freedom are 
chosen by Grace to partake of the dearest treasures of 
universal knowledge and life divine. We call upon them: 
may they come here, may they listen to us, may they 
speak to us from the heights of divinity, may they redeem 
and save us! 


58. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 
au zl a: fart: cdrearatsfiearar: ufatitaart: 
STR Ga Tate Aaa Sha Ferd derent i 
A yantu nah pitarah somydso’gnisvattah 
pathibhirdevayanaih. Asmin yajne svadhaya 
madanto'dhi bruvantu te’ vantvasman. 

May our seniors and scholars established in the 
peace and prosperity of fire knowledge and yajna come 
to us by the noblest paths of divinity. And may they, in 
this our yajnic project of science and technology, 
enjoying themselves in their own right to their own 
knowledge, speak to us, enlighten us and protect us from 
ignorance and poverty. 


59. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


aftara: farsus tæa uda: Had Gavia: | 
ara gatesta usar efécerr vede aur- 
TT gs 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


606 YAJURVEDA 


Agnisvattah pitara’ eha gacchata sadah sadah 
sadata supranitayah. Atta havinsi prayatani 
barhisyatha rayim sarvaviram dadhatana. 


Senior scholars and experts of the science of heat 
and energy, men of justice and positive policy, come 
here to us, seat yourselves in every home and every hall 
of assembly, take the food and materials prepared with 
care and offered with love and hope, and, sitting in your 
laboratory and workshop, create the knowledge, impart 
it to people, and produce the wealth which creates 
versatile heroes for the nation and humanity. 


60. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 
astra Assara ne fea: xerunt 
mada iz]: vene -itfadar dasi a-at eneu- 
aft ngon 
Ye’ agnisvatta ye’anagnisvatta madhye divah 
svadhaya madayante. Tebhyah svarada- 
sunitimetam yathavasam tanvam kalpayati. 


Those seniors who are experts of the science and 
technology of fire, and those who are not such but who 
are experts of other fields of knowledge, and all those 
who rejoice in the midst of the light of their own 
knowledge itself: for all these, the self-luminous lord 
of omniscience in-vests this body with health and energy 
according to their need and desire. 


61. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


arfirearardquat wars mares iuter Assy: | 
a ow fender weed cree aaxeata ude wae 


UTA USVu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 607 


Agnisvattanrtumato havamahe nara$ainse 
somapitham ya’asuh. Te no viprasah suhava 
bhavantu vayam syama patayo rayinam. 


Those experts of the science and technology of 
fire who work according to the seasons needs and who 
enjoy a drink of soma, we invite to social receptions 
and honour of felicitations. May they, noble scholars 
and creators, be great benefactors of society, and may 
we all become producers, protectors and masters of 
wealth and prosperity in the world. 


62. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


arer wrt afao Rada agana fene d 
m ReRe aa: tia agseml: qena 
HUA gN 


Acyā janu daksinato nisadyemam yajfiamabhi 
grnita vi$ve. Ma himsista pitarah kenacinno 
yadva' agah purusata karama. 
Noble seniors of the world, do not, for any reason 
whatever, destroy or injure our manliness and 


manpower. Take on this yajna for us, do it well and 
speak well of it. 


We sit kneeling on your right respectfully, and 
whatever your omission or commission in well-meaning 
work, we overlook and make up. And then we move on 
with the work in earnestness. 


63. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


smeil-arerssreufriiqueet Cer abst amore edite 
prz: TIER euer: Were asgat wem 11GB 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


608 YAJURVEDA 


Asináso'aruninámupasthe rayim dhatta dasuse 
martyaya. Putrebhyah pitarastasya vasvah pra 
yacchata ta 'ihorjam dadhata. 


Parents and seniors of the community, create and 
hold wealth for the man of charity and for the children 
sitting in the lap of their noble mothers. Give them ample 
means of living so that they may have ample energy. 


64. (Agni Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


Hr paaa a fasts rf a 
wal THR: sraret daar daar ast usu 


Yamagne kavyavahana tvam cinmanyase rayim. 
Tanno girbhih $ravayyam devatra panaya 
yujam. 


Agni, carrier of sumptuous foods and fragrance 
for the noble people, bless us with that wealth of life 
which you believe is fit for the use of divinities in nature 
and humanity, and which is worthy of celebration in 
the best of words worthy of the best listeners. 


65. (Agni Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


asara: kaaa: aqaa: 
ax a e a NEN 


Yo’ agnih kavyavahanah pitrn yaksadrtavrdhah. 
Predu havyani vocati devebhyasca pitrbhya’a. 


Surely that person is the leader, torch bearer, path 
maker, first among all who is brilliant as Agni (fire) 
and spreads purity and fragrance all round. He/She 
respects the parents, seniors, ancestors and the 
promoters of truth and justice. He/She communicates 
the noblest thoughts and ideas in persuasive and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 609 


powerful words to the seniors and the brilliant and 
generous people all round. 


66. (Agni Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


HM Ssisd: ehegerg-retazgoarht Gather Heh 
wet: frast: carr assteaks a da war 
gef neg 


Tvamagna’ iditah kavyavahanavaddhavyani 
surabhini krtvi. Pradah pitrbhyah svadhaya te’ 
aksannaddhi tvam deva prayata havinsi. 

Agni, brilliant master of noble thoughts, words 
and deeds, loved, invoked and adored, receive the gifts 
of life, convert them to fragrance and acknowledge. 
Share them with the parents, seniors and respectable 
people so that they too enjoy them as their own. These 
gifts are valuable, prepared and collected with effort. 
Generous as you are, enjoy them well. 


67. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 
3p ae frat a a Ae ive fast areiss a a 
tia iat cheer ufa a wade: aaria 
WET Neon 


Ye ceha pitaro ye ca neha yansca vidma yan'u 
ca na pravidma. Tvam vettha yati te jatavedah 
svadhabhiryajnam sukrtam jusasva. 


Agni, brilliant and generous power, the seniors 
who are here, and those who are not here, and those 
whom we know, and those whom we don’t know, you 
know them all, how many they are and where they are, 
since you know everything that is anywhere. Let this 
yajna of service and adoration be done well. Carry it on 
with grace and with gifts made in faith and love. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


610 
68. 


YAJURVEDA 
(Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 
ga faqe asenaan 3 uelur ussdirnsidg:i 
a urfster wren Raa à at "rredersriter faga u 


Idam pitrbhyo namo'astvadya ye purvaso ya’ 
uparasa tyuh. Ye parthive rajasya nisatta ye va 
nunam suvrjanasu viksu. 


Let this food and adoration today be for the 


parents and seniors, those who came earlier, those who 
came later, those who are seated in this earthly world 
and those who are on the move for sure among the 
moving people. 


69. 


(Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 

stan aat a: frat: aha: uemdissrissequismmm: i 
vrefrder-dtfelferareryma: erat fura-itssrmuited- 
wm Nee 


Adha yatha nah pitarah parasah pratnaso agna’ 
rtamasusanah. Sucidayan didhitimukthasasah 
ksama bhindanto’ arunirapa vran. 


And Agni, brilliant scholar, just as our teachers, 


saints and sages, eminent and ancient, dedicated to the 
holy Word and serving the cause of universal truth and 
justice, realized the purity and blaze of that truth, and, 
breaking through the dark veil of the night opened the 
flood-gates of the light of dawn, so do you blaze, burn, 
purge, purify and enlighten the world. 


70. 


(Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


Brea etapa: aeae à 
syrdsrassmde frat efeaussrda noon 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 611 


Usantastva ni dhimahyusantah samidhimahi. 
Usannusata'a vaha pitrn havise 'attave. 


Noble youth, with all the love and care, we accept, 
maintain and educate you. Out of love and affection 
with all the care, we develop your personality and 
potential. You too, loving and caring, bear the 
responsibility for the food and maintenance of the loving 
parents and other seniors. 


71. (Indra Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


ami Aa Ade: ferssaidada: d 
fasar gata: eget: eet 


Apam phenena namuceh $ira'indrodavartayah. 
Visva yadajayah sprdhah. 

Indra, ruler, commander, like the foam of the sea, 
like the vapours of water in the sky, rise and expand 
and break the head of the powers which hoard the wealth 
of the land like the cloud hoarding the waters. Conquer 
the forces which stand in opposition out of sheer 
jealousy. 


72. (Soma Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


M v mudespschSHUTSTETSTCIH S ri 
qaa aorista wetsud 
Tat non 

Somo rajamrtam suta’rjisenajahanmrtyum. 
Rtena satyamindriyam vipanam sukramandhasa’ 
indrasyendriyamidam payo’mrtam madhu. 


Soma, the man cleansed and distilled like soma 
through discipline, brilliant and inspiring, meditating 
on God and godly in character, by the simplicity and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


612 YAJURVEDA 


sincerity of his natural living conquers the pain of death. 


By his dedication to Rita, the universal Law of 
Dharma, he attains truth, spiritual power, soothing 
drinks, purity and vitality, best foods, honour and 
prosperity, water and milk, honey and the very nectar 
of life. 


73. (Angirasa Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


argu: sf alftaq cxsizgrdr fimm | eet 
Bun eee 
TEST 


Adbhyah ksiram vyapibat krunnangiraso dhiya. 
Rtena satyamindriyam vipanam sukramandhasa’ 
indrasyendriyamidam payo’mrtam madhu. 


The man of genius and discrimination trained by 
a divine sage, like the swan, separates the milk from 
the water, accepts the milk and rejects the water. 


With his dedication to the essential reality of 
existence through yoga, he attains the eternal verity, 
divine speech, the vision of word and meaning, purity 
of the inner light, spiritual food, honour and prosperity 
of the world, purest drinks, abiding health, and the 
honey-sweet joys of living. 


74. (Soma Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


ast €edfuseresur weg: sifuud 1 cmdd 
watts feurd«srnd-erasz-teifrafira udtsud 
"ej noxii 


Somamadbhyo vyapibacchandasa hansah 
Sucisat. Rtena satyamindriyam vipanam 
Sukramandhasa’indrasyendriyamidam payo’ 
mrtam madhu. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 613 


The man of discrimination, friend of pure 
visionaries, with the freedom of his vision, distils the 
essence, soma, from the waters as the swan separates 
the milk from water. He accepts the essence and rejects 
the scum. 


With his vision of the Vedas, he attains the truth 
of divinity, the purity and energy of food, direct 
experience of the divine presence, and the supreme taste 
of the sweetness and bliss of Immortality and Moksha. 


75. (Prajapati Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


aatake vu sel caftad spé we: wn 
wemdfer: | geret wearfilfzrei ferartesrenderasgsiii- 
faata wersud we noun 


Annatparisruto rasam brahmana vyapibat 
ksatram payah somam prajapatih. Rtena 
satyamindriyam vipanam sukramandhasa’ 
indrasyendriyamidam payo’mrtam madhu. 


Prajapati, ruler and protector of the people, 
President of the council, alongwith the study of the 
Vedas, receives the juices, essences and inspiring vital 
sweets extracted from the ripe grains and blessed waters 
of the land, and wields the onerous responsibility of the 
state. 


With fair and enlightened justice he attains the 
people's dedication to truth, the divine gift of national 
glory, comprehensive protection and defence, pure and 
vital foods, light of justice and knowledge, divine grace, 
energising drinks, honey, and noble state-order of 
immortal value. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


614 YAJURVEDA 


76. (Indra, Soul, Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 

tt wat atra of ufesfefasau a cru 
mandasse Setfa watt | seat ueritas 
faurd«gppd-erasgsturigrafira watsyd wed ios u 
Reto mutram vi jahati yonim pravisadindriyam. 
Garbho jarayuna "vrta' ulbam jahati janmana. 
Rtena satyamindriyam vipanain $ukram- 
andhasa’indrasyendriyamidam payo’mrtam 
madhu. 


In the process of growth and regeneration, the 
male organ of generation discharges the semen. Entering 
the womb it discharges/releases the seed of life to plant 
it into the mother’s body. 

The foetus is covered with the placenta during 
its growth till maturity. When the seed is born as an 
independent soul in a new body-system, it abandons 
the cover in which it had grown and matured. (Thus 
elimination and regenerative growth through the natural 
movement of discharge, elimination, union and 
separation is part of life’s evolution under the universal 
law of nature, which is Rtam, creative dynamics of Lord 
Prajapati.) 

By Rtam, the soul (jiva) gets Satyam, natural 
existence of the body, Indriyam, organs of perception, 
drinks and assimilation, purity and vitality for 
regeneration, foods and growth, potentials for living and 
continuation, and the immortal honey sweets of the joys 
of existence for itself (jiva). 


77. (Prajapati Devata, Shankha Rshi) 


Ino wetsud- "sd mown 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 615 


Drstva rupe vyakarot satyanrte prajapatih. 
A$raddhamanrte' dadhacchraddhain satye 
prajapatih. Rtena satyamindriyam vipanain 
Sukramandhasa indrasyendriyamidam payo' 
mrtam madhu. 


Having over-seen two aspects of created 
Existence, Lord Prajapati analyses it into two forms: 
One, reality, truth, dharma; the other, unreality, illusion, 
adharma. Then Lord Prajapati places faith and 
commitment (shraddha) in truth, and no-faith and no- 
commitment (ashraddha) in untruth. 

With truth and faith He joins right mind and 
intelligence (rtambhara-buddhi) which is the Lord's gift 
of saving grace, protective, purifying, and enlightening 
against the darkness of illusion. And this is the soul's 
real power and faculty which can lead to the honey 
sweets and milky streams of immortality. 


78. (Prajapati Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


Sra we edfaerq Gara werde: (gea ueritas 
riges A aaa ueirsud usd wen 


Vedena rupe vyapibat sutasutau prajapatih. 
Rtena satyamindriyam vipanain $ukram- 
andhasa’indrasyendriyamidam payo’mrtam 
madhu. 

By Veda, Prajapati, the soul, comes to know both 
forms of existence: Truth which is reality, dharma, Rtam, 
and untruth which is illusion, adharma, anartam. 

By Rtam it can realise the full potential of its 
faculties and the immortality of its essential nature, 
while with pure foods and drinks (in the interest of health 
and meditation) it can experience here and now the 
honey sweets and milky streams of nectar. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


616 YAJURVEDA 


79. (Prajapati Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


qur tiad ekyn wp efus us: und 
wsmdfe:i cdd gaa faderens- 
swa watsyd ws weed 


Drstva parisruto rasain $ukrena $ukram vyapibat 
payah somam prajapatih.Rtena satyamindriyam 
vipanam $ukramandhasa 'indrasyendriyamidam 
payo’mrtam madhu. 


Having viewed the essence of knowledge distilled 
with an objective mind from the panorama of existence, 
the consecrated Prajapati, guardian of his people, should 
drink this life-giving nectar of truth (Rtam). 


By Rtam, knowledge of reality, he attains the 
force of truth, joy of governance, purity of intention 
and action, plenty and prosperity, royal honour and 
dignity, and the pleasure and sweetness of immortality. 


80. (Savita Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


daa cat ater mitsana Haat erf à 
aaa aardiaar wxedter xu emu frg- 
"RT geo! 


Sisena tantram manasa manisina 'urnasutrena 
kavayo vayanti. A$vina yajnain savita 
sarasvatindrasya rupam varuno bhisajyan. 


Just as intelligent weavers weave designed cloth 
from woollen yarn with leaden loom, and intelligent 
designers create models of machines with their 
imagination and expertise, so do the Ashvinis, scholars 
and researchers of health and nature, Savita, man of 
inspiration and imagination, Sarasvati, woman of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 617 


learning and education, Varuna, expert of health and 
medication, create models of creative and productive 
yajna and of the form and character of Indra, the ideal 
individual or ruler, the ideal family and the ideal society. 


81. (Varuna Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


meee Boars aspici: TTT: | 
wrath sretdiger a dreeiiveente ureierdwrera 
AT: UZ 

Tadasya rupamamrtam Sactbhistisro dadhur- 
devatah saimraranah. Lomani $aspairbahudha 
na tokmabhistvagasya mainsamabhavanna 
lajah. 

Three divine powers, loving and generous, 
variously enact the immortal form and structure of this 
yajna with their acts and imagination: They structure 
the body hair, as if, with blades of grass, and the body 
cover (skin) with shoots and ears of corn; and roasted 
grains become, as if, the substance (flesh) of the body. 


82. (Ashvinau Devate, Shamkha Rshi) 


wafsed fuu egdi mead aafa As- 
atm | athet mara undi: ennpiur aetat wat 
ware uu 


Tadasvina bhisaja rudravartani sarasvati vayati 
peso’antaram. Asthi majjanam masaraih 
karotarena dadhato gavam tvaci. 


Sarasvati, the enlightened woman, with dedicated 
mind and knowledge, weaves its beautiful inside, the 
bones and marrow created with the holy barley meal 
and vitalizing juices, while the Ashvinis, powers of 
health and healing, at the speed of energy, prepare for 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


618 YAJURVEDA 


soma and place the filter and the cask on the floor of 
the earth. 


83. (Sarasvati Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 
ad: xd ufrenm cr ted mghead 4 
aq csi 


Sarasvati manasa pesalam vasu nasatyabhyam 
vayati darsatam vapuh. Rasam parisruta na 
rohitam nagnahurdhirastasaram na vema. 


As a wise and intelligent expert designs and 
weaves a beautiful cloth on the loom with the shuttle, 
so does Sarasvati, enlightened woman of wisdom and 
science, with her mind and knowledge, create the 
charming, special and excellent form and structure of 
yajna with the help of friendly Ashvinis, specialists of 
health and healing: yajna (visible symbol of Indra, lord 
of honour, power and prosperity) in which the pure and 
vitalizing essence of soma joy distilled from all elements 
of nature ripples like the vital spirit (blood) of the body. 


84. (Soma Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 
qda SERHEKE Sate Walser d: à startet 
adii oetarisadedt emdeued Wen ux 
Payasa $ukramamrtam janitrain suraya 


mutrajjanayanta retah. Apamatim durmatim 
badhamana 'uvadhyam vatarn sabvam tadarat. 


(Three divinities, i.e., Sarasvati and the two 
Ashvinis) with milk, juices and inspiring drink of soma 
create the pure, life-giving, generative seed of life 
discharged from the generative organ (into the womb), 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 619 


and (for the same purpose of purity and vitality, with 
the same food and drink) ward off intellectual debility 
and ignorance as well as hyper-activity and arrogance 
from far and near. 


85. (Savita Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


S: Gat ean cue dase afad sis d 
aed ate ator freu "det eraeri ffa 
fiw uu 


Indrah sutrama hrdayena satyam purodasena 
savita jajana. Yakrt klomanam varuno bhisajyan 
matasne vayavyairna minati pittam. 


Indra, saviour, protector and preserver, with his 
heart and love, Savita, inspirer and giver of 
nourishments, with food and drink, create satyam, the 
reality of life and yajna, bringing it into formal 
manifestation. Varuna, with health and healing and with 
air and pranic energies preserves and maintains the 
working of the liver, lungs and neck, the chest and the 
digestive secretions. 


86. (Savita Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 
smearfut erida feam spar: uratfur qeer T 
Sr: | IATA wd 4 weiter rrena ear 
F Ula ea 
Antrani sthalirmadhu pinvamana gudah patrani 
sudugha na dhenuh. Syenasya patram na pliha 
Sacibhirasandi nabhirudaram na mata. 


The intestines in the human body system (yajna) 
are like the cooking pans preparing delicious food for 
the vital fire. The bowels are like milk-pots or the udders 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


620 YAJURVEDA 


of an abundant milch cow. The spleen, pancreas and 
liver are powerful defensive organs like the wings of 
an eagle pouncing on disease-attacks. The navel with 
its energizing actions is like the royal seat of power. 
And the stomach, to all the body parts, as the mother- 
host, distributes holy food among all members of the 
yajnic family. 


87. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


qa dagaa sreffferdferrenm rt ns- 
am: Ret: arsso uà A pni 
mn aq: cen 


Kumbho vanisthurjanita $acibhiryasminnagre 
yonyam garbho antah. Plasirvyaktah satadhara’ 
utso duhe na kumbhi svadham pitrbhyah. 

The husband, progenitor, is like a jar overflowing 
with love and vigour. Healthy and handsome, he is like 
an exuberant fountain flowing in a hundred streams of 
action with grace and piety. So is the wife, her womb a 
recipient jar into which the husband should project the 
seed, the foetus inside being like an oblation in honour 
of his parents and ancestors. 


88. (Sarasvati Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


Wade fensgq uda Brat ufeniufserier- 
mad (cem cr afaik eme afert smit 
wiurp aed uec 


Mukham sadasya Sira’it satena jihva pavitra- 
ma$vinasantsarasvati. Capyam na payur- 
bhisagasya valo vastirna $epo harasa tarasvi. 


Sarasvati and the Ashvinis, enlightened woman 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 621 


and the health and spirits of the man, create a happy 
home with the head and mouth of both together in truth 
with a sweet tongue fluent in purity. The purity, comfort 
and security of the home, the love and desire of the 
woman's fertility, the passion and power of the man's 
virility, and the child as bloom of the health and love of 
the union, all these keep the family together. 


89. (Ashvinau Devate, Shamkha Rshi) 


saat agoi vera ors dui feni T0 d 


uati sp: pdea uvm a na 
"HR eeu 


Asvibhyam caksuramrtam grahabhyam chagena 
tejo havisa $rtena. Paksmani godhumaih 
kuvalairutani pe$o na $ukramasitam vasate. 


By the Ashvinis, sun and moon, with portions of 
clear soma distilled, is created the immortal light of the 
eye. With tonics prepared with goat's milk is created 
the lustre of health. The lower and upper eyelashes are 
created with wheat and water lilies, and the beauteous 
form white as well as dark shines with the same nature's 
gifts. 


90. (Sarasvati Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 
stadt rar afe date wore wats etum 
maqui teal aA gon 


Avirna meso nasi viryaya pranasya pantha’ 
amrto grahabhyam. Sarasvatyupavakairvyanam 
nasyani barhirbadarairjajana. 


Like the sheep and the ram, the protector and 
contender, the Ashvinis, with portions of clear soma, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


622 YAJURVEDA 


create the immortal passage of pranic energy in the nose. 
Sarasvati, nature's flowing vitality, with animation and 
energy, creates the systemic vyana air in the body, and 
with grains and fruits, she creates the hair-filter in the 
nose. 


91. (Indra Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 
zw wade senta suilvzres stad Teter 
wem a aedfa efor Heat wa web our 
yata ue? 


Indrasya rupamrsabho balaya karnabhyain 
Srotramamrtam grahabhyam. Yava na 
barhirbhruvi kesarani karkandhu jajne madhu 
saragham mukhat. 


The soul’s will to live in body form manifests as 
the bull for the expression of strength. From portions 
of nature’s auditory element in soma is created the 
immortal faculty of the ear. Barley, as the grass, 
manifests in the eyebrows. And the jujuba fruit creates 
the honey sweets that flow from the mouth. 


92. (Atma Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 
AGA A ghe edu We wusifur a etuer 
am cr vitae fra frat faxeer enu 
fatttttegarfat ngi 


Atmannupasthe na vrkasya loma mukhe 

Ssmasruni na vyaghraloma. Kesa na Ssirsanyasase 
Sriyai Sikha siinhasya loma tvisirindriyani. 

In the presence of Divinity, the soul rises in 

eminence and potential: the lower hair of the body is 

like the hair of the wolf, the beard and moustache on 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XIX 623 


the face are like the whiskers of the tiger, the hair on 
the head and the top hair glows with beauty and glory 
like the lion's mane, and the senses shine as lightening. 


93. (Ashvinis Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 


agre frost «afpera: wer etait 
ser wearers verfdrzgd ear: ues 


Anganyatman bhisaja tada$vinatmanamangaih 
samadhat sarasvati. Indrasya rupam $atamana- 
mayuscandrena jyotiramrtam dadhanah. 


Thus do the Ashvinis, bio-engineers of nature, 
structure limbs for the soul, and thus does Sarasvati, 
divine mother, join the soul with the limbs, creating a 
living Indra of a hundred years of age blest with the 
immortal light and beauty of the moon. 


94. (Sarasvati Devata, Shamkha Rshi) 
mad drat miraa uci aaa fasts | 


smaresvaat — eui ea erty 
wat ues 


Sarasvati yonyam garbhamantarasvibhyam 
patni sukrtam bibharti. Apam rasena varuno na 
samnendram $riyai janayannapsu raja. 


Sarasvati, the wife, bears inside the womb the 
foetus so well created by the Ashvinis, nature's powers 
of creation, Varuna, supreme ruler, immanent in the 
world, integrating the soul with the vital essences of 
nature and completing the creation of a living Indra, 
the human being, for a glorious existence. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


624 YAJURVEDA 


95. (Ashvinau Devate, Shamkha Rshi) 


ast: uspreigfefifgardq uke usur art 
ne | arant qret Past erteercar arent: 
sg. NUN 


Tejah pasunain havirindriyavat parisruta payasa 
saragham madhu. A$vibhyam dugdham bhisaja 
sarasvatya sutasutabhyamamrtah soma’ induh. 


The healthy glow of living forms, the mighty rich 
nourishments of life, the delicious honey collected by 
the bee from juices all round are the nectar, the vital 
power, the beauty distilled from the original as well as 
the refined sources of nature by Sarasvati, mother spirit 
of life and humanity through the Ashvinis, creative and 
healing powers of nature's cosmic flow. 


sta uamata: N 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XX 625 


CHAPTER-XX 


1.  (Sabhesha President Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
ape aha acre ATTA d 
m vat ferum at feret: neu 


Ksatrasya yonirasi ksatrasya nabhirasi. Ma tva 
himsinma ma himsth. 

President of the Council, you are the seat of world 
power. You are the centre-hold of the order of humanity. 
May no one challenge you! You too do not hurt me, any 
citizen. 


2. (Sabhesha Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
Reima aadA ereur: uweepesT |d 
ataa weed: puer ulfe frei usu 
Nisasada dhrtavrato varunah pastyasva. 
Samrajyaya sukratuh. Mrtyoh pahi vidyotpahi. 


President of the Supreme Council, committed to 
noble resolutions of conscious choice, master of noble 
thoughts and good actions, best and first choice of 
humanity, be seated on the seat of governance among 
the peoples of the world for a sovereign world order. 
Save us from death and destruction. Save us from 
lightning and the thunderbolt. 


3. (Sabhesha mires Ashwinau Rshi) 


fara aAa stafinn i 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


626 YAJURVEDA 


Devasya tva savituh prasave’ $vinorbahubhyam 
pusno hastabhyam. ASvinorbhaisajyena tejase 
brahma-varcasayabhisincami Sarasvatyai 
bhaisajyena viryayannadyayabhisinca- 
mindrasyendriyena balaya $riyai yasase’ 
bhisificami. 

In this yajnic world order of Lord Savita's 
creation, with the arms of Ashvinis, harbingers of light 
and knowledge, the hands of Pusha, powers of strength 
and nourishment, and the efficacy of Ashvinis, powers 
of health and healing, I consecrate you for the sake of 
world-wide brilliance and universal glory of 
enlightenment. 


I consecrate you for Sarasvati, for the sake of 
learning and education of the people. 


With the powers of health and nutrition, I 
consecrate you for the sake of food and vigour for all. 


With the power and enlightenment of divine 
Indra, Lord of glory, I consecrate you for the 
achievement of the moral strength, honour and beauty 
of the world order. 


4.  (Sabhapati Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
alsa eaursfu wet ver art vem à 
wee Gest PERS Is 


Ko'si katamo’si kasmai tva kaya tva. Susloka 
sumangala satyarajan. 


Man of high reputation and honour, leader of 
many noble causes, illustrious dispenser of truth and 
justice, you are a man of peace, giver of peace and 
prosperity. Therefore I accept and consecrate you in the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XX 627 


service of Prajapati, divine lord of peace, and His people, 
for the achievement of universal peace and prosperity. 


5.  (Sabhapati Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


fort 3 sid ya fafa: Aytsa vusifur i 
tet d wonssradvaore aatfarre steht uuu 


Siro me $rirya$o mukham tvisih kesasca 
Smasruni. Raja me prano’amrtam samrat 
caksurvirat $rotram. 


People of the world: honour of the human nation 
is my head, nobility of the people is my mouth, light of 
justice and grandeur of world culture is my hair, 
moustache and beard, good governance is my life and 
breath, unity of the order is my vision, and diversity of 
the constituents is my ear. 


6.  (Sabhapati Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


fa 4 ag are vel wat wer a aT: 
mat: waama fat A Gene 


Jihva me bhadram vanmaho mano manyuh 
svarad bhamah. Modah pramoda angulirangani 
mitram me sahah. 


Members of the world state: My tongue shall 
speak for the good of all. My speech shall explain great 
projects. My passion shall target wickedness. My anger 
shall be for the defence of freedom. My fingers shall 
point to the paths of joy. My limbs shall dance with the 
people's festivities. My prowess and challenges shall 
be for the promotion of love and friendship. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


628 YAJURVEDA 


7. (Raja Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


ag À ocifiigaeedt & at edu à 
seat aaa At non 


Bahu me balamindriyam hastau me karma 
viryam. Atma ksatramuro mama. 


May my arms, strength and prowess, my hands, 


actions and heroism, my heart and my very soul be for 
the supremacy and sovereignty of the world order. 


8. (Sabhapati Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


wein? wena aa siib | 
zesket art fasir Asst udt: u 


Prsthirme rastramudaramamsau griva$ca $ront. 

Uru 'aratni januni vi$o me’ ngani sarvatah. 
The government order is my back. My belly, 
shoulders, neck, hips and loins, thighs, elbows, knees, 


and all my limbs are wholly for the people — my people 
and my government are me. 


9.  (Sabhesha Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


aR fad faa urqüsdfafeiuq à sm 
"eTerUsSr A sp: debe wu: 1 ghai wea 
eat sfen fafer ust ufdfésa: usu 
Nabhirme  cittam vijnanam | payurme' 
pacitirbhasat. Anandanandavandau me bhagah 
saubhagyam pasah. Janghabhyam padbhyam 
dharmo 'smi visi raja pratisthitah. 
I am the ruler, honoured and consecrated among 
my people. I am Dharma, the law, committed to bear 
the burden of the order on my legs and feet. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XX 629 


My navel, mind, knowledge, security, honour and 
reverence, hips and loins, organs of excretion, 
generation and pleasure, honour and dignity, and good 
fortune all is for the order and the people. 


10. (Sabhesha Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
uid arx wfdfreorfz wee wasdag uirar vidi 


uta matya: ufdfreerf at ngon 


Prati ksatre prati tisthami rastre pratyaSvesu 
prati tisthami gosu. Pratyangesu prati tisthamy- 
atman prati pranesu prati tisthami puste prati 
dyavaprthivyoh prati tisthami yajne. 


Accepted, appointed and consecrated in this 
divinely protected Order of the brilliant State of the 
World: I dedicate and commit myself to the Order, in 
the Order, for the Order. I dedicate and commit myself 
to the State, in the State, for the State, to the people, 
among the People, for the People. I dedicate myself to 
the horses and cows. I dedicate myself to all parts of 
the Order and the State. Firmly established in my mind 
and soul, with all my soul and pranic energy, I dedicate 
myself to the living spirit and exuberant dynamics of 
the human nation. I dedicate myself to the growth and 
development of the strength and prosperity of the 
people. In the light of heaven and greenery of the earth 
and her environment, I dedicate myself to heaven and 
earth. I dedicate and commit myself to the grand socio- 
economic yajna of service, governance and brilliance 
of a generous humanity for total and holistic 
development. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


630 YAJURVEDA 


11. (Devas Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


qa «emsueniasr maa: ue | ageatd- 
Afra Gem ufeng: wa 1 car fated ur uec 


Traya deva ekadasa trayastriinsah suradhasah. 
Brhaspatipurohita devasya savituh save. Deva 
devairavantu ma. 


Three are the orders of divinities, brilliant powers 
of nature’s generosity. Three times eleven are they, 
thirtythree powers of grandeur and majesty all, 
Brihaspati, the Sun, great lord of light and knowledge 
being their chief. 


In this great world of Lord Savita’s yajnic 
creation, may the devas, brilliant scholars of knowledge 
and generosity, with all these divine powers, protect 
me and promote me for the higher life. 


Note: The thirty three devas, according to Swami 
Ji are: 


i. Eight Vasus, abodes and supports of life, are: 
earth, water, fire, air, space, sun, moon and the stars. 


ii. Eleven Rudras, viz., five primary pranic 
energies (prana, apana, vyana, udana and samana), five 
secondary pranic energies (naga, kurma, krikala 
devadatta and dhananjaya), and the soul. They are 
Rudras because they destroy pain, and when they leave 
the body they make people cry in sorrow. 


iii. Twelve Adityas, viz., twelve months of the 
year, they being zodiacs of the sun in the year. They are 
Adityas because they count up the time and exhaust the 
life of whatever is born. In addition to these (8+11+12), 
there is Indra, universal electric energy, and Yajna, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XX 631 
universal creative power. 


12. (Vishvedeva Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


wet fadtslfacdrategetsbeqdrer: SO ae sat rait 


aN irah: aatar: ysgar T: 
Qsqaren arearfirateur avecatctecerrsare fat 


Rare dat Aà enrareerdsiersg Ys CATSTU 3 t 


Prathama dvitiyairdvitiyastrtiyaistrtiyah satyena 
satyam yajnena yajno yajurbhiryajuinsi 
samabhih samanyrgbhirrcah puro 'nuvakyabhih 
puro nuvakya yajyabhiryajya vasatkarairvasat- 
kara 'ahutibhirahutayo me kamantsamardh- 
ayantu bhuh svaha. 


The first order of divinities (Vasus) with the 
second order (Rudras), the second with the third 
(Adityas), the third with Satya (nature), nature with 
yajna (science and technology), science and technology 
with Yajurveda hymns (application), application with 
Samaveda hymns (dedication, devotion and joy), 
dedication with Rgveda hymns (knowledge and vision), 
knowledge with Puronuvakas of  Atharva 
(specialization), specialisation with Yajnas (yajnic 
work), yajnic work with Vashatkaras (noble work), 
noble work with ahutis (oblations), oblations (inputs) 
with sincere conduct, and all these (in cycle with the 
Vasus, Rudras and Adityas and so on) on the earth — 
may all these grant all my desires and promote me among 
the people. 


13. (Teacher Preacher Devatas, Prajapati Rshi) 
oat «waft wae aserte: 
mesa ussdafadeafisb asa nssr: ue 3 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


632 YAJURVEDA 
Lomani prayatirmama tvan ma anatiragatih. 
Mamsam ma 'upanatirvasvasthi majja ma’ anatih. 
The hair on my body, my effort and action, my 
skin, my humility, my coming and income, my flesh, 
my courtesy, my wealth, bones, marrow and my humility 
and reverence be all for the teachers and preceptors. 


14. (Agni Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


wer adi calagaput WWW | 
aRt axaradar feasetapeerers2 8: uw t 


Yaddeva devahedanam devasa$cakrma vayam. 
Agnirma tasmadenaso visvanmuncatvainhasah. 


Teachers, preaches, saints and sages, whatever 
our offence we have done to the devas, noble powers, 
may Agni, Lord God and the noble saint, forgive, and 
save us from all that offence, irreverence and sin. 


15. (Vayu Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
fa feat ufa vaneatesfa apart aay | 
aqi wm favatyqsecacda: u£ud 


Yadi diva yadi naktamenamsi cakrma vayam. 
Vayurma tasmadenaso visvanmuncatvamhasah. 


If we commit any sin or offence either in the day 
or in the night, then may Vayu, lord of dynamic 
knowledge and imagination, deliver me from all that 
sin and offence. 


16. (Surya Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
afe wea xeersu-feifu apa wu | 
si ur aerate fasaa: NA N 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XX 633 


Yadi jagradyadi svapna' 'enainsi cakrma vayam. 

Suryo mā tasmadenaso visvanmuncatvamhasah. 

If we happen to commit any offence or sin either 

while awake or while asleep, then may Sun, lord of 

brilliant knowledge and warmth, deliver me from all 
that offence and sin. 


17. (Sages Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


aa HH atv aaa ufafud | waa uad 
weap at wdenrarsfzrendfur acataasia- 
TR ngon 


Yadgrame yadaranye yatsabhayam yadindriye. 
Yacchudre yadarye yadenasScakrma vayam 
yadekasyadhi dharmani tasyavayajanamasi. 


Saints and sages, whatever offence or sin we 
happen to commit in the village, or in the forest, or in 
the assembly, or in the mind, or among the assistants, 
or among the employers, or against anyone’s dharma, 
conscience or profession, then you alone are the powers 
to save and deliver us from that. 


18. (Varuna Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
aaratssreissta aeutfa grating adt aeo ar 
"pw i saya Paor Praet fa agar: | ata 
eadacdatsaeaa ueideiad Garrat ea R- 
ulf& nge 


Yadapo'aghnya'iti varuneti $apamahe tato 
varuna no munca. Avabhrtha nicumpuna 
nicerurasi nicumpunah. Ava devairdeva- 
krtameno' yaksyava martyairmartyakrtam 
pururavno deva risaspahi. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


634 YAJURVEDA 


Prana, life, is precious and sacred. The cow is 
precious and sacred, inviolable. Varuna, Lord Supreme, 
the eminent sage, is great. If ever we injure, violate or 
revile these, then, O Varuna, O generous sage, deliver 
us from that sin. 


Noble sage of knowledge, you are initiated and 
consecrated, blessed, calm and generous as a fountain. 
Ward off the sins committed by the nobles, through/by 
the nobles. Let the ordinary people fight out and 
eliminate the crimes committed by the average people. 
Save us from fear, terror and violence. 


19. (Apah Devta, Prajapati Rshi) 


was a amga: d cat femreerdefnmard: 


"gBrBrar asaras sider: aq afüfranaud = 
ase, ett wow aa fuu eeu 


Samudre te hrdayamapsvantah sam tva visantv- 
osadhirutapah. Sumitriya’ na’ apa’osadhayah 
santu durmitriyastasmai santu yo’sman dvesti 
yam ca vayam dvismah. 

Soma, disciple, your heart and soul is in sea, in 
the midst of the energy there and in the depths of 
celestial waters. May the pranic energies and the vitality 
of the herbs enter your mind with their secrets. May the 
herbs and the pranic energies be friendly to us. They 
will be unfriendly to those negativities which harm us 
and which we, in consequence, hate and avoid. 


20. (Apah Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


guarda pem: faa: erat nata i 
ud aad: perg Ata: don 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XX 635 


Drupadadiva mumucanah svinnah snato 

maladiva. Putam pavitrenevajyamapah 
Sundhantu mainasah. 

Like a prisoner freed from a post of captivity, 

like a man in sweat cleansed of dirt after bath, like ghee 

purified of scum through a strainer, may the waters and 


energies purge me of sin and evil into the purity of 
freedom. 


21. (Surya Devata, Praskanva Rshi) 
sgi atah xq: usdussdz | 
xe dant usd cdfdeguu Re 


Udvayam tamasaspari svah pasyanta’uttaram. 
Devam devatra suryamaganma jyotiruttamam. 


Up we move beyond the dark with a vision of the 
higher regions of bliss, and may we reach the sun, the 
Lord of Light Supreme, among the lights of the world. 


22. (Agni Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


ansaan aa agente I eaaa 
am ade aa wsrat ou emis E Re 


Apo 'adyanvacarisain rasena samasrksmahi. 
Payasvanagna 'agamam tam ma sain srja 
varcasa prajaya ca dhanena ca. 


I have tasted the waters of bliss to-day. Let us all 
create joy and open out to the flood gates of freedom 
and bliss. 


Agni, having drunk of joy and bliss, I have come 
to you. Lord of light and knowledge, bless me with 
children, wealth of knowledge and prosperity and the 
splendour of honour and dignity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


636 YAJURVEDA 


23. (Samid Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
valsartan adit dqelsfu ast aft af | 
wurdafa ufeérdt agar: ag aa: aq farda 
wat | Asaan ae fat arr Sera 3T: 
verme urs 


Edho’syedhisimahi samidasi tejo’si tejo mayi 
dhehi. Samavavarti prthivi samusah samu 
suryah. Samu visvamidam jagat. Vaisva- 
narajyotirbhuyasam vibhun kaman vyasnavai 
bhuh svaha. 


Samit, food of the holy fire, you are the harbinger 
of prosperity. May we be prosperous. You are the food 
of the light divine, light itself. Infuse light and lustre 
into me. May the earth be generous. May the dawns 
bring us light and peace. May the sun give light and 
warmth. May this whole world be full of joy. May I 
shine with the light of the world and be the light itself. 
May I attain my desire and great ambitions. May I, with 
truth of word and deed, attain the glory of the world. 


24. (Agni Devata, Ashvatarashvi Rshi) 


anmada aart amà aft à 
wd ot agi AAA ve AASA usd 


Abhyadadhami samidhamagne vratapate tvayi. 
Vratam ca $raddham copaimindhe tva diksito’ 
aham. 


Agni, lord keeper and sustainer of the vows of 
speech and karma, initiated and consecrated I place the 
fuel into the holy fire with concentration and dedication 
of mind. I light the fire and commit myself to the vows 
of yajna and faith in the divine order. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XX 637 


25. (Agni Devata, Ashvatarashvi Rshi) 
"IX sl a aa od act uta: WE | 
a ote goa uaa at car: aea een 


Yatra brahma ca ksatram ca samyancau caratah 
saha. Tamllokam punyam prajnesam yatra 
devah sahagnina. 

Where the Brahma order of learning and the 
Kshatra order of governance coexist and work together 
in harmony, and where the noble citizens abide by the 
fire of yajna, that holy land and spirit divine, O Lord, I 
pray, reveal to me. 


26. (Agni Devata, Ashvatarashvi Rshi) 


Hsu aed uer ota: WE | 

a ote goa use at afet faad usa 
Yatrendrasca vayusca samyancau caratah saha. 
Tamllokam punyam prajnesam yatra sedima 
vidyate. 


Where Indra is light and power, and Vayu breath 
of life, and both in unison work for all, where want is 
non-existent and weariness no more, that holy land of 
plenty and sacred joy, O Lord of Light, reveal to me. 


27. (Soma Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
At A steel: Gea WaT Te: | 
Tera dda vata sorea: RON 


Amsuna te amsuh prcyatam parusa paruh. 
Gandhaste somamavatu madaya raso’acyutah. 


Soma is the Spirit of life, fragrance imperishable, 
inexhaustible, eternal. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


638 YAJURVEDA 


Let the filament of the soma plant stay joined to 
the branch, let the branch with the plant mature and be 
whole with the plant. 


May the knot of the cane grow out of the knot, 
stay joined to the knot, mature and be one and whole 
with the tree. 


Soma, Spirit of life, may your fragrance and 


eternal vitality protect the unity and wholeness of life 
among all its constituent parts. 


28. (Indra Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


Rea ufifirserafedocrfs ard = | 
wp ava ud feat dafa fence: meN 


Sincanti pari sincantyutsincanti punanti ca. 
Surayai babhrvai made kintvo vadati kintvah. 


Those who take the shower of bliss in soma, life 
divine, merge wholly, purge and raise themselves, and 
purify their soul with the nectar for the sake of vitality, 
dignity and ecstasy of living, they are the immortals. 
‘So what?’ says the sceptic and ends up in the doubt. 


29. (Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 


amda enrfisraterquei «rfe à 
S Wasted A: Ren 


Dhanavantam karambhinamapupavanta- 
mukthinam. Indra pratarjusasva nah. 


Indra, master of knowledge and power of speech, 
in the morning accept and enjoy our food, delicious and 
rich with nutriments, mixed with curds and honey cakes, 
excellently prepared with holy recipes and offered with 
reverence. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XX 639 


30. (Indra Devata, Nrimedha Purushameda Rshis) 


gefegta wea HEA qeu | 
aa Aaaa ta cara wnt 01 


Brhadindraya gayata maruto vrtrahantamam. 
Yena jyotirajanayannrtavrdho devam devaya 
jagrvi. 

Heroes of knowledge, ever watchful, promoters 
of truth and right, sing the great joyous songs of Brihat- 
Sama in honour of mighty Indra, lord of the universe, 
by which you would awaken the heavenly light which 
will break through the clouds of darkness and open the 
flood-gates of light and prosperity. 


31. (Indra Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
aedis Ar: qacart ufemssmda i 
udata urs i321 


Adhvaryo 'adribhih sutam somam pavitra 'anaya. 
Punahindraya patave. 


High-priest of yajna, bring down the soma, waters 
of life, distilled from the clouds and sanctify them for 
the drink of Indra and his citizens of the world order. 


32. (Paramatma Devata, Kaundinya Rshi) 
at spararafétufeifed ecitenrsarfélferar: | asset Ager 
ment Wert warae aft wert cmme aad 


Yo bhutanamadhipatiryasmiAlloka 'adhi sritah. 
Ya'i$e mahato mahanstena grhnami tvamaham 
mayi grhnami tvamaham. 


The Lord that is the presiding power of all the 
forms of existence, under whose law the worlds of the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


640 YAJURVEDA 


universe reside, who is greater than the greatest and 
reigns supreme over all, to this Lord of existence, for 
His grace, I bow in faith. 


Lord of mine and all, I come, I hold on to you, 
and I consecrate my heart and soul with your presence. 


33. (Soma Devata, Kakshivat sukirti Rshi) 


suearmdétarsearfserszil car GA eren ear gats 
WH A aA Raa cer eri eere cord er eem spetta 3 UI 


Upayamagrhito’syasvibhyam tva sarasvatyai 
tvendraya tva sutramna’esa te yonira$vibhyam 
tva sarasvatyai tvendraya tva sutramne. 


Teacher/scholar, approved and authorized you are 
by the Ashvinis, teachers and scholars of eminence, for 
the service of Sarasvati, language and learning, Indra, 
administration, and Sutraman, security and discipline. 


Now here is your new office with the Ashvinis, 
teachers and scholars, with adequate powers in the 
service of Sarasvati, teaching and research, Indra, 
administration, planning and development, and 
Sutraman, discipline and security of the organisation. 


34. (Lingokta Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
Wore saamas: staat T d 
eret Ñ fasastast miats feremdan: ust 


Pranapa me’ apanapascaksuspah srotrapasca 
me. Vaco me visvabhesajo manaso’ si vilayakah. 


Soma, teacher scholar, you are protector of my 
prana, apana, eye and ear, speech and language, and 
you are the master and controller of my mind. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XX 641 


35. (Lingokta Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


stated et wieerfeesawdrstur Garant aes i 
sdgdssdgae MATA au 


Asvinakrtasya te sarasvatikrtasyendrena 
sutramna krtasya. Upahuta'upahutasya 
bhaksayami. 


On invitation, I take the food served here as it 
has been prepared by experts, supervised by learned 
women, ordered by Indra, the dignified host, and 
certified by the chief of security. 


36. (Indra Devata, Angirasa Rshi) 


ufgsz-sswurnriles umet uedsglssm:i 
Badana ators at fer ait erem us 


Samiddha 'indra'usasamanike puroruca purva- 
krdvavrdhanah. Tribhirdevaistriin$ata vajra- 
bahurjaghana vrtram vi duro vavara. 


Just as Indra, the sun, ancient light of the world, 
refulgent in the splendour of the dawn, blazing and 
advancing in the east with thirty three devatas, destroys 
the clouds of darkness and opens the flood gates of light, 
so do you, brilliant man of knowledge and modern 
challenges, advance with all the force of your scholars 
of the Vasu, Rudra and Aditya order, destroy the 
darkness of ignorance and open the flood gates of the 
light of knowledge. 


37. (Tanunapat Devata, Angirasa Rshi) 


CRISTSH: Wht snp aaaea wrap Sm ad 
Roars casa ret wagered data ela: uat 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


642 YAJURVEDA 


Narasarnsah prati $uro mimanastanunapat prati 
yajnasya dhama. Gobhirvapavan madhuna 
samanjan hiranyai$candri yajati pracetah. 


Universally admirable is the man who is brave 
and totally fearless, maker of many things, self- 
dependent and self-protective, wholly dedicated to 
yajna, farming the land with bulls and cows, well- 
provided with milk, butter and honey, bright with golden 
wealth, and highly enlightened, and begins his day with 
yajna. 


38. (Indra Devata, Angirasa Rshi) 


sfedr ard ftars ussrfirfee repetit ferar vega: | 
Geant aNg wand AT wpTUTS Re 


Idito devairharivan’abhistirajuhvano havisa 
Sardhamanah. Purandaro gotrabhidvajra- 
bahurayatu yajnamupa no jusanah. 


Indra, the man respected and admired by the 
godly, brilliant spirit of many yajnas, invited and 
engaged in discussions with presentations, bold yet 
patient, breaking the clouds and enemy forts like Indra, 
lord of the thunderbolt, is invited to our yajna. May he 
come and grace the yajna with his presence. 


39. (Indra Devata. Angirasa Rshi) 
won afédfierasz-: ureirdedtaafasi uere: 
seu: ushuraeurmutfacmed adh: ws: iau 


Jusano barhirharivan na 'indrah pracinam sidat 
pradisa prthivyah. Uruprathah prathamanam 
syonamadityairaktam vasubhih sajosah. 


Just as Indra, the sun, wielder of the waters and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XX 643 


expansive lord of the rays of light, pervading the sky 
and regions of the universe, united with the Vasus and 
the Adityas, graces the ancient, vast, beautiful and 
celebrated floor of the earth, so please you, celebrated 
man of yajna, grace our home of yajna. 


40. (Indra Devata, Angirasa Rshi) 
Eu wi: Hae ada uiui aq sta: wu: 
ant gia fassi dit wear 
agafi: mson 


Indram durah kavasyo dhavamana vrsanam 
yantu janayah supatnih. Dvaro devirabhito vi 
Srayantam suvira viram prathamana mahobhih. 


Just as noble women sweet of speech and good 
wives and mothers to be, eagerly join Indra, virile young 
men of power and dignity, and find the door to their 
new home of settlement, so should noble and virile 
young men, celebrated for their power and dignity, take 
to good and virtuous women wholly and freely and settle 
in a happy new home. 


41. (Ushasa-nakta Devate, Angirasa Rshi) 


parent sect ged weet Gee SA 
ded dd astur Gade dart dei dota: quss u 


Usasanakta brhati brhantam payasvati sudughe 
Suramindram. Tantum tatam pe$asa samvayantt 
devanam devam yajatah surukme. 


Night and dawn, beautiful, great, abundant, 
generous, wearing the design of the warp and woof of 
light, already spread out in the east, with form and 
colour, adorn Indra, the rising sun, light of lights so 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


644 YAJURVEDA 
brave and majestic, with the splendour of the morning. 


(Just as night and dawn look forward to the sun, 
so should the people look forward to and associate with 
the brilliant and the brave and fearless.) 


42. (Daivyadhyapaka-upadeshaka Devata, Angirasa Rshi) 


fer frat ade: gear tates wernr qaret i 
Fea TA ned acerba eit verrfetd feret ETAT: ine 


Daivya mimana manusah purutra hotara- 
vindram prathama suvaca. Murdhan yajnasya 
madhuna dadhana pracinam jyotirhavisa 
vrdhatah. 


Teachers and preachers, learned and brilliant 
makers of yajnic projects, generous in oblations, noble 
of speech, first and foremost in yajnic organisations, 
leaders and supporters of people in many ways, with 
honey and fragrant materials light up, promote and 
advance the ancient fire of yajna and glorify Indra, the 
Spirit, power and ecstasy of the holy performance. 


43. (Tisro-daivyah, Three goddesses Devata, Angirasa Rshi) 


fret aefré ferar asg prom Seat A weit: 
shea wd weder madet def andi faya- 
Fa: ss u 


Tisro devirhavisa vardhamana 'indram jusana 
janayo na patnih. Acchinnam tantum payasa 
sarasvatida devi bharati vi$vaturtih. 


The trinity of Ida, Sarasvati and Bharati, 
universally active like nursing mothers, constantly feed, 
sustain and augment the continuous flow of life-yajna 
with holy food and drinks, serving thereby and pleasing 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XX 645 


Indra, lord of existence. (Ida holds the inexhaustible 
potential, Sarasvati controls the flow, and Bharati 
defines the forms in the continuum.) 


44. (Tvashta Devata, Angirasa Rshi) 
vere aerate «uit surentsfelezsisrit qatar 
qur ATL AIT RIA regit SAT THAT serre 


Tvasta dadhacchusmamindraya vrsne’pako’- 
cisturyaSase puruni. Vrsa yajan vrsanam 
bhurireta murdhan yajnasya samanaktu devan. 


May Tvashta, creator of fine and sophisticated 
forms, provide the weapons of defence and power for 
virile Indra, lord defender of life. Let the dynamic man 
going far and wide collect various and versatile materials 
for his glory. Let the generous man of tempestuous speed 
studying the rain and clouds at the head of yajna (of 
science and technology) bring together the noblest 
scholars and sages in the service of the generous Indra. 


45. (Vanaspati Devata, Angirasa Rshi) 
ermarfaveurer 4 use emessdfidr- me: | 
ster gelsist vum: wat aa usb get inset 


Vanaspatiravasrsto na pasaistmanya sama- 
njanchamita na devah. Indrasya havyair- 
jatharam prnanah svadati yajnam madhuna 
ghrtena. 


The chief of the forests, like an arrow shot from 
the bow, with all the bonds of dedication of his heart 
and soul, fills the treasures of Indra with created wealth 
like the brilliant and blissful yajna of the nation, and 
himself too enjoys the honey sweet gifts of the yajna. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


646 YAJURVEDA 


46. (Svahakritayah Devata, Angirasa Rshi) 


THUS ufi vresg-t Garton quere! 
gage ndr dran: caret aarsargat nrasramnes 


Stokanamindum prati $ura'indro vrsayamano 
vrsabhasturasat. Ghrtaprusa manasa moda- 
manah svaha deva'amrta madayantam. 


May the brave, generous and exalted hero, Indra, 
conqueror of the violent, and the brilliant realized souls 
among humanity, rejoicing at heart by the sacred acts 
of their holy sacrifice into the fire and gifts of love and 
kindness, drink of the nectar sweets of soma in yajnic 
life and live the ecstasy of their immortal being on earth. 


47. (Indra Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


amarfergisdussd sgg Ea: Hamd sm: 
aaam vefteit-t arrafurdfea werk ineo 


A ydatvindro’vasa’upa na’iha stutah sadha- 
madastu Surah. Vavrdhanastavisiryasya 
purvirdyaurna ksatramabhibhuti pusyat. 


May Indra, mighty hero, come for our defence 
and protection here and, sung and celebrated, be with 
us as a friend and companion, augmenting his forces 
trained by veterans, which superior power of his forces, 
able to suppress the enemies, may strengthen and 
promote our social order like the umbrella of vast 
heavens. 


48. (Indra Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


ST aS Sal quar tsar Pe qpada aman 
sihishriatidaarg: Us Tad Taft: EUM 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XX 647 


A na'indro durada na’ dsddabhistikrdavase 
yasadugrah. Ojisthebhirnrpatirvajrabahuh 
sange samatsu turvanih prtanyun. 


Indra, come to us from far and near for our 
protection. Mighty hero, achiever of cherished goals, 
ruler of the people, man of arms of steel, victorious over 
the enemies, come with the most powerful forces for 
our defence in the battles of life. 


49. (Indra Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


att asst efifsraicrestateirdrser vreler wr à 
Reia ast maat ferent aaa at emsterdrines 


A na'indro haribhiryatvaccharvacino' vase 
radhase ca. Tisthati vajri maghava virapsimam 
yajnamanu no vajasatau. 


May Indra, eminent man of dynamic knowledge 
and movement, come well with his power of horse for 
our protection and advancement in prosperity. Wielder 
of the thunderbolt, lord of power and majesty, mighty 
strong, may he grace this our yajna with favour. May 
he stand by us firm and inviolable in the battles of life. 


50. (Indra Devata, Garga Rshi) 


xrarzfiargufearrfizsedes Gears | 

Bale vim Gegdhtes cated at erat erties: uo i 
Trataramindramavitaramindram have have 
suhavam $uramindram. Hvayami $akram 


puruhutamindram svasti no maghava 
dhatvindrah. 


I invoke Indra, lord of might and majesty, 
adorable and universally adored, saviour, protector and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


648 YAJURVEDA 


promoter of His creation. I invoke Him for protection 
in every problem of life. 


I call upon Indra, royal and brave ruler of the 
nation, saviour and protector of the people, and 
destroyer of the nation's enemies. I call upon him for 
protection and solution of every problem in the life of 
the nation. 


I call upon Indra, commander of the army, 
defender and protector of the land, instant in action, for 
defence in every battle of the nation. 


May Indra, saviour, protector, defender and 
promoter of life, destroyer of evil and router of the 
enemy, lord of power and prosperity, bless us with all 
that is good and hold it safe for us. 


51. (Indra Devata, Garga Rshi) 


Sa: GATT tara tisarallfar: gdr tag ferserdar:i 
areal gasanh Hund yete Uda: eur gue 


Indrah sutrama svavan’avobhih sumrdiko 
bhavatu visvavedah. Badhatam dveso’ abhayam 
krnotu suviryasya patayah syama. 


May Indra, lord of life and the world, gracious 
saviour and protector, sole lord of his power and people, 
master of universal wealth and knowledge, lord of 
progress and advancement, we pray, be kind and give 
us all the protection we need. 


May the lord keep off all hate and enemies and 
bless us with freedom from fear. We pray we may be 
defenders and promoters of manly power and honour. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XX 649 
52. (Indra Devata, Garga Rshi) 


wed aax dadt ufaeneurfu we ebur xad dg 
a GAM veretsszissndpssmqfera gu: aa- 
ERI uw WN 


Tasya’vayam sumatau yajniyasyapi bhadre 
saumanase syama. Sa sutrama svavan’indro’ 
asme 'araccid dvesah sanutaryuyotu. 


May Indra, lord of life and the world/Ruler of 
the land, master of his own power and people, saviour 
and protector, always and everyway keep off from us 
whatever hate or emity is there far and near. 


May we be with him in his yajna of life, in his 
creative and constructive works, and abide by him 
enjoying the favour of his love as well as judgement. 


53. (Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 


em wets uwffsraife wate: 1 at at GR 
fafa cua fe = urfsrirsfa eta ats usdf 14301 


A mandrairindra haribhiryahi mayuraromabhih. 
Ma tva ke cinni yaman vim na pasino 'ti dhanveva 
tan ihi. 

Come Indra, lord of might and majesty, by your 
charming peacock-haired horses. Let none whatsoever 
hold you back, let no hunter catch you with snares like 
a bird. March on like an exceptional hero of the bow, 
advance and take them (the enemies) on. 


54. (Indra Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


rd quui adage, efWtsrdssre eium: 0H 
a: xar eirvetzar tite ule vefeafir: Gat A uet 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


650 YAJURVEDA 


Evedindram vrsanam vajrabahum vasisthaso 
abhyarcantyarkaih. Sa na stuto viravaddhatu 
gomad yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


The best, richest and most excellent people, well 
settled in peace and prosperity, honour and worship with 
prayers and good works Indra, lord of might and 
majesty, ruler of the land and the world, hero of the 
arms of steel. Honoured and worshipped thus, may he 
hold and protect our land and nation blest with heroic 
warriors and the wealth of cows, fields and pastures. 


55. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 
wfigrsarfnfyerar eruit wat ferre Aa: | 
ge Sep mad ark eRT uuu 
Samiddho' agnira$vina tapto gharmo virat 
sutah. Duhe dhenuh sarasvati somarn $ukrami- 
hendriyam. 


Agni, lighted, heated, burning and blazing as 
universal and sovereign light of the world, inspired with 
vitality, creates food and energy for the Lord's creation. 


Sarasvati, voice of universal knowledge, holds 
the pure nectar of the wealth and grandeur of the spirit 
of life and, like a cow, yields it for the nourishment and 
benefit of men and women of the world. 


So must I create light and vitality. So should all 
men and women do like the Ashvinis, powers of health 
and nourishment. 

56. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 
aia fast shao eme | 
"eem mtse ufefsdsrn uus 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XX 651 


Tanupa bhisaja sute'$vinobha sarasvati. 
Madhva rajainsindriyamindraya pathibhir- 
vahan. 


In this world of beauty created with the sweetness 
of soma distilled from the spirit of nature, both the 
Ashvinis, powers of health, the physicians, and 
Sarasvati, scholar of knowledge and the divine voice, 
should bear the honour and glory of Indra, lord of the 
world, and render it back to Indra,the ruler, in faith and 
gratitude. 


57. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 


Supe: Uttadt uere TAA d 
aetan ae Hast furum ga uui 


Indrayendum sarasvati narasamsena nagnahum. 
Adhatamasvina madhu bhesajam bhisaja sute. 
Let Sarasvati, mother scholar of knowledge and 
the Vedic voice, create the inspiring honour and joy of 
life by the admirable yajna of the people in honour of 
Indra, lord of yajna and the world. 


Let the Ashvinis, experts of health and medicine, 
create and bear the sweet medicinal panacea in honour 
of the Lord. 


58. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 
amnem maietan eu | 
zenan Gast: as TT uud 


Ajuhvana sarasvatindráyendriyüni viryam. 
Idabhira$vinavisain samurjain sain rayim 
dadhuh. 

The wife, woman of knowledge respected and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


652 YAJURVEDA 


praised all round, should hold in the home the best of 
health-giving, rejuvenating and powerful foods for her 
husband's body, mind and senses. The physicians and 
nutricians should, with their knowledge and researches, 
create special energising foods, elevating tonics and 
blissful wealth of health. 


59. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 


afa ror: ues GAs sr dfrent à 
mad amha aasta  urda neu 


Asvina namuceh sutam somařñ $ukram parisruta. 
Sarasvati tamabharad barhisendraya patave. 


The scholars of science and medicine and women 
of knowledge and motherly love, with all their research 
and yajnic dedication, should create and bear for Indra 
pure nectars of vitality distilled from the juices extracted 
from all herbs for the cure of chronic and deadly 
diseases. 


60. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 


qa) emeveritzfsevem a wir fast: 
Sat A Uedtssa ge cnIHDeHdWedL gol 


Kavasyo na vyacasvatirasvibhyam na duro 
disah. Indro na rodasi’ubhe duhe kamant- 
sarasvati. 


As the humming bees go round wide spaces, as 
wide spaces are lit up by the sun and moon, as Indra, 
universal energy, invigorates the heaven and earth, so 
does Sarasvati, mother of vision and knowledge, with 
the Ashvinis, fiery energy of the sun and soothing beauty 
of the moon, create all the means of joy and comfort for 
all. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XX 653 


61. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 


Eaki hai Msc 
HAA gA aA ata NGR N 


Usasanaktamasvina divendram sayamindriyaih. 
Sanjanane supesasa samanjate sarasvatya. 


Day and night from early dawn to evening, 
Ashvinis, scholars of knowledge and wisdom, with 
Sarasvati, mother of joy and generosity, in words of 
sweetness and persuasion, knowing well together life 
and its values, invest Indra, the human spirit, with a 
handsome form and noble faculties, powers and 
prosperity. 


62. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 


urd Asean feat urfe Aarts areata | 

Wen grant faust uefirgsrat qa een 

Patam no’asvina diva pāhi naktain sarasvati. 

Daivya hotara bhisaja patamindram saca sute. 
Men of knowledge and wisdom, teachers and 


preachers, and mother Sarasvati protect and promote 
us day and night. 


Noble men of yajna and sacrifice, men of health 
and medicine, working together in the world, save and 
protect the human spirit, create and protect the spirit of 


joy. 

63. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 
freee maaan undis | 
Wa ther aratrata uere ua 


Tisrastredha sarasvatyasvina bharatida. Tivram 
parisruta somamindraya susuvurmadam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


654 YAJURVEDA 


Three motherly spirits, Vedic vision, knowledge 
and wisdom, and the mother-land, and two powers of 
health and medicine, may distil and create the intense 
and joyous nectar of soma extracted from all nature for 
Indra, the human soul, in three ways, that is, for physical, 
mental and spiritual nourishment. 


64. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 
sian das ue] Yast o ateadl ad 
Se at cur: Brung: UI ues 


Asvina bhesjam madhu bhesajam nah sarasvati. 
Indre tvasta yasah Sriyain rupam rupamadhuh 
sute. 


The soma juice of health having been prepared 
for us and Indra, the ruling powers, may the Ashvinis, 
sanative powers of nature and the scholars, Sarasvati, 
generous motherly women of knowledge, and Tvashta, 
refiners and creators of beautiful forms bless us with 
honey-sweets of life, honour, wealth and prosperity and 
graceful forms of individual and social life appropriate 
for everyone. 


65. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 


Risa enmeufd: vera: dRea d 
wliemetufsersem He ge Aq: Aad wea 
Rtuthendro vanaspatih $a$amanah parisruta. 


Kiladlamasvibhyam madhu duhe dhenuh 
sarasvati. 


Let Indra, the ruling power, the chief of the 
forests, the great growing trees, the generous cow and 
the enlightened mother, Sarasvati, with the advice and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XX 655 


expertise of the Ashvinis, scholars of health care and 
medication, create and produce powerful honey-tonics 
from the flowing and fermenting juices according to 
the seasons. 


66. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 
TR Aaa urdiur ufzzml i 
rendi CaM vem wed eb usd 


Gobhirna somama$vina masarena parisruta. 
Samadhatain sarasvatya svahendre sutam 
madhu. 


Ashvinis, expert powers of health and nutrition, 
like milk produced and held by cows, create and hold 
for the man of power and glory soma, honey-sweet 
tonics, distilled from widely extracted juices mixed with 
curds and barley prepared by the generous mother 
Sarasvati with love and dedication. 


67. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 


aRt gfafi easi weet era à 
at yeng efe wu ge 


Asvina havirindriyam namucerdhiya sarasvati. 
A $ukramasuradvasu maghamindraya jabhrire. 


Let the Ashvinis, scholars of health and nature, 
and Sarasvati, expert of science and the divine word, 
with their intelligence and vision, distil and create from 
the heavenly waters of space, modes of Prakriti, pure 
vitality, exceptional drinks, wealth and prosperity, 
sacred materials for yajna, and noble mind and senses 
worthy of the man of honour and glory. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


656 YAJURVEDA 
68. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 


aaa atadt feuda | 
a fata act ueber Gat usc 


Yama$vina sarasvati havisendramavardhayan. 
Sa bibheda valam magham namucavasure saca. 


Indra, man of power and glory, whom the 
Ashvinis, masters of health and vitality, and Sarasvati, 
lady of knowledge and divine speech, together, created 
and reared with holy foods and drinks, could surely 
break through the wondrous vitalities of nature hidden 
in the heavenly waters of space. 


69. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 


afd usta: wemíserer attach oa 
wenarssrzrTWG fem uasdfz3: ee 


Tamindram pasavah saca$vinobha sarasvati. 
Dadhana 'abhyanusata havisa yajfia 'indriyaih. 
That wondrous vitality of soma which the 
animals, both the Ashvinis, scholars of life sciences, 
and Sarasvati, generous mother scholar of knowledge 
and divine vision share and bear in common, you all 
celebrate and intensify in yajna with powerful holy 
offerings and yourselves shine bright in consequence. 


70. (Indra-Savita-Varuna Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 
assasshga ag: fer aho t: 
a qmi gadaa Www W901 


Ya’indra’indriyam dadhuh savita varuno 
bhagah. Sa sutrama havispatiryajamanaya 
sascata. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XX 657 


Lord creator Savita, supreme lord Varuna, and 
Bhaga, lord of glory, bless Indra, lord of power and 
prosperity, with wealth and riches of mind and sense. 
The same lord Indra of yajna and holy materials, saviour 
and protector of the soul, we pray, may provide for the 
yajamana. 


71. (Indra-Savita-Varuna Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 
aaa ator agentur wISDÉ | 
stad miade dart acifegar won 


Savita varuno dadhad yajamanaya dasuse. 
Adatta namucervasu sutrama balamindriyam. 


The supreme lord Varuna, creator Savita, and 
saviour and protector of life Sutrama, collect energy, 
prosperity and efficiency of intelligence from the spatial 
currents of nature and bear it to bestow it on the generous 
yajamana. 


72. (Indra-Savita-Varuna Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 


wur: grafts ws afaar f2rdu i 
wart asta act sinu awatera worl 


Varunah ksatramindriyam bhagena savita 
Sriyam. Sutrama yasasa balam dadhana 
yajnamasata. 

Just as Varuna, man of excellence, Savita, 
creative man of inspiration, and Sutrama, protective man 
of industry, create the social order, power, strength and 
beauty, and hold and sustain it with honour and grace 
and thereby attain the fruits of yajna. So should all men 
and women try to achieve the earthly goal of their life 
with yajna. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


658 YAJURVEDA 


73. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 


aan mR gars rds eria | 
zeem asta esi 


Asvina gobhirindriyam asvebhirviryam balam. 
Havisendram sarasvati yajamanamavardhayan. 


The Ashvins, creative and curative powers of 
nature, and the teacher and the preacher, and Sarasvati, 
universal intelligence, and the woman of knowledge and 
enlightenment advance Indra, prosperous man of yajna, 
with wealth and power by cows and produce of the earth, 
valour and prowess by horses, and moral and spiritual 
strength by the holy foods of yajna fire. 


74. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 


wr Ader Gastar fatvaadstt at d 
mead gamd cH sed ext 


Ta nasatya supesasa hiranyavartani nara. 
Sarasvati havismatindra karmasu no 'vata. 
Indra, leader and path-maker possessed of the 
wealth of knowledge and power, those two Ashvinis, 
teacher and preacher, graceful of form, immaculate in 
thought and conduct, foremost in virtue moving on the 
paths of gold, and Sarasvati, generous mother 
overflowing with yajnic materials, guide and protect us 
on the paths of action. 


75. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 
vr fast Garon a Arar attach | 
a dae maketa eater uweuu 


Ta bhisaja sukarmana sa sudugha sarasvati. Sa 
vrtraha $atakraturindraya dadhurindriyam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XX 659 


The two physicians of body and soul, teacher- 
preacher and the doctor, the learned woman, giver of 
total fulfilment, and the brilliant man of hundred-fold 
genius, mighty opener of the treasures of good fortune, 
may these create and promote all the power and 
prosperity for Indra, the happy man. 


76. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 


werxprHufserm adararat wat | 
fiam: maig paaa ean 


Yuvam suramamasvina namucavasure saca. 
Vipipanah sarasvatindram karmasvavata. 


Come Ashvinis, both protector promoters of life, 
come-Sarasvati, enlightened mothers of the land, come 
all of you together, and, drinking deep at the nation's 
fount of glory, defend her honour at every move in the 
onward march to progress within the ceaseless flow of 
divine evolution. 


77. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 


qifa fartatearsrgag: aAa: (ueque 
aa: erat: meai ver maaro wow 


Putramiva pitaravasvinobhendravathuh 
kavyairdamsanabhih. Yatsuramam vyapibah 
Sactbhih sarasvati tva maghavannabhisnak. 


Indra, lord of knowledge, power and grandeur, 
now that you have drunk keep at the joyous fount of 
life with your mighty deeds of grace worthy of poetic 
songs of celebration, may Sarasvati, enlightened mother 
of the land, recompense and consecrate you. May both 
the Ashvinis, divine powers of health and intelligence, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


660 YAJURVEDA 


like father and mother, protect and promote you as a 
child. 


78. (Agni Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 


"femasenessmrdssamil ewm Hurssieneras- 
Sea: eBremerü Ages werd gar fd waa 
"TIGHT edit 


Yasminnasvasa’rsabhasa’ uksano vasa mesa’ 
avasrstasa’ ahutah. Kilalape somaprsthaya 
vedhase hrda matim janaya carumagnaye. 
Man of knowledge, enlightened citizen, blessed 
is the land where horses, strong and virile bulls and 
bullocks, cows, sheep and other animals are planned, 
produced, raised, trained, and deployed in service; where 
Agni, brilliant leader and ruler and a revered man of 
knowledge is protector and promoter of food and bearer 
of the burdens of soma for the prosperity of the people; 
there, in the land, noble citizen, create a good 
disposition, high opinion and charming love for Agni. 


79. (Agni Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 


seer gears a ea yea ata art: 
aera galt were as aes egentes N 


Ahavyagne havirasye te sruciva ghrtam camviva 
somah. Vajasaniin rayimasme suviram 
prasastam dhehi yas$asam brhantam. 


Agni, rich libations of havi, fragrant materials as 
ghee in the ladle and soma in the cup are offered into 
your fiery mouth. We pray create for us and bless us 
with plenty of food and victorious generosity, noble war- 
like children, wealth and prosperity and resounding 
honour of universal order. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XX 661 


80. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi) 
sive asta wed: urgra meai e i 
aAA serrata «eff icon 


AS$vina tejasa caksuh pranena sarasvati viryam. 
Vacendro balenendraya dadhurindriyam. 


Ashivinis, creative powers of nature and the 
experts of health and nutrition, Sarasvati, divine 
intelligence and the enlightened mother, and Indra, the 
sun and the man of knowledge and power, these create 
and strengthen for the living soul the eye with light, 
virility with pranic energy, a sharp mind with senses, 
and honourable disposition with vital energy and noble 
speech. 


81. (Ashvinau Devate, Gritsamada Rshi) 


THs g taena aT | 

adit Set TAAL eg 

Gomadu su nasatyasvavadyatamasvina. Vartti 
rudra nrpayyam. 

Ashvinis, eminent teacher and sagely preacher 
going by the path of truth, and Rudras, men of justice 
and rectitude, go slow by the path of the cow, go fast by 
the path of the horse, as is fair, but see you go by the 
path which is beneficial to humanity and worthy of 
acceptance and support. 


82. (Ashvinau Devate, Gritsamada Rshi) 


a Feat Ad saree quus | 
Ske wat Ra: RN 


Na yatparo nantara’ adadharsad vrsanvasu. 
Duhsamso martyo ripuh. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


662 YAJURVEDA 


Ashvinis, ruler and defender, showers of wealth 
and shelter of the strong, let there be no man too strong 
uncontrollable, far or near or in the middle, to terrorize 
us or jeopardize the state. 


83. (Ashvinau Devate, Gritsamada Rshi) 
wr sam atentvert xf fusrQenasu | 
ferra aR usu 
Ta na'a vodhamasvina rayim pisangasandrsam. 
Dhisnya varivovidam. 
Ashvinis, both ruler and commander of the state, 
with your intelligence, create, bear and manage the 


wealth bright and beautiful as gold which may bring 
honour and comfort to the nation. 


84. (Sarasvati Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi) 
uam 4: attadt cemstfWeifsriedt i 
aa cu frede: wxi 
Pavaka nah sarasvati vjebhirvajinivati. Yajnam 
vastu dhiyavasuh. 

Sarasvati, mother spirit of divinity, mistress of 
sacred knowledge and super-intelligence, purifier of the 
mind and soul and creator of prosperity with divine 
vision and knowledge of nature, may, we pray, grace 
and intensify our yajna and bless us with purity and 
prosperity. 

85. (Sarasvati Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi) 
ira fzcit gga erdt upra | 


aa dà aad neu 


Codayitri sunrtanam cetanti sumatinam. Yajnam 
dadhe sarasvati. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XX 663 


Sarasvati inspires the voices of holy truth, she 
awakens and brightens the noble intelligence of 
intellectuals. May she, we pray, bear our yajna forward 
and carry it on to high success. 


86. (Sarasvati Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi) 


aasan: ata w caufa eat i 
fart fasar farta wan 


Maho'arnah sarasvati pra cetayati ketuna. 
Dhiyo vi$va virajati. 

Sarasvati, Divine Intelligence, inspires the cosmic 
mind with consciousness and vests the universal Word 
with meaning and self-revelation. It illuminates the 
mental faculties of the soul with divine light and matures 
their potential for self-expression. 


87. (Indra Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi) 


zaai Frau wpersgH caret: |i 
sTUeft feret gard: cet 


Indrayahi citrabhano suta'ime tvayavah. 
Anvibhistana putasah. 


Indra, lord of versatile forms and lights of 
knowledge, ruler, president of the assembly, come and 
take your share of the things rich in quality, prepared 
by hand and cleansed by fingers. 


88. (Indra Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi) 


sorte RAA fads: garda: | 
sa aat art: ec 


Indrayahi dhiyesito viprajutah sutavatah. Upa 
brahmani vaghatah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


664 YAJURVEDA 


Indra, lord of power and majesty, refined by 
intelligence, inspired by the wise, enlightened by the 
divine voice, come and accept the reverence and 
hospitality of the makers of soma. 


89. (Indra Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi) 


sat assu setter afta: od 
aa da yw: ues 


Indrayahi tutujana'upa brahmani harivah. Sute 
dadhisva nascanah. 


Indra, lord of knowledge and power, come on 
horse and chariot at your fastest and, in our yajnic 
celebration, accept our homage of food and prayer. 


90. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi) 
afat ai Hep ener USAT | 
sad: Gamat quer weedieiuneb vet gon 
A$vina pibatam madhu sarasvatya sajosasa. 
Indrah sutrama vrtraha jusantam somyam 


madhu. 


Ashvinis, scholars of nature and teachers of 
humanity, with Sarasvati, vision and voice of divinity, 
may drink deep of the honey-sweets of life. 


Indra, lord of power and prosperity, saviour of 
society, dispeller of darkness and breaker of the clouds, 
may enjoy thenectar-sweets of peace andsomaic ecstasy. 


gta fasitseara: u 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXI 665 


CHAPTER-XXI 


1. (Varuna Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi) 
gH H anor seit gdn vd esu | 
TATHAERTA i9 11 


Imam me varuna $rudhi havamadya ca mrdaya. 
Tvamavasyuracake. 


Varuna, lord supreme and first of my choice and 
love, I yearn for light and protection and I have come to 
you: Listen to this prayer of mine to-day and be pleased 
to bless me. 


2.  (Varuna Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi) 


carat art erdum adamant asta gaf: 
SSSA AGUS SITESTR STEHT ASST: WATE: Us t 
Tattva yami brahmana vandamanastadasaste 


yajamano havirbhih. Ahedamano varuneha 
bodhyurusamsa ma na'ayuh pra mosth. 


Varuna, lord supreme, as the yajamana honours 
you with holy offerings in worship, so do I come to you 
singing songs of praise. Universally sung and celebrated, 
pleased and gracious, enlighten us here. Let not our life 
slip away through the fingers. 


3.  (Agni-Varuna Devate, Vamadeva Rshi) 


ve sarei eurn fera dew àexssrd mA- 
Great: aa afean: vista fagar gatesfa 
WHHTEETEHSD U3 N 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


666 YAJURVEDA 


Tvam no'agne varunasya vidvan devasya hedo’ 
ava yasisisthah. Yajistho vahnitamah sosucano 
visva dvesansi pra mumugdhyasmat. 


Agni, sagely man of light, brilliant scholar and 
teacher, most dedicated to yajna, surest guide to light 
and life, purest purifier, save us from frivolity and 
offence to Varuna, lord supreme of the world, and help 
us keep away from all hate and anger. 


4.  (Agni-Varuna Devate, Vamadeva Rshi) 


" cw isms dA eraen sear 
opel ard uus A aeur vum dife dolens 


[o 


"gest asfar irs 


Sa tvam no'agne'vamo bhavoti nedistho'asya 
usaso uyustau. Ava yaksva no varunaim rarano 
vihi mrdikam suhavo na'edhi. 


Agni, light of life, be our saviour and protector 
at the closest with all the favour and felicity as in the 
light of the dawn. Joyous and generous, lead us on to 
Varuna, lord supreme of the world. Kind and 
compassionate, come in response to our invocation and 
bring us the gifts of your grace. 


5.  (Adityah Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


wey Ww uneneuedrügaer weffnduü uuu | 
gaama grio gaot wu 


Mahımu su matarain suvratanamrtasya patni- 
mavase huvema. Tuviksatramajarantimurucim 
susarmanamaditiin supranitim. 


For our protection and sustenance, we invoke and 
serve the great Aditi, creative power of the universe, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXI 667 


mother of the observer of pious vows of discipline, 
keeper of the universal laws of truth, mighty queen of 
the earth, unageing, expansive, sweet shelter of all, 
inviolable and the generator of noble values. 


6.  (Aditi Devata, Gayaplata Rshi) 


Sutramanam prthivim dyamanehasam susarma- 
namaditim supranitim. Daivim navam svaritra- 
managasamasravantimaruhema svastaye. 


Let us, for the sake of success and salvation, 
mount the boat with efficient ores, sailing across to 
safety, firm as earth, bright as heaven, inviolable, sweet 
shelter, unbreakable, well-guided, divine, faultless and 
free from leakage. 


7. (Svargya Nau Devata, Gayaplata Rshi) 
=I z] t l 
vrarfitarescereel non 
Sunavamaruheyamasravantimanagasam. Sata- 


ritram svastaye. 


Let me ride the boat to safety and prosperity — 
the boat is auspicious, faultless, sinless, and fitted with 
a hundred oars. 


8.  (Mitra-Varunau Devate, Vishvamitra Rshi) 


em "il araeo ented ferqerrs i 
"EST vwde$fu pq dedi 


A no mitrāvarunā ghrtairgavyutimuksatam. 
Madhva rajansi sukratu. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


668 YAJURVEDA 


Mitra and Varuna, noble experts of our yajna of 
science and technology, sprinkle and consecrate our 
underground path ways with water, and shower our 
paths in the sky with honey. 


9. (Agni Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


u aat fagd viret asan A vedfaged get i 
SAT A SM saad Gar sd P araeo ATN N 


Pra bahava sisrtam jivase na'a no gavyuti- 
muksatam ghrtena. A ma jane $ravayatam 
yuvana $rutam me mitravaruna havema. 


Mitra and Varuna, young people of science and 
technology, listen to this prayer of mine. Extend your 
arms for the progress of our life. Sprinkle our yajnic 
paths with water and ghrta. Speak among the people of 
this programme of ours. 


10. (Ritvijah Devata, Atreya Rshi) 
watt werd amt edu cantar fasta: cant: 
wWarasté qartatesta amaa: got 


Sarn no bhavantu vajino havesu devatata mita- 
dravah svarkah. Jambhayanto’him vrkain 
raksansi sanemyasmadyuyavannamivah. 


May the brilliant men of science and power of 
arms, noble and generous, moving at a balanced speed, 
be always good and auspicious to us in our projects. As 
the sun breaks down the clouds, so, destroying the 
serpents, wolves and demons of the society, may they 
remove our wants and ailments and give us peace and 
prosperity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXI 669 


11. (Vidvanso Devata, Atreya Rshi) 


antanisad emfsrdr at ety femmrssrqgarssdam: | 
am "wed: food mada qum ala ufafiida- 
art: uei 


Vajevaje’vata vajino no dhanesu vipra’amrta’ 
rtajnah. Asya madhvah pibata madayadhvam 
trpta yata pathibhirdevayanath. 


Brilliant geniuses of the yajna of science and 
technology, self-realized souls, visionaries of the truths 
and laws of nature, defend and advance us in battle after 
battle of our life and in all our economic projects. 
Drinking deep of the honey-sweets of this programme, 
rejoice, content yourselves and, having completed your 
purpose of life, retire by the paths of the divines. 


12. (Agni Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


aasa: afer gA atva:| 
"met sassi aia aq: een 


Samiddho’agnih samidha susamiddho varenyah. 
Gayatri chanda’indriyam tryavirgaurvayo 
dadhuh. 


The yajna fire lighted and fed with holy fuel, the 
blazing sun, the brilliant man of knowledge, gayatri 
verses, the divine speech that sustains the body, mind 
and soul, these bear the life and honour for us and the 
yajamana. 


13. (Vidvanso Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


apura aasa uet i 
short wdsstea flare AAN ws: ues 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


670 YAJURVEDA 


Tanunapacchucivratastanupasca sarasvati. 
Usniha chanda’indriyam dityavad gaurvayo 
dadhuh. 


The protective powers of the body, the sustaining 
powers, those who observe the holy vows of purity, the 
creative intelligence of the universe, the ushnik verses, 
the redeemer of the fallen, the chant of divinity, these 
hold the secret of life and splendour for humanity. 


14. (Vidvanso Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


ssttrattea: amt eatssrdet: 
arqeu wd Shea atati «sr: 1g wi 


Idabhiragniridyah somo devo’amartyah. Anu- 
stup chanda'indriyam pancavirgaurvayo 
dadhuh. 


Agni, brilliant power of light and knowledge 
worthy of homage and research with holy mantras, the 
generous and divine Soma, the self-realized soul, 
anushtup verses, the sustainers and protectors of the 
five orders of humanity from the highest to the lowest, 
and the scholar singer of the divine Word, these hold 
the secrets of life and age with perfect mind and senses 
for us. 


15. (Vidvanso Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


gaxha: — duveredivisfécde:i 
sedit wd sgh flaca NAA «sr: uuu 


Subarhiragnih | pusanvantstirnabarhir- 
amartyah. Brhati chanda'indriyam trivatso 
gaurvayo dadhuh. 


Agni, divine light and knowledge omnipresent 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXI 671 


in space, blazing and beautiful, immortal existence and 
source of sustenance, and the sagely scholar, master of 
his body, mind and soul, and the divine speech, these 
hold the knowledge and the mind and senses for the 
seekers. 


16. (Vidvanso Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


au adifast élan wer surf: 
ufgsu-aszàftzsd tara est eases 


Duro devirdiso mahirbrahma devo brhaspatih. 
Pankti$chanda 'ihendriyam turyavad gaurvayo 
dadhuh. 


In the world here, the grand directions of space, 
divine revelations through the doors of nature, Brahma, 
lord of knowledge, the sun, great source of light and 
warmth, pankti verses, the sage in the fourth quarter of 
his life's experience, and the generous cow, these bear 
the life and the wealth of life for us. 


17. (Vishvedeva Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


sl ad qastar fayl gasart: 
freu sads tears videt «sue 


Use yahvi supesSasa vi$ve deva'amartyah. 
Tristup chanda 'ihendriyam pasthavad gaurvayo 
dadhuh. 


In this world here, the early dawn and the evening 
twilight with the grandeur and peace of their beauty, 
the immortal powers of divinity in life and nature, 
trishtup verses, the ox that patiently carries the burdens 
on his back, these bear and sustain the life and senses 
for us all. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


672 YAJURVEDA 


18. (Vishvedeva Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


"eur eat asso wast FST d 
wait sass aaa telat Fey: ue 1 


Daivya hotara bhisajendrena sayuja yuja. Jagati 
chanda 'indriyamanadvan gaurvayo dadhuh. 
Two divine personalities dedicated to yajna, the 
physicians, men of focussed mind working together (like 
fire and wind in the sky), jagati verses, the bull and the 
cow, these hold and bear the life and the desired wealth 
of life for us. 


19. (Vishvedeva Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 
feasgar mrad andi weal fast: i 
fee wudszefud Sb aat eq: een 


Tisra'ida sarasvati bharati maruto visah. Virat 
chanda 'ihendriyam dhenurgaurna vayo dadhuh. 


In the world here, three, earth, Speech and 
Intelligence, the winds, the humans and other living 
forms, and virat verses, like the milch cow and the 
bullock, sustain the life and the health and wealth of 
life for us. 


20. (Vishvedeva Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


wet qiüutsarasiass-sreit ieat à 
füdar o-dssiganen cii aat qq: god 


Tvasta turipo’ adbhuta’indragni pustivardhana. 
Dvipada chanda'indriyamuksa gaurna vayo 
dadhuh. 


Nature's speedy and wonderful power of catalysis 
and formation, pranic energy, vital heat and light, givers 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXI 673 


of vigour and growth, the two-pada verses, like the virile 
bull and the generous cow, bear the secrets of life as 
well as the mind and senses. 


21. (Vishvedeva Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


wrfirer sit erreafe: ferar tage sri à 
mE w-dsgatud am degat ss: NRU 


Samità no vanaspatih savità prasuvan bhagam. 
Kakup chanda’ihendriyam vasa vehadvayo 
dadhuh. 


The best of peace-giving trees and herbs and the 
chief of the forests, the sun that creates and promotes 
the grandeur of life, the Kakup verses, the barren cow 
as well as the cow in season create for us the desired 
objects of life. 


22. (Vidvanso Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


vatet Ga ako: apa simui chr | 
arfeles-arsg gei sedet tical asp 9 
Svaha yajnam varunah suksatro bhesajam karat. 
Aticchanda 'indriyam brhadrsabho gaurvayo 
dadhuh. 

Varuna, lord supreme of the grand order of 
humanity, with creative yajnic acts, creates the yajna of 
unification and produces sanative drugs and waters for 
health. The atichhanda verses, rishabha, the mighty 
generous bull, and the supreme herbs provide the means 
of life and prosperity beyond ordinary desires. 


23. (Rudras Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


atsegt gat adakaga war: 
Tama aster gates web agM 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


674 YAJURVEDA 


Vasantena’rtuna deva vasavastrivrta stutah. 
Rathantarena tejasa havirindre vayo dadhuh. 


The brilliant and generous Vasus, celebrated and 
worshipped with the Rathantara Sama, along with the 
spring season and with their own splendour, create the 
energies for the growth of life in the soul. 


24. (Vishvedeva Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 
Weise gar wet: daa AAT: 
gem asi ackgfatte ub ears 


Grismena’rtuna deva rudrah pancadase stutah. 
Brhata yasasa balarn havirindre vayo dadhuh. 


The generous Rudras worshipped with the 
fifteenfold stoma of Brihat Sama, with the summer 
season create strength and power with honour for the 
life of the soul. 


25. (Indra Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


athiti Eat Berger apr: | 
eect fasiste gat eed xung 


Varsabhirrtunaditya stome saptadase stutah. 
Vairupena visaujasa havirindre vayo dadhuh. 


The Adityas, worshipped with seventeenfold 
stoma in virupa verses, alongwith the rainy season, 
create life and life-energies alongwith lustre and noble 
people for enrichment of the soul for Indra. 


26. (Vishvedeva Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


mtse gars uenferesrsagsrel at: | 
ane fr fendezfafez at eqnesi 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXI 675 


Saradena 'rtuna deva’ekavimsa’rbhava stutah. 
Vairajena $riya $riyam havirindre vayo dadhuh. 


The Ribhus, brilliant and generous artists 
celebrated in the twenty-one fold stoma with the Viraja 
verses, in unison with the autumn season, create for man 
the means of health and age, comfort and beauty, and 
vest it in the soul with all the grace and majesty. 


27. (Vidvanso Devata, Atreya Rshi) 


waist gatas ed Eat: | 
web srt: wel ARR aat aq: ren 


Hemantena’rtuna devastrinave maruta stutah. 
Balena sakvarth saho havirindre vayo dadhuh. 


The brilliant and generous Maruts, fiery and 
stormy geniuses, celebrated in the twenty seven fold 
stoma with shakvari verses, with the clouds, in unison 
with the winter season, create the means of good life 
and living and the courage and patience of mind and 
vest it in the soul. 


28. (Vishvedeva Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


ARR gardtakasg saat var: | 
"snb redi: sprexfefez aat gga 


Saisirena'rtunà devastrayastrimse’mrta stutah. 
Satyena revatih ksatram havirindre vayo 
dadhuh. 


Immortal powers of exceptional brilliance and 
generosity celebrated in thirty three fold stoma with 
revati verses, in unison with the cool and dewy season, 
create, with truth and full faith, health and age, means 
of good living, and a powerful social order for the master 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


676 YAJURVEDA 
mind and vest all these in Indra, the mighty soul. 


29. (Agni, Ashvi, Indra, Sarasvati etc. Devata, Svastyatreya 
Rshi) 


eat uereufusmrsfifireura share cada 
gar «t mea: epelerifast vey wert dsisghga wa: 
art: Raa ya wspes«ereder gnrsb ure 


Hota yaksat samidha'gnimidaspade '$vine- 
ndram sarasvatimajo dhumro na godhumaih 
kuvalairbhesajam madhu $aspairna teja’ 
indriyam payah somah parisruta ghrtam madhu 
vyantvajyasya hotaryaja. 


Let the generous man perform yajna on the earth 
and light the fire in the vedi with holy fuel in honour of 
Agni, light of life, Ashvinis, sun and moon, Indra, 
cosmic power, and Sarasvati, creative intelligence of 
the universe. 


Like the purple fire and grey smoke of the yajna, 
sweet sanative fragrances would rise with the libations 
of wheat and berries as shoots of grass. Like the 
brilliance of fire would follow the lustre of life, wealth 
and prosperity, milk and delicacies, soma distilled from 
nature, nectar of waters and honey-sweets of the world. 

O devotee of yajna, perform the sacrifice with 
the richest offerings in faith. 


30. (Ashvinis and Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


eat wereprurevadtufsiur = das uem 
"efr TART RA eee Ru. 
Sd is inen 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXI 677 


Hota yaksattanunapat sarasvatunavirmeso na 
bhesajam patha madhumata bharann- 
a$vinendraya viryam badarairupavaka- 
bhirbhesajam tokmabhih payah somah parisruta 
ghrtam madhu vyantvajyasya hotaryaja. 


Let the man of yajna, preserver of good health, 
perform yajna in honour of Sarasvati, creative intelligence 
of the world, and Ashvinis, sanative and curative powers 
of nature who, like a ram, protector of the flock, bear for 
Indra, the soul, efficacious tonics, manly vigour and 
splendour by the honeyed paths of health. Let him perform 
the yajna with berries, superior barley and shoots of corn; 
and then medicinal waters, juices, milk, soma from herbal 
essences, butter and honey would follow. 


O man of yajna, perform the yajna with the best 
of ghrta and fragrant materials. 


31. (Ashvinis and Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


Stab waa Tag ure Gar vast Aa: 
mad Amd cp ocnwgfsesidursz-ixu arf 
adua N dedi: wa: ate: ufeat 
yi ay cramer grs used 


Hota yaksannarasaisam na nagnahum patiin 
suraya bhesajam mesah sarasvati bhisagratho 
na candryasvinorvapa 'indrasya viryam badarai- 
rupavakabhirbhesajam tokmabhih payah somah 
parisruta ghrtam madhu vyantvajyasya 
hotaryaja. 


Let the man of yajna perform yajna in honour of 
the master challenger of want and wickedness like a hero 
of people's celebration, and pray for medicinal cures with 
stimulating tonics, and for heroic lustre of life with the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


678 YAJURVEDA 


offers of berries, barley and shoots of corn in all sincerity 
of word and deed. And the generous scholar, Sarasvati, 
mother of life and intelligence, the physician, like a 
brilliant warrior of the chariot, would bless him. And 
then the sanative blessings of earth and heaven, delicious 
drinks and milk, soma distilled from herbal essences, 
nectar-like waters and butter and honey would follow. 


Man of yajna, perform the yajna with the best of 
ghrta and fragrant offerings. 


32. (Sarasvati and Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


Amt EE 


Hota yaksadidedita’ ajuhvanah sarasvati- 
mindram balena vardhayannrsabhena gave- 
ndriyamasvinendraya bhesajam  yavaih 
karkandhubhirmadhu lajairna masaram payah 
somah parisruta ghrtam madhu vyantvajyasya 
hotaryaja. 


Inspired by grace, called by the sacred voice, let 
the man of yajna perform the yajna in honour of Sarasvati, 
divine intelligence, Indra, universal glory, and Ashvinis, 
nature's powers of health and growth, with libations of 
barley, excellent berries as well as puffed rice. He would 
thus be strengthening, refining and promoting food, 
medicines and life's beauty for the soul with the aid of 
medicinal plants and cow’s milk. And then milk and 
delicious drinks, soma distilled from herbal juices, ghee 
and honey would follow. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXI 679 


Arise, faithful man of yajna, perform the yajna, 
and move on to growth. 


33. (Ashvins etc. Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 
Slat aga eféssubuar Sire ree firmsmsfsenms- 


var Read Pray: wea firragss-uiur Wasi 
ua: ad: ufrepd ud Fey acme gres 231 


Hota yaksad barhirurnamrada bhisan nasatya 
bhisaja’svina’sva sisumati bhisagdhenuh 
sarasvati bhisagduha’indraya bhesajam payah 
somah parisruta ghrtam madhu vyantvajyasya 
hotaryaja. 


Let the man of yajna, the physician, perform the 
yajna to explore the soft and deep skies. Let the two 
faithful physicians of nature, the Ashvinis, the expert 
physician specialist of the mare with the foal, the expert 
physician specialist of the milch cow, and Sarasvati, 
scholar of the divine voice, distil from nature divine 
cures for Indra, the soul. And then milk and rejuvenating 
drinks, soma from vital juices, ghee and honey would 
follow. 


Man of yajna, perform the yajna with the best 
libations of ghrta. 


34. (Ashvinis etc. Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


iat warp fast: wae a emedeedirífsezm 4 
aU fasrsg-ut cr treet at ue aq: maaa 
weg a overfdféfgu wa: det: uftaat ud 
ay arate zr usw 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


680 YAJURVEDA 


Hota yaksadduro disah kavasyo na vyacasvati- 
rasvibhyam na duro disa’indro na rodasi dughe 
duhe dhenuh sarasvatyasvinendraya bhesajam 
Sukram na jyotirindriyam payah somah 
parisruta ghrtam madhu vyantvajyasya 
hotaryaja. 


Let the man of yajna perform the yajna of 
exploration, explore the highways of spaces, resounding 
and expansive as if the doors of the spaces are opened 
by Indra and Agni for him. Let him, like Indra, explore 
earth and heaven both replete with energy like the 
mother cow. Let Sarasvati, scholar and visionary of the 
divine word, explore the sun and the moon, distil the 
panacea and splendour of life as pure and powerful as 
light itself for Indra, the soul. And then milk and 
delicious drinks, soma distilled from nature, ghee and 
honey would follow and flow upon the earth. 


Man of yajna, perform the yajna with the best of 
ghee in love and faith. 


35. (Ashvinis etc. Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


raters 4 Aà 4 tster gar frat a Arey 
Ua: art: Reat ue Hey aT BATS uaudi 


Hota yaksat supesasose naktam diva’ svina 
samanjate sarasvatya tvisimindre na bhesajam 
Syeno na rajasa hrda $riya na masaram payah 
somah parisruta ghrtam madhu vyantvajyasya 
hotaryaja. 


Just as the beautiful dawn and twilight decorate 
the day and night, just as the Ashvinis, sun and moon, 
with Sarasvati, currents of universal energy, vest and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXI 681 


brighten up lustre and vitality in Indra, the powerful 
soul, so should the man of yajna, like an eagle (scholar), 
one with the soma of the sky, bring and offer rice and 
barley pudding in yajna with whole-hearted faith and 
grace of mind. And then milk and delicious drinks, soma 
distilled from nature, ghee and honey would follow and 
flow on the earth. 


Man of yajna, perform the yajna with the purest 
ghee. 


36. (Ashvinis and others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


erat aaeen Erie fraser rouen fear 
Tad cc hus vp Mad fends gesstga 
ua: art: Reat yd Hey aa STS URE 


Hota yaksaddaivya hotara bhisaja’ $vinendram 
na jagrvi diva’ naktam na bhesajaih $usain 
sarasvati bhisak stsena duha’indriyam payah 
somah parisruta ghrtam madhu vyantvajyasya 
hotaryaja. 


Just as the celestial priests and physicians, the 
Ashvinis, fire and wind, perform the cosmic yajna of 
evolution in honour of Indra, universal life energy, and 
just as Sarasvati, divine creativity, or the enlightened 
physician, active day and night, creates vital energy with 
sanative waters and lead and distils the glory for Indra, 
the soul, from nature, so should the man of yajna perform 
the sacrifice to the lord supreme for the sake of the soul. 
And then milk and delicious drinks, soma distilled from 
nature, ghee and honey would follow and flow upon 
the earth. 


Man of yajna, perform the yajna with the best of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


682 YAJURVEDA 
ghee and fragrance. 


37. (Ashvinis & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


Jat cake aer test aedfiremdersunt suf 
f&xuerdufserrar 4 and ara ateadt "gsz-la 
aes shga va: art: ufteal ga wey cara 
Aadat ngon 


Hota yaksattisro devirna bhesajam trayastri- 
dhatavo ’ paso rupamindre hiranyayama$vineda 
na bharati vaca sarasvati maha’ indraya duha 
indriyam payah somah parisruta ghrtam madhu 
vyantvajyasya hotarya]. 


Let the man of yajna perform the yajna, invoking 
three divine powers, Ida, eternal speech and intelligence, 
Sarasvati, fluent speech, and Bharati, specific intelligence, 
and let him pray to the Ashvinis, sanative powers of 
nature, for curative waters of health and longevity 
(bheshajam). The three as well as the Ashvinis would 
create threefold balance of health (with sattva, rajas and 
tamas — intellect, energy and matter — and three humors 
of vata, pitta, and cough), turn it into a golden form and 
vest it into Indra, the soul. Thus do the Ashvinis as well 
as Ida, Sarasvati and Bharati, with speech and energy, 
create glory and prosperity from nature for the soul. 


Man of yajna, perform the yajna with ghee, and 
then milk and delicious drinks, soma distilled from juices, 
nectars of water and ghee and honey would follow and 
flow upon the earth. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXI 683 


38. (Ashvinis and Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


q Reads 71 afaR teat gent a veram farra: 
gar Aeee a ardyt wa: att: ufrend ud 
"rep erama grrsb ize 


Hota yaksat suretasamrsabham naryapasam 
tvastaramindramasvina bhisajam na sarasvati- 
mojo na jutirindriyam vrko na rabhaso bhisag 
yasah suraya bhesajam $riya na masaram payah 
somah parisruta ghrtam madhu vyantvajyasya 
hotaryaja. 


Let the man of yajna perform the yajna and invoke 
the virile, powerful, noble maker and creator Tvashta, 
destroyer of suffering, Indra, lord of power and majesty, 
Ashvinis, nature's energy of wind and electricity, 
Sarasvati, universal intelligence as well as the physician, 
all creators and harbingers of health and growth. And 
like an expert of health he would attain brilliance of health 
as well as the drive and splendour for living, ardour of 
movement as well as the lightning of the thunderbolt, 
honour and reputation as tonics, medicaments with 
curative waters, and holy food with beauty and grace. 
And further, delicious drinks and milk, soma distilled as 
the essence of herbal juices, butter and nectars of waters, 
and honey would follow and flow upon the earth. 


Man of yajna, perform the yajna with the best of 
ghee. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


684 YAJURVEDA 


39. (Ashvinis etc. Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 
Aat uera mufdesrfiran esrachd wiht 4 ATs Ue 
ua: art: aaa ud Hey arcades giri uas 


Hota yaksad vanaspatiin $amitararn satakratum 
bhimam na manyum rajanam vyaghram 
namasa’ $vina bhamam sarasvati bhisagindraya 
duha’indriyam payah somah parisruta ghrtam 
madhu vyantvajyasya hotaryaja. 

Let the man of yajna offer the sacrifice in honour 
of the lord of sun-rays, Vanaspati, giver of peace, hero 
of a hundred noble acts of yajna and yet fearsome and 
passionate, the ruler, majestic as a lion with the 
thunderbolt. And Ashvinis, nature’s currents of energy 
(and the president of the assembly and the commander 
of the army) and Sarasvati, noble intelligence and speech 
as well as the physician would create righteous anger 
and dignity for Indra, the ruler. And then all round 
prosperity, milk and drinks, soma, beauty and grace, 
nectar-like waters and ghee and honey would follow 
and flow upon the earth. 


Man of yajna, perform the yajna with the best of 
ghee for the ruler. 


40. (Ashvinis etc. Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 
ma sahamae Herattael aS- 
aAa era wéusgbgaeeergri- A A- 
sass spsruirsariistersi uer: rd: afeat 
"qd ng erare nr: neo 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXI 685 


Hota yaksadagniin svaha"jyasya stokanain 
svaha medasam prthak svaha chagamasvibhyain 
svaha mesam sarasvatyai svaha’rsabha- 
mindraya simhaya sahasa’indriyam svaha'gnim 
na bhesajam svaha somamindriyarn svahendrarn 
sutramanam savitaram varunam bhisajam patim 
svaha vanaspatim priyam patho na bhesajain 
svaha deva' ajyapa jusano' agnirbhesajam 
payah somah parisruta ghrtam madhu 
vyantvajyasya hotaryaja. 


Let the man of yajna perform the yajna in honour 
of Agni in all sincerity. Let him in truth of word and 
action offer ghee in a stream of libations. Let him offer 
libations of fat and meda plant and roots in all sincerity 
with reverence. Let him faithfully offer sanative and 
palliative materials for the Ashvinis, protectors of 
society. Let him work on the clouds and rain with the 
light of the divine word of knowledge. Let him offer 
sincere drive and action in the service of the mighty 
Indra, the ruler. Let him offer money and materials for 
the strength and perseverance of the human nation in 
sincerity of word and action. Let him work on agni, 
heat and fire with love and faith, taking energy as 
saviour. Let him serve the lord of peace and joy in 
service of his grace and majesty with full faith. Let him 
serve Indra, lord of power, saviour and protector, Savita, 
giver of life and light, Varuna, the supreme lord, and 
the lord president of all physicians, with all might and 
honesty. Let him make the oblations for the chief of 
forests, vegetation and water, a darling friend and fellow 
traveller, with love, as for a soothing medicine. And all 
the powers of divinity, lovers, protectors and promoters 
of food and nourishments, and Agni, lord of light and 
energy, would bring around restorative and curative 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


686 YAJURVEDA 


medicaments, milk and delicious drinks, soma, the 
nectar juice distilled from nature, butter and ghee and 
honey. These would follow and flow upon the earth. 


Man of yajna, make the yajna offers with the best 
of ghee. 


41. (Vidvanso Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


wat agaia wenden curar Adal Aate- 
feiass erat uereixedi Zeb eurar Adar 
vetesg feréiereisti erat ergrfer-ctuererest aor Haat 
wpetesgfereieretst ine t 


Hota yaksadasvinau chagasya vapaya medaso 
jusetam havirhotaryaja. Hota yaksatsarasvatim 
mesasya vapaya medaso jusatain havirhotar- 
yaja. Hota yaksadindramrsabhasya vapaya 
medaso jusatain havirhotaryaja. 


Let the man of yajna, specialized scholar, 
organize yajna and conferences in the service of the 
Ashvinis, farmers and cattle breeders. Let them grow 
by the wool and breeding of goats and the development 
of rich products such as fats, cream and cheese. May 
the Ashvinis enjoy the yajna and benefit from it. Man 
of yajna, carry on the programme with libations of 
knowledge and investments. 

Scholar of yajna, organize yajna in the service of 
Sarasvati, spirit of learning. Let the knowledge of 
farming and animal husbandry develop with wool and 
breeding of sheep and the development of fine foods 
such as cream, butter and ghee. May Sarasvati enjoy 
and bless the yajna. 

Man of yajna, carry on the endeavour with rich 
libations of knowledge and investments. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXI 687 


Man of yajna, organize the yajna in the service 
of Indra, leading power of farming and animal 
husbandry. Let the breed of the bull and knowledge 
about dairy farming grow with research on the bull, cows 
and the development of dairy products such as fat, butter 
and cheese. May Indra enjoy and bless the yajna. 

Man of yajna, keep on the yajna with rich libations 
of knowledge, work and investments. 


42. (Hotradaya Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


misters war umdror ufésgar: SERT: weber 
ya: wheetat at naranai mada: 


Aad sN 


Hota yaksadaSvinau sarasvatimindram sutra- 
manamime somah suramanaschagairna 
mesairrsabhaih sutah $aspairna tokmabhir- 
lajairmahasvanto mada masarena pariskrtah 
Sukrah payasvanto'mrtah prasthita vo 
madhuscutastanas$vina sarasvatindrah sutrama 
vrtraha jusantain somyam madhu pibantu 
madantu vyantu hotaryaja. 


Let the hota, man of yajna, enlightened citizen, 
perform the yajna of development in honour of the 
Ashvinis, teachers, preachers and intellectuals, for 
Sarasvati, voice and motherhood of the nation, in the 
service of Indra, protective and ruling powers of the 
land. And here are these soma juices, leaders of rare 
quality, distilled, that is, selected, elected, prepared and 
perfected from amongst the people. Joyous they are as 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


688 YAJURVEDA 


if with the wealth of goats, sheep, bulls and cows. 
Honoured and consecrated they are with shoots of 
grasses, ears of corn and roasted rice as with children. 
Inspired they are, seasoned and purified with holy food 
and nectar-drinks of life. And up-front they are, on their 
mark, ready for self-sacrifice in the service of humanity. 


Exhort them, all of you, support them with love 
and loyalty, and may you and the Ashvinis, Sarasvati 
and the protector Indra make the best of their service 
and sacrifice. Replete they are with honey-mead, 
overflowing, streaming for anyone to taste. May all 
drink of the soothing and enlightening sweets, may all 
rejoice and prosper with the wealth of life. 


Relent not, man of yajna, carry on with the offers 
of libations. 


43. (Hotradaya Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


wat agaa xni gwfeussmatwe erdt 
Tessa wu muss: UT dete Wt t T 
aseo adanan ARTOTT YTA- 
wfgelumafi-erearai aai mngda: siffüra: 
qat giaet weg 

Hota yakşadaśvinau chāgasya havisa’attamadya 
madhyato meda'udbhrtam pura dvesobhyah 
pura pauruseyya grbho ghastam nunam ghase’ 
ajranam yavasaprathamanam sumatksaranain 
Satarudriyanamagnisvattanam | pivopa- 
vasananam par$vatah $ronitah Sitamata- 
utsadato' ngadangadavattanam karata 'eva$vina 
jusetain havirhotaryaja. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXI 689 


Let the man of yajna perform the yajna in honour 
of Ashvinis, prana and apana powers of nature and the 
physicians with the milk and ghee of the goat. Let the 
Ashvinis partake of the holy food. Let them eat and 
raise the pranic vitality from the middle part of the body, 
for sure, before the anti-system forces of ailments take 
hold of the body and make their home there. And may 
the Ashvinis delight in protecting and promoting the 
subtle vitality of the pranas which are ever active in the 
digestion of food, first in assimilating the assimilable 
and eliminating the waste, exhilarating, creating a 
hundred currents of energy, living heat of the system, 
and essential strength of the body free from obesity. 
May the Ashvinis protect and promote the vitality 
expressive from the sides, the back, hyperactive vital 
parts, weaker and delicate parts, in short, from every 
vital part of the body system. 


Man of yajna, offer the holy food in the yajna. 


44. (Vidvanso Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 
eat ad mea A wfenrsameberrer deat 
ssi ur gata: ua deer wt wd 
mAsa adana gege PTA- 
"fsetumafi-eararai aaa usda: Sora: 
Rimase sga gada maana 
gmat gaead iss 


Hota yaksat sarasvatun mesasya havisa 'avaya- 
dadya madhyato meda'udbhrtam pura 
dvesobhyah pura pauruseyya ghrbho ghasan- 
nunam ghase'ajranam yavasaprathamanain 
sumatksaranam $atarudriyanamagnisvattanam 
pivopavasananam parsvatah $ronitah sitamata’ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


690 YAJURVEDA 


utsadato'hgadangadavattanam karadevam 
sarasvati jusatam havirhotaryaja. 


Let the man of yajna perform the yajna in honour 
of Sarasvati, divine voice and mother power of 
enlightenment, with the holy food of sheep's milk and 
ghee. May Sarasvati partake of the holy food offered in 
yajna and raise the pranic vitality from the middle of 
body before the anti-system forces of ailments take hold 
of the body and make their home there. And may mother 
Sarasvati delight in protecting and promoting the subtle 
vitality of the pranas which are ever active in the 
digestion of food, first in assimilating the assimilable 
and throwing out the waste, exhilarating, creating a 
hundred forms of energy, vital fire of the system, 
essential strength of the body free from obesity. May 
Sarasvati protect and promote the vitality expressive 
and perceptible from the sides, the back, hyperactive 
vital parts, weaker and delicate parts, in short, from 
every vital part of the body system. 


Man of yajna, offer the holy food of yajna to the 
mother. 


45. (Yajamana-Yajnics Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


ral aafedueret zfenrs sidaca Herdt Hass 
uu gha: rr dreueur jar cundi urüsshsmum 
EESE Ko Es LELES grekon yasatan 
Hatua ursda: sora: fetarqassearadts— 
Flagdart milar mates gatai isk tl 
Hota yaksadindramrsabhasya havisa’avaya- 
dadya madhyato meda’udbhrtam pura 
dvesobhyah pura pauruseyya ghrbho 
ghasannunam ghase' ajranam yavasapra- 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXI 691 


thamanam sumatksaranam $atarudriyana- 
magnisvattanam pivopavasananam parsvatah 
Sronitah sitamata utsadato'ngadangada- 
vattanam karadevamindro jusatain havir- 
hotaryaja. 


Let the man of yajna perform the yajna in honour 
of Indra, wonder and glory of the power of nature and 
the nation, with the most powerful holy foods of the 
strength of the bull and the rishabha plant. May Indra 
partake of the food and raise the pranic vitality of the 
body-system from the middle of the body, for sure, 
before the anti-system forces of ailments take hold of 
the body and make their home there. And may Indra 
delight in protecting and promoting the subtle vitality 
of the pranas which are ever active in the digestion of 
food, first in assimilating the assimilable and eliminating 
the waste, exhilarating, creating a hundred forms of 
energy, vital fire of the system, and essential strength 
of the body free from obesity. May Indra protect and 
promote the vitality expressed and perceptible from the 
sides, the back, hyperactive parts, weaker and delicate 
parts, in short, from every vital part of the body system. 


Man of yajna, offer the holy food of yajna for 
Indra. 


46. (Ashvinis etc. Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


Aat aaga fe redan titeann tya- 
faa | aRar efad: Aa etA aa 
meaa teed gfad: frat eta aaea 
grad: firar eta ar: far eta aa e 
tren ata ae gat: firar eat aad afad: 
frat eat aa akoa An eta aa aad: 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


692 YAJURVEDA 


fren mest nd Gerauregurib frm erat 
mAd: fret erate axa urqsisnruqsi- 
audas pet enixe gat oenemufd- 
wiertesgfereiereist ise t 


Hota yaksad vanaspatimabhi hi pistatamaya 
rabhisthaya ra$anayadhita. Yatrasvino- 
Schagasya havisah priya dhamani yatra- 
sarasvatya mesasya havisah priya dhamani 
yatrendrasya’rsabhasya havisah priya dhamani 
yatragneh priya dhamani yatra somasya priya 
dhamani yatrendrasya sutramnah priya 
dhamani yatra savituh priya dhamani yatra 
varunasya priya dhamani yatra vanaspateh 
priya pathansi yatra devanamajyapanam priya 
dhamani yatragnerhotuh priya dhamani 
tatraitan prastutye vopastutye vopa- 
vasraksadrabhiyasa’ iva krtvi karadevam devo 
vanspatirjusatam havirhotaryaja. 


Let the man of yajna perform the yajna in honour 
of the lord of forests for love of the forests, herbs and 
trees. Let him, with the finest, strongest and most 
inviolable protective zone fence the forest: which is the 
favourite haunt of the Ashvinis and goats and home of 
yajnic food; 

which is lovely resort of Sarasvati and the sheep 
and the source of holy food; 


which is the awful seat of Indra and the bull and 
the giver of sacred food; 


where abound the favourite resorts of Agni, Soma, 
the protector Indra, Savita and Varuna; 


where the grand old banyan grows and finds his 
food; 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXI 693 


where the noble lovers of divinity seek their 
nectar in their holy places; 


where the lord of yajna, Agni, loves to shine and 
act. 


And the brilliant man of yajna out there, strongest 
and most enthusiastic of his mission, may offer songs 
of inauguration and songs of valediction in his yajna of 
protection and extension of the forests and these resorts 
and thereby serve the holy lord of nature and partake of 
the yajnic gifts. 


Man of yajna, perform the yajna, don't relent. 


47. (Ashvinis etc. Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


eat aaah Rae panaleharbanventea zferd: 
Aa arse. meaa Gre fen: faa 
€——59 firar eraraatsn: 
fer emr-rarz reden firar emerarfe-tva qnare: 
fuer arate afad: furem eea aeoret 
fur amir ated: frat uremeieseta 
miaa fuer erate aatametd: fuer 
amt aad ve Heas zu: enu 
Asea Vidar maates fatat isi 


Hota yaksadagniin svistakrtamayadagni- 
ra$vino$chagasya havisah priya dhamanyayat 
sarasvatya mesasya havisah priya dhamanya- 
yadindrasya 'rsabhasya havisah priya dhama- 
nyayadagneh priya dhamanyayat somasya priya 
dhamanyayadindrasya sutramnah priya 
dhamanyayat savituh priya dhamanyayad 
varunasya priya dhamanyayad vanaspateh priya 
pathansyayad devanamajyapanam priya 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


694 YAJURVEDA 


dhamani yaksadagnerhotuh priya dhamani 
yaksat svam mahimanamayajatamejya’isah 
krnotu so’adhvara  jataveda jusatam 
havirhotaryaja. 


Let the man of yajna perform yajna in honour of 
Agni, lord of knowledge and energy, which leads energy 
projects to completion and success. 


It is Agni which leads to the favourite haunts of 
the Ashvinis, pranic energies, and the goats and holy 
foods. 


It leads to the favourite haunts of Sarasvati, 
wisdom, and the sheep and holy foods. 


It leads to the favourite resorts of Indra (majesty), 
and the bull (power) and holy foods. 


It leads to the favourite haunts of Agni (energy), 
to the favourite haunts of Soma (peace and prosperity), 
to the favourite haunts of Indra, the protector, to the 
favourite haunts of Savita (inspiration), to the favourite 
haunts of Varuna (water), to the favourite haunts of the 
trees and their fruits, to the favourite places of the noble 
people of piety and protection of the sacred resources, 
it leads to the favourite homes of Agni, lord of cosmic 
yajna, it leads to its own grandeur, it creates the means 
of its own yajnic sacrifice and all the food and energy 
for life. 


May the glorious Agni, omniscient light of life, 
lead all projects of yajna to success. 


Man of yajna, keep on with the yajna, don’t relent. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXI 695 


48. (Sarasvati & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 
we af: mad waefindssrfsene 1 ait a 
adedi affa ueni aged arg 


aA sel 


Devamı barhih sarasvati sudevamindre 'a$vina. 
Tejo na caksuraksyorbarhisa dadhurindriyam 
vasuvane vasudheyasya vyantu yaja. 


Sarasvati, lady of light and knowledge, offers the 
seat of honour on the yajna vedi to Indra, noble and 
brilliant master of the home. The Ashvinis, powers of 
health and wealth, create the light of the eyes as well as 
the lustre and splendour of life and vest these in Indra. 
For the blessed man the powers of divinity create wealth 
with all the resources of nature and bestow it on the 
yajnic man of prosperity. 


Man of yajna, keep on with the yajna. 


49. (Ashvinis and Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 
adightsstaat Frases ated? 1 uri = dt 
ale ent asiste daat ages arg ast ines ui 


Devirdvaro'a$vina bhisajendre sarasvati. 
Pranam na viryam nasi dvaro dadhurindriyam 
vasuvane vasudheyasya vyantu yaja. 


The doors of divinity, the Ashvinis, nature's 
powers of health, the physicians, and Sarasvati, 
enlightened woman, open the door, create breath in the 
nose, vigour and virility, and vest it in Indra, man of 
sacrifice and power. For the blessed man, the powers 
of divinity create wealth and bestow it on him to enjoy 
life through yajna. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


696 YAJURVEDA 


Man of yajna, keep on with the life of sacrifice 
and enlightenment. 


50. (Ashvinis and Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 
Assata wag urradt | ad cT 


x m agna dyat engeren ard 
IKON 


Devi’usasavasvina sutramendre sarasvati. 
Balam na vacamasya 'usabhyam dadhu- 
rindriyam vasuvane vasudheyasya vyantu yaja. 


The divine energy of the early dawn and the 
evening twilight, the protective Ashvinis, health powers 
of sunlight and the moon-rays, and Sarasvati, 
enlightened mother spirit of life, with the morning- 
evening cycle of time, bless Indra, man of yajna with 
strength, noble speech in the mouth as also the lustre of 
life for glory. Thus, to the blessed man come all the 
wealths of existence for the enjoyment of life. 


Man of yajna, live on with the spirit of sacrifice 
and enlightenment. Relent not ever. 


51. (Ashvinis & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 
dat set ctaabardradke | sta a oration 
wiehat aR g dyes aghe arg ast 1420 


Devi jostri sarasvatyasvinendramavardhayan. 

Srotram na karnayoryaso jostribhyam 

dadhurindriyam vasuvane vasudheyasya vyantu 
yaja. 

The adorable vitality of divine nature, Sarasvati, 

motherly spirit of enlightenment, and the Ashvinis, wind 

and electric energy, advance Indra, man of power and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXI 697 


lustre, in life by the day-night fortnightly cycle of time 
through earth and heaven. They bless him with the sense 
of hearing in the ears and honour and splendour of life. 
Thus to the blessed man of yajna come the wealths of 
existence for the enjoyment of life. 


Blessed man, keep on with yajna, never relent, 
in life. 


52. (Ashvinis etc. Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


aaa ary at TET 


Devi'urjahuti dughe sudughendre sarasvaty- 
asvina bhisajavatah. Sukram na jyoti 
stanayorahuti dhatta’indriyam vasuvane 
vasudheyasya vyantu yaja. 


The beautiful morning and the peaceful evening, 
generous and blissful, both celebrated with powerful 
oblations, the Ashvinis, powers of health and 
enlightenment, the physicians, and Sarasvati, motherly 
spirit of life, save and protect the man of yajna and bless 
him with purity of vigour and golden light of the soul 
in the heart. Thus do they bless Indra fortunate man of 
yajna with the wealth and splendour of the world and 
bring him to perfection in life. 


Man of devotion, live on with the spirit of yajna. 


53. (Ashvinis & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


met fefe a er fa mre effera bel 
were card ast dad 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


698 YAJURVEDA 
Deva devanam bhisaja hotaravindramasvina. 
Vasatkaraih sarasvati tvisim na hrdaye matiin 
hotrbhyam dadhurindriyam vasuvane vasu- 
dheyasya vyantu yaja. 


Noble and brilliant powers of divinity, priests of 
the noble and generous people, the Ashvinis, learned 
scholars, the physicians, and Sarasvati, the voice of 
divinity, with Vashatkara hymns by the priests of yajna, 
vest Indra, lustrous man of yajna, with divine light and 
lightning energy in the heart as well as intelligence in 
the mind. Thus do they bring wealth of the world and 
splendour of life to the man of yajna and perfect him in 
his desire and ambition. 


Man of yajna, keep up the sacrifice for perfection 
in life. 


54. (Ashvinis & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


edie uefirfserrer unweit 1 et cr et 


mwana agna dual agqeda aq 
Eo MITTIT 


Devistisrastisro devirasvineda sarasvati. Susan 
na madhye nabhyamindraya dadhurindriyam 
vasuvane vasudheyasya vyantu yaja. 


Three brilliant and divine powers, Ida, divine 
speech, Sarasvati, divine universal intelligence, and 
Bharati, specific energies of nature in various forms, 
and these three, further, alongwith the Ashvinis, 
complementary currents of universal energy, hold 
strength and splendour for the soul and infuse it into 
the middle of the body-system by the navel for the soul's 
perfection. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXI 699 


May all the divine powers come and make the 
energy and wealth of the world flow into the blessed 
man of yajna. 


Blessed man, perform the yajna, never relent. 


55. (Ashvinis & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


dass -mrsredfiresssr: araavavatitad TA: 
w a eund ahairea mer asdfafusrul 
pert agde Sq Ast duni 


Deva’indro narasamsastrivariuthah sarasvaty- 
asvibhyamiyate rathah. Reto na rupamamrtam 
janitramindraya tvasta dadhadindriyani 
vasuvane vasudheyasya vyantu yaja. 


The brilliant Indra universally sung and 
celebrated, residing in the three worlds of heaven, earth 
and the sky, wondrous warrior of the chariot, is reached 
through Sarasvati, divine speech and the Ashvinis, 
circuitous powers of nature. Tvashta, divine maker of 
forms, creates the vital creative energy as well as the 
immortal form, senses and the sense organs for Indra 
and vests these in him. May Tvashta, Sarasvati and the 
Ashvinis create the wealth of the world for Indra, blessed 
man of honour and power, and vest the same in him. 


Man of yajna, perform the yajna in honour of the 
divinities. 


56. (Ashvinis & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


E NUKEM 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


700 YAJURVEDA 


Devo devairvanaspatirhiranyavarno 'a$vibhyain 
sarasvatya supippala 'indraya pacyate madhu. 
Ojo na jutirrsabho na bhamam vanaspatirno 
dadhadindriyani vasuvane vasudheyasya vyantu 
yaja. 


The lord of light, guardian of nature, self- 
refulgent, of golden hue, generous and fruitful, matures 
the honey sweets of fruits and vegetables for Indra, the 
soul, with Sarasvati, constant flow of energy, the rays 
of light, and the Ashvinis, heat and water. And thus, 
the sun, the tree, and the forest chief create and hold for 
us lustre of life as well as speed of action, and passion 
as much as vitality of life. May all the wealth and power 
of body and mind come to the man who loves them 
through yajna. 


Man of yajna, move on with the creative life of 
sacrifice. 


57. (Ashvinis & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


aa aaia vetuizfyervenqui gar: a 
würde a cud: 1 sm we us afiat 
agit dyat aged ard ast myo 


Devam barhirvaritinamadhvare stirnam- 
asvibhyamurnamradah sarasvatya syona- 
mindra te sadah. I$ayai manyuin rajanam 
barhisa dadhurindriyam vasuvane vasudhe- 
yasya vyantu yaja. 


Indra, noble soul, soft as wool and blessed is your 
seat in the yajna covered with watery grasses and the 
light of heaven spread by Sarasvati, spirit divine, and 
the Ashvinis, currents of energy. May your yajnic seat 
and home and the lights of heaven create holy and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXI 701 


splendid passion of the mind for you for the sake of 
honour and glory. May all the wealth of the world come 
to the man of sacred desire and work through yajna. 


Man of yajna, carry on the endeavour, neglect 
not the sacrifice. 


58. (Ashvinis & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


seitsarfia: feeleeenzerciarererarersgralarfersiíserat 
"Te emereteerdrafi eure fiere cn Rete sea: 
pret ferr ertum ferafirezr gat errería: Raer 
aasar: Resana erat eri fetes 
wen a asifafaenrsindferfaserer agqet aq 
ST OMA 


Devo’agnih svistakrd devan yaksadyathayatham 
hotaravindrama$vina vaca vacam sarasvati- 
magnim somam svistakrt svista’indrah sutrama 
savita varuno bhisagisto devo vanaspatih svista 
deva’ ajyapah svisto’agniragnina hota hotre 
svistakrdyaso na dadhadindriyamurjamapacitimn 
svadham vasuvane vasudheyasya vyantu yaja. 


For the man of yajnic endeavour in search of 
honour and success in the world, the Divine Agni, lord 
of light and life, generous giver of all round success, 
does universal yajna with the divinities of nature such 
as the earth in appropriate manner. The Ashvinis, wind 
and electric energy, both high-priests of nature, act in 
yajna with Indra, the sun. With the energy of universal 
sound, they work with Sarasvati, the dynamics of nature. 
They work on agni, fire, and soma, the moon, both 
powers of universal success. Indra, lord protector of 
the world, Savita, the sun, Varuna, universal waters, the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


702 YAJURVEDA 


physician, the generous and all-loved tree, the dear 
powers of nature which feed on the food of yajna, and 
all-loved vital heat—all these work with the universal 
fire for the creation of wealth and energy. 


Thus any versatile performer of yajna (individual, 
social and natural) has the secret of success and creates 
honour, glory, energy and fame for the dedicated souls. 


May all the powers of yajna create and carry the 
wealth of the world for the man of yajna. 


Man of yajna, carry on with the sacrifice. 


59. (Agnyadayo Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


afma saagi asta: wa vert: 
TES srerafyerezrt Sra Aarah- 
angaa am MAA Sasa web RT- 
CHEHTA ds 9 UI 


Agnimadya hotaramavrnitayam yajamanah 
pacan paktih pacan purodasan badhnann- 
asvibhyam chagam sarasvatyai mesamindraya’ 
rsabham sunvannasvibhyam sarasvatya 'indraya 
sutramne surasoman. 


Let the yajamana to-day, cooking the yajna 
offerings and preparing the oblations, select Agni as 
the high-priest and as the deity. The devotees rear and 
bind the goat for milk and butter for the Ashvinis, prana 
and apana energy, sheep for Sarasvati, universal 
intelligence, and the bull for Indra, honour and lustre, 
and they extract and distil the exhilarating soma drink 
for the Ashvins, Sarasvati and the protector Indra, the 
ruler. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXI 703 


60. (Ashvinis & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


wquearsare dat errerfeeorea foervart arts vivat 
Hussars a: ufd ea- 
 ivadiged errata maA: spart 
TAA Ngon 


Supastha’adya devo vanaspatirabhavad- 
asvibhyam chagena saravatyai mesenendraya’ 
rsabhenaksanstan medastah prati pacata- 
grbhisatavivrdhanta purodasairapura$vina 
sarasvatindrah sutrama surasoman. 


Soothing and joyous is the yajna post to day as a 
mark of valediction. For the Ashvinis, prana and apana 
energy, milk of the goat! For Sarasvati, speech and 
intelligence, milk of the sheep! For Indra, honour and 
grandeur in life, let us rejoice with the strength and 
vigour of the bull! Let all enjoy the fine foods cooked 
with cream and butter and let all grow strong on 
specially seasoned foods and delicacies. May the 
Ashvinis, teachers, intellectuals and physicians, 
Sarasvati, enlightened woman, and Indra, protector and 
ruler and leader, all celebrate with the exciting drink of 
soma. 


61. (Rishis & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 
amasra o -urasuírdra asta 
asa Teas H deu eu aratdeadssta 
wT a Wem dep WTHDSTWdDEHTSSIT D SING a 
qaia ged wgareta ufsudr arte: 
Gear Gant dfs us 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


704 YAJURVEDA 


Tvamadya’rsa’arseya’rsinam napadavrnitayam 
yajamano bahubhya’a sangatebhya’esa me 
devesu vasu varyayaksyata iti ta ya deva deva 
dananyadustanyasma'a ca  $asva ca 
gurasvesitasca hotarasi bhadravacyaya presito 
manusah suktavakaya sukta bruhi. 


O Rishi, seer blest, child of the Rishis and the 
tradition of the Rishis: of the many noble sages 
assembled here to-day, this yajamana opts for you, 
saying: “This sage among the generous and brilliant ones 
would gain for us the consecrated shower of wealth and 
vision." 

Noble sage, give unto us of those gifts which the 


divinities have granted, pray for us, raise us and keep 
up the tradition. 


Hota, man of yajna, you are the man inspired and 
sent to pronounce the sacred Word and sing the hymns 
of divinity. Pray, speak the Word, sing the hymns of 
praise. 


ZAPAS: N 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXII 705 


CHAPTER-XXII 


1.  (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


Atsa sppHudurgeussmdaü ure | med car 
aag: taastartatesat qur gxalvammráa ugu 


Tejo'si sukramamrtamayuspa’ayurme pāhi. 
Devasya tva savituh prassave '$vinorbahubhyarm 
pusno hastabhyamadade. 


Light of life, you are the power and glory of the 
world, the passion and purity of life, and the spirit and 
immortality of existence. Guardian and protector of life, 
protect and promote the life for me. In the world of 
Lord Savita's creation, I dedicate myself to you with 
nature's currents of energy and the solar gifts of health 
and vitality. 


2.  (Vidvanso Devata, Yajnapurusha Rshi) 


sary vyrmgaer qdssmdfa facade ener | 
"Wr Risa Rasha SAS ATA dE US UI 


Imamagrbhnan rasanamrtasya purva 'ayusi 
vidathesu kavya. Sa no'asmintsuta'a babhiuva’ 
rtasya samantsaramarapanti. 


The seers of the earliest time of creation in their 
communion receive and realise the chain of cause and 
effect from the first vibration of the original cause 
(Ritam) to the last and closing silence. And the same, 
in this world of ours, has become the whispering voice 
of the whole truth of existence to us (in the Veda). 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


706 YAJURVEDA 


3. (Agni Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
aifvenssifa yaa asf eat | 
" eua dvaradad Tras vermetega: 113 t 


Abhidha’asi bhuvanamasi yanta’si dharta. Sa 
tvamagnim vaisvanaram saprathasam gaccha 
svahakrtah. 


You are the preceptor and teacher. You are the 
realized soul. You are the guide. You are the support 
and preserver of the knowledge and the law. Yajamana, 
initiated and consecrated by the sacred acts of yajna, 
take up, research and realize Agni, omnipresent vitality 
of the world, expansive and infinite. 


4.  (Vishvedeva Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


ream cat daz: wsmdasr aalasd weit cast: 
wà at weary i ad dart east: wsmdaa 
wt weÓTE irs 


Svaga tva devebhyah prajapataye brahmann- 
asvam bhantsyami devebhyah prajapataye tena 
radhyasam. Tam badhana devebhyah 
prajapataye tena radhnuhi. 


Man of knowledge, scholar of divinity and the 
Veda, I consecrate you as free independent researcher 
in the service of the noblest powers of the world and the 
ruler-guardian of the people. 


I shall control powerful energy like a horse for the 
noblest powers and the ruler-guardian of the people. I 
shall thereby realise the mission of my life. 

Bind and control energy for the divinities and the 


ruler-guardian and thereby realise the mission of your 
life. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXII 707 


5. (Indra & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
Warde cer SS Wreaths car SS: tert hat 
aad cat we waif federe denm wpe 
Want wes denm VS Wrath | atsate at 
fratesafa ansanitfa ado: 1 at ad: az: 
"em UKM 


Prajapataye tva justam proksamindragnibhyam 
tva jistam proksami vayave tva justam proksami 
vi$vebhyastva devebhyo justam proksami 
sarvebhyastva devebhyo justam proksami. Yo' 
arvantam jighansati tamabhyamiti varunah. 
Paro martah parah sva. 


Dedicated as you are, scholar, to Prajapati, I 
consecrate you. Dedicated to Indra and Agni, the soul 
and energy, I consecrate you. Dedicated to Vayu, wind 
energy, I consecrate you. Dedicated to divinities of the 
world, I consecrate you. Dedicated to all nobilities, I 
consecrate you. Who ever does violence to the horse- 
power, energy and the nation, the supreme lord Varuna 
punishes him, the best man too takes him on. The killer 
is worse than the worst man. He is worse than a dog. 


6. (Agni etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


sma taal Hata carer Hata eme afar 
wrt aad carer ferie tare sla taal Gedy 
were fara tare aema vemel usi 


Agnaye svaha somaya svahapam modaya svaha 
savitre svaha vayave svaha visnave svahe- 
ndraya svaha brhaspataye svaha mitraya svaha 
varunaya svaha. 


All the best action and dedication for Agni, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


708 YAJURVEDA 


knowledge, light and fire energy; all the best action and 
commitment for Soma, health and medication; all the best 
investment and action for the Apah, development of water 
resources; all the best action and dedication for Savita, 
solar energy; all the best action and dedication for Vayu, 
wind energy; all the best action and dedication to Vishnu, 
universal electric energy; all the best action and dedication 
for Indra, development of the self; all the best action and 
care for Brihaspati, guardian of the elderly; all the best 
for Mitra, spirit of friendship and cooperation; all the 
best action and care for Varuna, best personalities. 


7. (Prana etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


Rg verre Redan Caled maA Caleta 
Taal AA Carat waters Carat Were Carat AAT 
m Arfer vere rdferezrer caret far carer 
wena meha taal STU Yaar Cada Cara 
Wied Taal Pad Talal uaa verret aoa 
varar factara e meha cererdíisrarua 
wga cater urdums wagt non 


Hinkaraya svaha hinkrtaya svaha krandate 
svaha'vakrandaya svaha prothate svaha 
praprothaya svaha gandhaya svaha ghrataya 
svaha nivistaya svahopavistaya svaha sanditaya 
svaha valgate svaha"sinaya svaha $ayanaya 
svaha svapate svaha jagrate svaha kujate svaha 
prabuddhaya svaha vijrmbhamanaya svaha 
vicrttaya svaha sainhanaya svahopasthitaya 
svaha "yanaya svaha prayanaya svaha. 


Reverence to the singer of Samans, reverence to 
him who has done the singing, reverence to the loud 
challenger, reverence to the soft singer, reverence to 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXII 709 


the man of accomplishment, reverence to the specialist, 
value for fragrance, welcome to the fragrant, reverence 
to the securely seated, reverence to the close-by friends 
and yogis in posture, thanks for what is well-given, 
reverence for the one on the move, reverence for the 
sitting, reverence for the sleeping, care for the one in 
deep sleep, welcome to the waking one, love for the 
humming one, rest for the yawning one, reverence for 
the shining, reverence for the strong and well-built, 
reverence for the close neighbours, reverence for the 
knowledgeable, reverence for the scholars of special 
knowledge. (Those who welcome, respect and reverence 
the others are fortunate and blessed.) 


8.  (Prayatnavanto Jeevadayo Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


ad taal aaa carelagrara varetagara vert 
VENTS Cael Shara tater Prtvurra caretheatara 
varet ara tater acta caret fear ara carer 
adma caret ayama carer fada vemer 
yaoa vermel oad verdaburume care fara 
Taal ditfarara caret aa xemer cafu qui 
Taal ufersifa Te taal a enirf Te carat 
oda eet para caret eu 


Yate svaha dhavate svahoddravaya svahod- 
drutaya svaha $ukaraya svaha $ukrtaya svaha 
nisannaya svahotthitaya svaha javaya svaha 
balaya svaha vivartamanaya svaha vivrttaya 
svaha vidhunvanaya svaha vidhutaya svaha 
Susrusamanaya svaha $rnvate svaheksamanaya 
svaheksitaya svaha viksitaya svaha nimesaya 
svaha yadatti tasmai svaha yat pibati tasmai 
svaha yanmutram karoti tasmai svaha kurvate 
svaha krtaya svaha. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


710 YAJURVEDA 


All hail and reverence for the man of endeavour, 
running, advancing, flying high, acting promptly, and for 
the man who has achieved instant success and 
accomplishment. Reverence to the man who is of stable 
mind, of high values, speed and strength. Reverence to 
the man who is expansive, and has achieved 
advancement and peace. Reverence for the agitative and 
sympathy for the shaken. Welcome and reverence for 
the man who wants to listen and is listening, for the 
man who is watching, who is watched, and who is 
watched and guarded for security reasons. Reverence 
for the yogi with closed eyes. Reverence for any one 
who eats and drinks and who removes the waste of the 
system. Reverence to the man who is doing the job and 
to the one who has done and calls it a day. 


(Those who honour the men of action and 
accomplishment find recognition peace and happiness.) 


9. (Savita Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 


wedfergeiius want xe six d 
fat at 4+: weteata usu 


Tat saviturvarenyam bhargo devasya dhimahi. 
Dhiyo yo nah pracodayat. 


Let us concentrate and meditate on the glory and 
blazing splendour of Lord Savita, worthy of our choice 
and worship, who may, we pray, inspire and enlighten 
our mind and soul. 


10. (Savita Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


Rivara aaa à 
"od gaat usu ngon 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXII 711 


Hiranyapanimutaye savitaramupa hvaye. Sa 
cetta devata padam. 

For the sake of inspiration and self-protection, I 
invoke and worship Lord Savita, creator and sustainer 
who wields the glorious lights of the world. Lord of light 
and omniscience, He is the giver of light and knowledge, 
and He is the ultimate goal and haven of all. 


11. (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


wen Ada udi uw dat arse i 
URN Meas de Ul 


Devasya cetato mahim pra saviturhavamahe. 
Sumatim satyaradhasam. 


We worship and pray for the great truth-bearing 
divine wisdom of the brilliant and blazing omniscient 
Lord Savita, creator and sustainer of the world. We pray, 
meditate and internalize. 


12. (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


qefadadige vfesdfeqéüue i 
u dart uditfad ue3u 


Sustutim sumativrdho ratim saviturimahe. Pra 
devaya mativide. 


For the seeker of light and lover of wisdom, we 
pray for the generous gift of the grace of Lord Savita 
who is the creator of the world and promoter of noble 
intelligence and wisdom for mankind. 


13. (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


ues adi ue díeanud gu i 
simus eadtaad ues 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


712 YAJURVEDA 


Ratim satpatim mahe savitaramupa hvaye. 
Asavam devavitaye. 


I invoke, praise, worship and meditate upon the 
generous and glorious Savita, Lord creator and fatherly 
guardian of the living creatures for the attainment of 
sagely company, noble virtues and divine grace. 


14. (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


«ere afaqiaatad farada à 
frar sat mara? dex 


Devasya saviturmatimasavam visvadevyam. 
Dhiya bhagam manamahe. 


With all our intelligence we pray for the great and 
generous lord Savita's omniscience and with our mind 
and soul meditate upon His glorious and universal 
grandeur of divinity. 


15. (Agni Devata, Sutambhara Rshi) 
STR sere fissare i 
Bam dem AT TT UN 


Agnim stomena bodhaya samidhano’ amartyam. 
Havya devesu no dadhat. 


Man of yajna lighting the immortal Agni, divine 
fire in the vedi with holy fuel, feed it with holy foods 
and fragrances, and expand it with holy chants of hymns, 
so that it may create and carry among the divinities of 
nature such as the air and the sky rich materials of the 
wealth of life for the devotees. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXII 713 


16. (Agni Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


a taaredeissirqavasttea: | 
arfiaférar advata ngau 


Sa havyavadamartya ’uSigdutascanohitah. 
Agnirdhiya samrnvati. 

That Agni, brilliant, immortal, radiant power, 

carrier and begetter of holy foods and wealths of life 


for nature and humanity is attained through intelligent 
and dedicated action. 


17. (Agni Devata, Vishvarupa Rshi) 


afta xd at wir weeds | 
gat nsan aazafes ngon 


Agnim dutam puro dadhe havyavahamupa 
bruve. Devan'a sadayadiha. 


Fire is the fastest catalytic agent of nature. It is 
the creator and carrier of the holy foods for life. I light 
and place the fire up front in the Vedi and pray that it 
may bring us the blessings of divinity in this life. 


18. (Pavamana Devata, Arunatra sadasyu Rshi) 
ani fe daar wet faent sra ud: i 
TST vezgHTUT: WAT ded! 


Ajyjano hi pavamana suryam vidhare Sakmana 
payah. Gojiraya ramhamanah purandhya. 


Agni, universal energy, pure and purifying, faster 
than light, flowing as well as omnipresent, you create 
and hold the sun and, as is mission of the cow and the 
earth, with your own actions, bear the waters of 
sustenance for existence. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


714 YAJURVEDA 


19. (Agni Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


fomi wy: ansats à saseda mAs 
aia arate agatsa qaotsara | aaatats a 


— L— e 


Repite emi aa 1 dertsamemaremsust 
gassa Reta Aae tee tafe 
afdite ada: et ngen 


Vibhurmatra prabhuh pitra'$vo'si hayo’- 
syatyo 'si mayo 'syarva'si saptirasi vajyasi vrsa’- 
si nrmana 'asi. Yayurnama'si sisurnama’- 
syadityanam patvanvihi. Deva’ asapala’etam 
devebhyo '$vam medhaya proksitam raksateha 
rantiriha ramatamiha dhrtiriha svadhrtih svaha. 


Agni, universal energy of life and the world, you 
are immence and abundant as mother like the earth, pre- 
eminent and super-guardian as father like the sky. You 
attain to everything; self-impelled you impel everything; 
you are constant ever, and ever on the move; you are 
ever at peace and ever fresh; you reach everywhere; 
you are the way to love and honour; you are fast and 
impetuous; you are generous like a shower; kind, 
reaching everyone's heart. Surely, you are the way to 
final beatitude and worthy of meditation. Ever new as 
reborn, you make the time fly with the motion of the 
stars. Come and be with us here. 


Guardians of the earth in all directions, serve and 
save this consecrated power for the noble people and the 
environment in the interest of national growth. Here is 
peace and pleasure, let it stay while you enjoy. Here is 
stability and constancy. Here is self-dependence and self- 
realisation. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXII 715 


20. (Prajapati and Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


RIS taleal Hee Carel Haney vemar carerfera- 
etaa carer nt: ustdaa caret fad faataaraa A 
mea wat vereríacr qure carer univer 
TET Ota Ulan Later atta eer carat 
facta carat fasta Aaaa eet fawia 
forfüferezrar carat mon 


Kaya svaha kasmai svaha katamasmai svaha 
svaha "dhimadhitaya svaha manah prajapataye 
svaha cittam vijnatayadityai svaha 'dityai mahyai 
svaha'dityai sumrdikayai svaha sarasvatyai 
svaha sarasvatyai pavakayai svaha sarasvatyai 
brhatyai svaha pusne svaha pusne prapathyaya 
svaha pusne narandhisaya svaha tvastre svaha 
tvastre turipaya svaha tvastre pururupaya svaha 
visnave svaha visnave nibhuyapaya svaha 
visnave Sipivistaya svaha. 


Homage in honest thought, word and deed: to 
Prajapati, lord giver of peace and comfort, who Himself 
is peace and joy in the essence, who is the exceptional 
Being among the infinite beings in existence; homage to 
the scholar of wider learning; to the lord present in the 
mind; to the lord who knows the depths of the 
unconscious; to the mother earth; to the divine speech; 
to the kind and loving mother; to the streams and rivers; 
to the fluent speech that purifies the mind; to the universal 
speech in the universal mind; to the wind that sustains 
life; to the energy that freshens and restores life; to the 
universal teacher of humanity; to the lord creator and 
giver of light; to the lord giver of life and speed across 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


716 YAJURVEDA 


life; to the lord maker of many forms; to the lord 
omnipresent, protector of existence, and present in the 
depths of intelligence and in the unconscious. 


21. (Vidvan Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) 


farat erect aaa? atta unm à 
fasat wasige vmi dufra wena varet ee 


Visvo devasya neturmarto vurita sakhyam. Vi$vo 

raya 'isudhyati dyumnam vrnita pusyase svaha. 

Let all mankind, with truth of thought, word and 
action, dedicate themselves to the love and friendship 
of the lord and light of existence. Let them all try for 


the wealth of the world and choose wealth and honour 
for the sake of growth and advancement in life. 


22. (Brahmanas & Others/Rashtra Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


ar Welt ma aerate wüerarHT tree UST: 
spsguegrsfeeuretr Herat wüsrai ere eqatet- 
mam: afta: atfeatat fry tees: wr 
gare crebrae dit wteat Fart Hear 3: 
mit add weal asada: Gerd AAA 
A: RATA RRN 

A brahman brahmano brahmavarcasī jāyatām 
a rastre rājanyah $ura 'isavyo tivyadhi maha- 
ratho jayatam dogdhri dhenurvodhanadvan 
asuh saptih purandhiryosa jisnu rathesthah 
sabheyo yuvasya yajamanasya viro jayatam 
nikame nikame nah parjanyo varsatu phalavatyo 
na'osadhayah pacyantam yogaksemo nah 
kalpatam. 


Lord Supreme of the world, in this Rashtra 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXII 717 


(Republic) of ours, let the Brahmanas rise as a 
community of brilliant men of divinity and illustrious 
scholars of universal knowledge. Let the Kshatriyas rise 
as a force of heroic warriors of the chariot and routers 
of the enemy with unfailing arrows. May the cows be 
fertile and abundant in milk, the oxen, carriers of heavy 
load, the coursers, swift, the women, kind and generous; 
and may the children (people) of this yajamana, the ruler, 
be brave and fearless, victorious riders of the chariot, 
and youthful and civilized members of the council. 


May the clouds rain in showers for us according 
to the need of the seasons. May the herbs and trees 
mature and ripen with abundant fruit. And may this land 
be securely blest with a ceaseless cycle of growth and 
protection of happiness and prosperity. 


23. (Prana energy Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


WUT arets taet AMAT ver AAT AET 
stata caret aret tatar wer vemel eat 


Pranaya svaha'panaya svaha vyanaya svaha 
caksuse svaha $rotaya svaha vace svaha manase 
svaha. 

For prana and apana (breath in and out), yoga 
exercise; for vyana, systemic energy of the whole body, 
expert counselling; for the eye, training in direct 
observation and proof; for the ear, word of the wise; 
for the speech (tongue), love of truth; for the mind, 
thought and meditation. 


(This is the way to growth and culture.) 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


718 YAJURVEDA 


24. (Dishah, Directions Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


mà fast cataisatet fast carer ufadumi fast 
raretsatel fest caret udrel fest vareratel fast 
mad fast wergratel fast vereris fast 
manat fast xereretetr fast vereretel fast 
Caveat ux 

Pracyai dise svaha'rvacyai dise svaha 
daksinayai di$e svaha'rvacyai dise svaha 
praticyai di$e svaha’rvacyai dise svahodicyai 
dise svaha’rvacyai dise svahordhvayai dise 
svaha'rvacyai dise svaha’vacyai dise svaha’- 
'rvacyai dise svaha. 

Pursue the science of Astronomy and the literature 
on the subject in right earnest for the knowledge of: the 
eastern direction from the horizon to the near-most point; 
the south-eastern direction from the farthest to the nearest 
point; the south direction from the farthest to the nearest 
point; the south-western direction from the farthest to 
the nearest point; the western direction from the farthest 
to the nearest point; the north western direction from the 
farthest to the nearest point; the north direction from the 
farthest to the nearest point; the north eastern direction 
from the farthest to the nearest point; the direction above 
from the highest to the lowest point; and the direction 
below from the farthest to the nearest point (where you 
are). 


25. (Jala etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
asa: at emi: vemelaenra tater Rre: 
tat Erebi: taral Saas: Carat speatez: 
eT yata: tater aratsar: caretutara caret 
"Tuan caret aera carat ea 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXII 719 


Adbhyah svaha varbhyah svahodakaya svaha 
tisthantibhyah svaha sravantibhyah svaha 
syandamanabhyah svaha kupyabhyah svaha 
sudyabhyah svaha dharyabhyah svaha’ - 
rnavaya svaha samudraya svaha sariraya svaha. 
For sacrificial waters, filtering and cleansing; for 
selected and controlled waters, watchful management; 
for fresh and spring waters, proper protection; for 
standing waters, safety from pollution and proper 
treatment with chemicals; for streaming waters, safety 
from waste discharge; for the rushing waters, control 
and management; for the well-waters, flow out and 
cleaning; for cooking and yajna waters, cleaning and 
sanctification; for conducted as well as rain waters, 
security and proper control; for space waters, research 
and environment control; for the oceans, knowledge of 
tides and preservation of nature; for the surging and 
fluctuating waters, proper management and grid-control. 
This is the honest action in truth and dedication. 


26. (Vata, winds etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


arta caret qara taretsura caret Fara vemet 

ferrdurara ‘caret wed xereisenupsid carer 

avd taetsaata verni end carat vita ada 

maraa CaS lee taal Taal wur Talat virenrer 

=e yaha: remet gatha: caret Arena 
NEU 


Vataya svaha dhumaya svaha’bhraya svaha 
meghaya svaha vidyotamanaya svaha stanayate 
svaha’vasphurjate svaha varsate svaha’- 
vavarsate svahogram varsate svaha sighram 
varsate svahodgrhnate svahodgrhitaya svaha. 
prusnate svaha sikayate svaha prusvabhyah 
svaha hradunibhyah svaha niharaya svaha. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


120 YAJURVEDA 


Perform yajna for the purification, treatment and 
management of the air and wind, smoke and smog, the 
mist, the rainy cloud, the lightning cloud, the thundering 
cloud, the hailing cloud, the raining cloud, the pouring 
cloud, the bursting cloud, the vapour-holding cloud, the 
held up vapours, the refreshing rain, the rain that irrigates, 
the rain that is full and flourishing, the roaring cloud, and 
the frost and freezing rain. 


27. (Agnietc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


amà vata uiuis emeta erat ufered 
xemars«afiamea xerel fas carat far: carerettsa: 
wergred fast weraratel fast caret uu 


Agnaye svaha somaya svahendraya svaha 
prthivyai svaha’ntariksaya svaha dive svaha 
digbhyah svaha"$abhyah svahorvyai dise 
svaha’rvacyai di$e svaha. 

Let us perform yajna for the heat and vitality of 
life, for the peace and waters of life, for the energy and 
power of the soul, for the earth, the middle regions of 
the sky, and heaven and the regions of light, for the 
directions of space, for the interdirections, and for the 
upper and lower directions of space. 


28. (Nakshatra, etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


"gr caret aaa: vereinen: agtet- 
HII: taal ares: tae seas: aAA: 
mret Pacers tater zretuferetezresverel xr 
vara Gata xerel na: carer adea: et 
Sed: ceerelfacrer: xemel equ: tater fayd 
aqwa: taal ya: carat VIRI: ‘rarer 
amaha: taal yha: caval mea: vemérd- 
efr: Carat usc 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXII 721 


Naksatrebhyah svaha naksatriyebhyah svaha’ - 
horatrebhyah svaha’rdhamasebhyah svaha 
masebhyah svaha rtubhyah svaha "rtavebhyah 
svaha samvatsaraya svaha dyavaprthivibhyam 
svaha candraya svaha suryaya svaha rasmi- 
bhyah svaha vasubhyah svaharudrebhyah 
svaha "dityebhyah svaha marudbhyah svaha 
visvebhyo devebhyah svaha mulebhyah svaha 
Sakhabhyah svaha vanaspatibhyah svaha 
puspebhyah svaha phalebhyah svahausadhi- 
bhyah svaha. 


Let us perform yajna and do our best for the stars 
and planets and their part in nature, the day-night cycle, 
the fortnights, the months, the seasons and their part in 
nature, the year, the heaven and earth, the moon, the 
sun, the rays of light, the Vasu sustainers of life, the 
Rudra sustainers of pranic energy, the solar zodiacs of 
time, the winds, all the divine powers of nature, the roots, 
the branches, the herbs and trees, the flowers, fruits and 
medicinal plants. 


29. (Earth etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


yà vargrssafismear eret faa carer Gata caret 
CERTE CHET AANA: TATISHA: Tas ees: FATET 
amanha: caret aera: caret ree: caret 
ergata: Et us 

Prthivyai svaha’ntariksaya svaha dive svaha 
suryaya svaha candraya svaha naksatrebhyah 
svaha'dbhyah svahausadhibhyah svaha 
vanaspatibhyah svaha pariplavebhyah svaha 
caracarebhyah svaha sarisrpebhyah svaha. 


Let us perform yajna for the earth, the middle 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


722 YAJURVEDA 


regions of the sky, the heaven of light, the sun, the moon, 
the stars, the waters, the medicinal plants, the trees, all 
those that swim and float, those that move and don’t move 
and all those that creep. 


30. (Vasus etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


std taal ada caret fava vere fadead carat 
wA caret wordaa wetna aerfa 
waürfduü caret fenepera a faat uaa 
arzt naon 


Asave svaha vasave svaha vibhuve svaha 
vivasvate svaha gana$riye svaha ganapataye 
svaha 'bhibhuve svaha'dhipataye svaha $usaya 
svaha samsarpaya svaha candraya svaha jyotise 
svaha malimlucaya svaha diva pataye svaha. 
Let us perform yajna in homage to the energy of 
prana, the soul residing in the body, the universal energy, 
the lord giver of light, the electric energy that provides 
for the beauty of existence, the air that sustains the forms 
of life in nature, the heat energy that is always close at 
hand, the ruler president of the human community, the 
powers of defence, whatever glides or creeps silently, 
the moon and beauty of life, the light, the darkness, and 
the lord of the day, the sun. 


31. (Masah months Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


Raa Taal Aaa vem Vows Cael De Laval 
Ada Cael AMET aS Caretta Taal Tea 
mret GEMS Laat AU caret quera vemelei- 
Exec use 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXII 723 


Madhave svaha madhavaya svaha sukraya 
svaha $ucaye svaha nabhase svaha nabhasyaya 
svahesaya svahorjaya svaha sahase svaha 
sahasyaya svaha tapase svaha tapasyaya svaha’ - 
mhasaspataye svaha. 


Let us perform yajna for the service and enrichment 
of the romantic spring month of Chaitra, the charming 
month of Vaishakha, the cleansing month of Jyeshtha, 
the brilliant and purifying month of Ashadha, the generous 
and showering month of Shravana, the misty and foggy 
month of Bhadrapada, the food-producing month of 
Ashvina, the feeding and energising month of Kartika, 
the strengthening and vigorous month of Marga-Shirsha, 
the most powerful endurable Pausha, the austere month 
of Magha, the month of observance of vows and 
austerities, Phalguna, and the intercalary month which is 
the lord over sin and perplexity. 


32. (Vaja-food etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


ania rgt vaara caretsfasirat tater mhe carer 
qp; wemel Wet et eser vemers-cuta verme Tutar 
wera carat weer ude vermerfiltuasr caret 
wsmda3 carat i32 


Vajaya svaha prasavaya svaha’pijaya svaha 
kratave svaha svah svaha murdhne svaha 
vyas$nuvine svaha'ntyaya svaha’ntyaya 
bhauvanaya svaha bhuvanasya pataye svaha'- 
dhipataye svaha prajapataye svaha. 


Let us perform yajna for the sake of food and 
energy, procreation, children and family, intelligence 
and action, happiness, intellect and purity of thought, 
universal vitality, the ultimate lord of existence, the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


124 YAJURVEDA 


ultimate reduction of existence which is prakriti, the 
transcendent lord of creation, Brahma, and and the father 
and guardian of the living beings, Prajapati. 


33. (Life and vitality Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


seat eneuareszeret uroit ast eceudreszerets- 
writ dat eneudreiverel cart curd cneudrei- 
wela cuu cneudrehverel wart cn 
cheudrejzeTer adda eneudres tater sit ward 
meade emus cneudre$xeTer wat cnr 
cReudre$xeTZIedT Gat cneudre$xeTel gent wur 
chReudre$ermgr Vaddiadt eneudre$veTzr cada 
Heads vem wes Gat eneudreivemel Gal ur 
cReudreixemel uss 


Ayuryajnena kalpatam svaha prano yajnena 
kalpatai svaha’pano yajnena kalpatam svaha 
vyano yajnena kalpatam svahodano yajnena 
kalpatam svaha samano yajnena kalpatain 
svaha caksuryajnena kalpatam svaha srotram 
yajnena kalpatam svaha vagyajnena kalpatain 
svaha mano yajnena kalpatam svaha’tma 
yajnena kalpatam svaha brahma yajnena 
kalpatam svaha jyotiryajnena kalpatam svaha 
svaryajnena kalpatain svaha prstham yajnena 
kalpatarn svaha yajno yajnena kalpatam svaha. 


May life grow by yajna and be dedicated, may 
prana energy grow by yajna and be dedicated, may apana 
energy grow by yajna and be dedicated, may vyana 
energy grow by yajna and be dedicated, may udana 
energy grow by yajna and be dedicated, may the ear 
and hearing grow by yajna and be dedicated, may the 
speech and all other senses of volition grow by yajna 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXII 125 


and be dedicated, may the mind grow by yajna and yoga 
and be dedicated, may the soul grow by yajna and yoga 
and be dedicated to the lord of life and existence, may 
the knowledge of Veda and the man of knowledge grow 
by yajna and meditation and be dedicated, may the light 
of knowledge and the spirit grow by yajna and be 
dedicated to divine service, may the heavenly joy of 
the soul grow by yajna and be dedicated to the Divine, 
may the ultimate question and desire of the soul be 
answered and fulfilled by yajna and divine grace and 
be surrendered to the Divine. May the yajna of life and 
age grow to completion by constant yajna and 
meditation and terminate in the interminable and infinite 
divine super-existence, which is the last oblation of 
existential yajna. 


34. (Yajna Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


weh Talal grezmeiveTEl Vas aka YET 
wem vemel venie vemel 113411 


Ekasmai svaha dvabhyam svaha Sataya svahai- 
kasataya svaha vyustyai svaha svargaya svaha. 


By yajna in truth of thought, word and deed, 
homage and surrender to the One, Supreme Soul of the 
universe. Homage to the two, Purusha, the supreme spirit, 
and Prakriti, one the efficient cause and the other the 
material cause of the world. Homage to the hundred (years 
of life and countless things). Homage to the hundred 
(years of life) and the one beyond. Homage to the fire, 
the reckoning and the dawn. Homage to Svarga, the joy 
of the next world. 


sta gifaettseara: N 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


726 


YAJURVEDA 


CHAPTER-XXIII 


(Parameshvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


frere: weder ereet im: uferehssmdta à 
fem ngu 


Hiranyagarbhah samavartatagre bhutasya jatah 
patireka’asit. Sa dadhara prthivim dyamutemam 
kasmai devaya havisa vidhema. 


The Great Golden Egg, the mighty original womb 


of the lights of the world such as the sun and moon, 
exists by Himself before the world comes into existence. 
He is the sole lord manifest, preserver, creator and 
guardian of the world of forms. He holds this earth and 
Heaven, and to that lord of bliss and majesty we offer 
our homage and worship with the surrender of our mind 
and soul. 


d. 


(Parameshvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


swarndératsfr wemdas car sre aA a ath: 
wer afear i edpsdeeeut Ha aga wd 
wrarerdfisr afar daya aed fafa qa ufear 
Haya dat a oufzcrowsmdas caret Past: usd 


Upayamagrhito’si prajapataye tva justam 
grhnamyesa te yonih suryaste mahima. Yaste’ 
hantsamvatsare mahima sambabhuva yaste 
vayavantarikse mahima sambabhuva yaste divi 
surye mahima sambabhuva tasmai te mahimne 
prajapataye svaha devebhyah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIII 727 


Lord of this great universe, through the discipline 
of yoga you are realized and consecrated in the heart 
and soul, and loved in faith for the sake of Prajapati, 
protector and guardian of the people. I accept and 
surrender to you. 


This Prakriti and the world of forms is your seat 
of immanence. The sun is the manifestation of your 
grandeur. The glory of yours which manifests in the 
day and in the year, the glory which manifests in the air 
and in the sky, the glory which manifests in the sun and 
in heaven, to that glory and to you we offer our homage 
and worship for the sake of Prajapati, guardian of the 
people, and the devas, noble and generous powers of 
nature and humanity. 


3. (Parameshvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
a: ulorat Hia Hedas gern wia aye | 


assa füguavedsm: pÙ gard giaa 
faràn nau 


Yah pranato nimisato mahitvaika 'idraja jagato 
babhuva. Ya ise’asya dvipada$catuspadah 
kasmai devaya havisa vidhema. 


The sole one lord who, with His own might, creates 
and rules over the world of those who breathe and see, 
the lord who rules over men and animals, to that sovereign 
lord of bliss and majesty we offer our homage and 
worship with our heart and soul. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


728 YAJURVEDA 


4.  (Parameshvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


sammis ward cum we were a 
ayaa asa à wed wat dacat finr 
tanya ted gear dea aya sed Tabu 
asta nèm Haya du a aie wsmddad 
EC HE SHE sit 


Upayamagrhito'si prajapataye tva justam 
grhnamyesa te yoni$candramaste mahima. Yaste 
ratrau samvatsare mahima sambabhuva yaste 
prthivyamagnau mahima sambabhuva yaste 
naksatresu candramasi mahima sambabhuva 
tasmai te mahimne prajapataye devebhyah 
svaha. 

Lord of the universe, seated and consecrated you 
are in the heart. Loved and worshipped you are in faith. 
I surrender to you for the sake of Prajapati, protector 
and guardian of the people. 


This world is your space of immanence and 
omnipotence. The moon is the symbol of your glory. 
The grandeur of yours which manifests in the night and 
in the year, the generosity of yours which manifests in 
the earth and in the universal fire vitality, the glory of 
yours which manifests in the stars and in the moon, to 
that glory of yours and to you we offer our homage and 
worship for the sake of Prajapati and the noble and 
brilliant powers of nature and humanity. 


5.  (Parameshvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


wposrf«i geet wn ufi wem: | 
teat treat fafer imu 


Yunjanti bradhnamarusam carantam pari 
tasthusah. Rocante rocana divi. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIII 729 


Those who join their mind and soul to the great 
and glorious presence of God vibrating like electric 
energy in the moving and non-moving forms of 
existence, shine like the sunlight in heaven. 


6. (Surya Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


Garda enreur ett fadar TA | 
BOT FUT "TeTE HT Ne 


Yufijantyasya kamya hari vipaksasá rathe. Sona 
dhrsnu nrvahasa. 


Just as they yoke to the chariot two strong, 
handsome, reddish horses worthy of ride by men and 
loved by all, so do the yogis join their senses, mind and 
soul to Ishvara, lord and light of the world. 


(So do the scientists use the carrier currents of 
solar and electric energy, i.e., the energy of Surya/sun 
and Indra/electricity, in the service of humanity for the 
divine purpose.) 


7. (Indra Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


agatsan, tardies dun a 
waewdlerrd wem yansa A: we 


Yadvato 'apo'aganigan priyamindrasya tanvam. 
Etain stotaranena patha punara$vamavartayasi 
nah. 


O man of the science-mantra, the celestial horse, 
mighty carrier, flies across the waters of the sky and the 
wondrous oceans of space on the wings of the winds. 
The same horse, by the same paths of energy, you bring 
us back and take us round. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


730 YAJURVEDA 


8. (Vayu & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


Cee WATT uH ngnelesr ALIA 
saaa maa ode i ya: 
AAT SSM ZI, Al nesaad das- 
vadaag USAT ed 


Vasavastvarnjantu gayatrena chandasa 
rudrastvanjantu traistubhena chandasa’ ditya 
stvanjantu jagatena chandasa. Bhurbhuvah sva- 
rlajinchacin yavye gavya’ etadannamatta deva’ 
etadannamaddhi prajapate. 


Prajapati, guardian and protector of the people, 
may the scholars of the Vasu order of twenty-four years 
celebrate you with the joy of the gayatri verses. May 
the scholars of the Rudra order of thirty-six years 
enlighten you with the knowledge of the trishtubh 
verses. May the scholars of the Aditya order of forty- 
eight years beatify you with the vision of the jagati 
verses. Receive the homage and be pleased by this 
celebration. 


Brilliant men of knowledge and vision, take the 
food from the fields of barley and milk of the cow and 
reach across the regions of the earth to the sky and the 
heavens orbiting in their own courses in space. 


9.  (Jijnasu-researcher Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


ch: fedaenrent Ra asd fierce wd: 
frnd ast fradi ed ei 


Kah svidekaki carati ka’u svijjayate punah. Kim 
sviddhimasya bhesajam kimvavapanam mahat. 


Who moves alone (by itself, self-lighted)? Who 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIII 731 


is born again (in another’s light)? What is the antidote 
of cold? What is the great field for the sowing of seeds 
and the great store for things? 


10. (Surya Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


wei staat cit erunt Saad wi 

anaim dest spfüvrend4 qed ngon 

Surya’ekaki carati candrama jayate punah. 

Agnirhimasya bhesajam bhumiravapanam 

mahat. 

The sun moves alone (self-lighted, on its own axis). 

The moon is born again (in the light of the sun). Fire is 
the antidote of cold. The earth is the great field for the 


sowing of seeds (and the great store-house of things, with 
its gravity). 


11. (Jijnasu-researcher Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


ant fidandiregeifelfu: farendan segs: i 
cnt festareirfeaferfurer enr Ratatat us 9 u 


Ka svidasit purvacittih kirn svidasid brhadvayah. 
Ka svidasit pilippila ka svidasit pisangila. 
What is the first object of perception and thought? 


What is the great bird of motion? What is soft, smooth 
and beautiful? What is it that devours light and form? 


12. (Vidyut, energy Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


niea usdfefearsdssmdia suu: i 
arfelerirfeaterfurer vrfsierdrfersrfger us zu 


Dyaurasit purvacittira$va'asid brhadvayah. 
Avirasit pilippila ratrirasit pisangila. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


732 YAJURVEDA 


Heaven is the first object of perception and 
thought. Energy, electricity and light, is the greatest bird 
of motion. Protective mother earth is soft, smooth and 
beautiful. The night of darkness devours light and forms. 


13. (Brahmadaya Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
erat wer ecefiadrensort-zinivernir slegfer- 
dali uw xeu usat gui uzfuseghinesum 


E Goa Asad Hir ues 


Vayustva pacatairavatvasitagrivaschagairnya- 
grodhascamasaih salmalirvrddhya. Esa sya 
rathyo vrsa padbhiscaturbhiredaganbrahma 
krsna$ca no’vatu namo’ gnaye. 


Seeker of knowledge, may the air protect you with 
maturation and perfection. May the fire nourish and 
protect you with the milk of goats. May the banyan tree 
strengthen and protect you with ladlefuls of juice. May 
the shalmali plant protect and advance you with growth. 
May this strong and virile chariot horse on its four legs 
carry you forward on your journey. 


Brahma, brilliant star of knowledge, guide and 
protect us. All homage, respect and support for Agni, 
light of knowledge and yajna. 


14. (Brahma Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
wefstdr tit ta: aeft cert et: 
midt mea wa AATE: ues 


Saśito ra$mina rathah samsito ra$mina hayah. 
Samsito apsvapsuja brahma somapurogavah. 


The chariot is refined by the light of sunbeams. 
The horse is refined by sensitive reins of steering. The 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIII 733 


expert man of knowledge born of the energy of prana, 
working on energy, is refined by advancement in the 
knowledge of health, peace and value of honour. 


15. (Vidvan Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


werd aise ene tae User xen wiuue | 
"f&ur asa A HAN eau 


Svayam vajinstanvam kalpayasva svayam 
yajasva svayam jusava. Mahima te’nyena na 
sannase. 


Man of knowledge, seeker of advancement, 
develop your self by yourself. Do the yajna of joint work 
by your own choice. Serve the scholars and society by 
yourself. Your eminence and value must not be destroyed 
by others. 


16. (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
a ersisudfsden a Refs xetsusgeafa aah: 


art: aarda genet aa a wae wart ea: dfe 
amg eau 


—vw5 


Na va'u'etanmriyase na risyasi devan’idesi 
pathibhih sugebhih. Yatrasate sukrto yatra te 
yayustatra tva devah savita dadhatu. 


Man of knowledge and yajna, you go to meet with 
the seers and sages by the straight and right paths of 
truth. Die you shall not, nor your value diminish. 


Where dwell the men of right action and where 
they realize lasting peace and joy, there may Savita, 
lord of light and life, establish you. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


734 YAJURVEDA 


17. (Agni and Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


aha: upia Usud emendate: 
ad eire cfeerfa ad Sofa faasa: 1 ara: 


(Ann ud 
virent sifererfe wd Serta fàsa: ngon 


Agnih pasurasit tenayajanta sa’etamllokam- 
ajayad yasminnagnih sa te loko bhavisyati tarn 
jesyasi pibaita'apah. Vayuh pasurasit 
tenayajanta sa’etamllokamajayad yasminvayuh 
sa te loko bhavisyati tam jesyasi pibaita’apah. 
Suryah pasurasit tenayajanta sa etamllokam- 
ajayad yasmintsuryah sa te loko bhavisyati tam 
Jesyasi pibaita apah. 


Agni, fire, is the soul of yajna, a direct participant. 
The divines perform yajna with agni. Who ever does 
the yajna with agni wins the sphere where agni is 
supreme. The same will become your sphere too, you 
would conquer it if you do yajna. Drink deep at the 
fount of knowledge and joy purified by agni. 


Vayu, wind, is the soul of yajna, a seer and 
participant. The divines perform yajna by vayu. 
Whoever does the yajna by vayu wins the sphere where 
vayu is supreme. The same will become your sphere 
too, you would conquer it if you do yajna. Drink deep 
at the fount of breath and energy purified by vayu. 


Surya, the sun, is the soul of yajna, a seer and 
participant. The divines perform yajna with the sun. 
Whoever does the yajna with the sun wins the sphere 
where the sun is supreme. The same will become your 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIII 735 


sphere too, you would win it if you do yajna. Drink 
deep at the fount of light and energy purified by the 
sun. 


18. (Prana etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


woma taretarara vei camara caret | Sras- 
aTfisrensrarferen ubera meas guess: 
utai enpruftererfuerilu ue zu 

Pranaya svaha- 'panaya svaha vyanaya svaha. 
Ambe ambike' mbalike na ma nayati ka$cana. 
Sasastyasvakah subhadrikam kampilavasinim. 


Best of thought, word and action in truth for prana, 
for apana and for vyana, the energy of breath, the energy 
for systemic cleansing, and the overall health and vitality 
of the body system. 


Mother, grand-mother, and great-grand-mother, 
none can retain and sustain me or anyone in the splendid 
good fortune and peaceful settled seat of the man of 
prosperity, who, though he might have been as fast and 
impetuous as a war-horse, goes to sleep in sloth after 
getting the wealth and comfort. 


19. (Ganapati Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
zm? fus walt aeaea cupo a 
eme smf referer aA sm ee 
Gananam tva ganapatiin havamahe priyanam 
tva priyapatiin havamahe nidhinam tva 


nidhipatiin havamahe vaso mama. Ahamajani 
garbhadhama tvamajasi garbhadham. 


Lord of the universe, you are the presiding and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


736 YAJURVEDA 


protective fatherly presence over all the groups, 
communities and republics of the world. Such as you 
are, we accept, realise and surrender unto you. 


You are the darling life-giver and protector of all 
things of existence which are so dear to you. We 
recognise, realise and worship you in love and faith. 


You are the giver, protector and promoter of all the 
wealths of the world. We surrender to you in worship 
and gratitude and pray to you for all the wealth, prosperity 
and happiness of life. 


Lord omnipresent in every particle of existence, 
every particle of existence exists in you. You are my 
haven and home too. You are the father of all forms of 
existence. I pray that I may know you, the father, that I 
may know Prakriti, the mother; and that I may know all 
the forms of existence, as you do. 


20. (Raja & Praja Devate, Prajapati Rshi) 


ass at: wa: gahar eet citer wrofarent 
qat ari tater tat sara uon 


Ta'ubhau caturah padah samprasarayava 
svarge loke prornuvatham vrsa vāji retodha reto 
dadhatu. 


Let both of them, the ruler and the people, protect 
and support each other. May both realise and extend 
the four values of life: Dharma, righteous living, Artha, 
worldly well-being, kama, self-fulfilment, and Moksha, 
ultimate freedom. May the ruler, wielder of power, swift 
in action and advancement, strengthen the people with 
power, and the people, in return, strengthen the ruler 
with power. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIII 737 


21. (Raja, judge Devate, Prajapati Rshi) 
sasad We ate aaa aia qun | 
a Shon wes: us 


Utsakthya’ ava gudam dhehi samanjim caraya 
vrsan. Ya strinam jivabhojanah. 


O Ruler, man of strength and power, if there is 
anyone evil who plays with the life and honour of 
women, punish him. Establish peace among the people. 
Establish the rule of law. Eliminate immorality and 
wantonness from the state. 


22. (Raja Praja Devate, Prajapati Rshi) 


aaa siphatsseafifa aster à 
amefa p cat Pretercitfe ater eeu 


Yakasakau sakuntika” halagiti vaficati. Ahanti 
gabhe paso nigalgaliti dharaka. 


Where the ruler strikes at the people, he strikes at 
the nation and the state because there the people, though 
otherwise they enjoyed comfort and happiness before, 
grow weaker and weaker now and fade like a helpless 
bird. When such a ruler exacts taxes from the farmers, 
he only cheats the nation. 


23. (Raja Praja Devate, Prajapati Rshi) 
Gents — vlepereessmeen asedfa | 


— Eo = 


fadaasza d yane m aeaa wiwem: esi 


Yako'sakau $akuntaka'ahalagiti vañcati. 
Vivaksata'iva te mukhamadhvaryo ma 
nastvamabhi bhasathah. 


Ruler, high-priest of the yajna of the state, make 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


738 YAJURVEDA 


no false promises to us. Let your mouth be not like a 
boaster’s. If you tell lies, you will grow weaker and 
weaker like a helpless bird and end up, cheating yourself. 


24. (Bhumi and Surya Devate, Prajapati Rshi) 
am t a frat a ast ane trea: | 
widest c frat wet giedama, usw 


Mata ca te pita ca te’ gram vrksasya rohatah. 
Pratilamiti te pita gabhe mustimatamsayat. 


Ruler, the earth your mother and the sun your father 
rise to the top of the world. The sun strikes at the treasure 
of space-waters with his light and power, the earth 
receives the showers and shines. Celebrate them with 
the people in yajna: It is beautiful, it is joyous. I am happy. 


25. (Bhumi and Surya Devate, Prajapati Rshi) 
ma at a frat wr asd wan serm: | 
fadarassa d ya sme at dat ae mean 
Mata ca te pita ca te’gre vrksasya kridatah. 


Vivaksata’iva te mukham brahman ma tvam 
vado bahu. 


People of the land, your mother-land like the earth 
and the ruler, father of the nation, like the sun, both 
joyous, play on top of the world in the midst of beauty 
and prosperity. Ruler, Brahma, presiding priest of the 
national yajna, your mouth seems eager to shout with 
pride and joy. At that time, speak not much, control 
yourself. 


26. (Shri Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


mattraesica fap uvetia d 
atA names emd Gata usu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIII 739 


Urdhvamenadmucchrapaya girau bharain 
haranniva. Athasyai madhyamedhatarn Site vate 
punanniva. 


Ruler of the land, lead this rising nation to the 
heights of beauty and prosperity like a mountaineer 
bearing his banner to the top of the mount, and, in the 
midst of this people, being sanctified as if in the cool 
mountain breezes, move on higher and ever higher. 


27. (Shri Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


seha frit aretha d 
stata neta vite art Gata usi 


Urdhvamenamucchrayatad girau bharain 
haranniva. Athasya madhyamejatu Site vate 
punanniva. 


Man of knowledge, enlightened citizen, support 
this rising ruler to the height of glory and power as a 
mountaineer carrying his burden to the top of the mount, 
and, in the midst of this nation, and sifting the truth 
from falsehood, as if, in the cool breeze, shine on in the 
beauty and prosperity of the land. 


28. (Prajapati Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


uwdwmsarspHer: py wepempunhud | 
"qeenrferd earsusrdt mrs vhepemfee uc 


Yadasya’ainhubhedyah krdhu sthulamupatasat. 
Muskavidasya 'ejato gosaphe $akulaviva. 


When the small and great acts of the people who 
clear out sin and crime from the society are appreciated 
by the ruler and the enlightened officers, they, the ruler 
and the elite, captivate the heart of the people and they 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


740 YAJURVEDA 


shine in their eyes as shakula fish shine in a little pool 
of water. 


29. (Scholars Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


wer aa uw fedem: i 

war dfasag ant uerenenrei em ure 

Yaddevaso lalamagum pravistuminamavisuh. 

Sakthna dedisyate nari satyasyaksibhuvo yatha. 

Just as noble people approach an eminent and 

reasonable judge for justice, just as a woman is 
distinguished by her body, so the men of reason find out 
the truth by direct observation of evidence. 


30. (Raja Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


"fum wen wee uy ata | 
Vet wed cT Urata earafa oN 


Yaddharino yavamatti na pustam pasu manyate. 
Sudrà yadaryajara na posaya dhanayati. 

When the deer eats up the barley it does not care 
for the field but destroys it. A servant woman who is 
the mistress of her master loves money but not for the 
well-being of her master or of her family. So when a 
ruler exploits his people, he does not care for their well- 
being, he destroys the nation. 


31. (Raja Praja Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


aah aanta we ag Ad | 
Vet aad wt A areata dad 


Yaddharino yavamatti na pustam bahu manyate. 
Sudro yadaryayai jaro na posamanumanyate. 


The deer that eats up the barley cares not for the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIII 741 


crop and the field. The servant who is a paramour of his 
mistress cares not for the well-being of the family. The 
ruler who exploits the people destroys the nation. 


32. (Raja Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


afamats Raros emfsrd: 1 
mA Al gat ara semg aR 3RN 


Dadhikrāvņo akarisam Jisnora$vasya a 


The hero is on guard, holdi and E iny the 
land and people. Like a knight of horse panting for victory, 
fast advancing in the battle, I place him at the head of the 
nation. May he do us proud, holding our head high 
gracefully, and may he carry us across the field of life. 


33. (Scholars Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


Tat Aeee Ue | 
geafuret mapa: Ve aT !a3! 


Gayatri tristubjagatyanustuppanktya saha. 
Brhatyusniha kakupsucibhih samyantu tva. 
May the scholars with research and action perfect 
and stabilize you in peace and tranquillity with the 
joyous gayatri, the stable trishtup, the protective 
anushtup, the comprehensive pankti, the expansive 
brihati, the lovely ushnih, and the charming kakup verses 
of the Veda. 


(May the scholars perfect the ruler.) 


34. (Praja Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


fedar maduara area wader: | 
Rea aya Usa: Ge: sree aT URI 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


742 YAJURVEDA 


Dvipada yascatuspadastripada yasca satpadah. 
Vicchanda yasca sacchandah sucibhih $amyantu 
tva. 


O citizens of the nation, may the learned and the 
wise, with their knowledge and acts, perfect and stabilise 
you in peace and tranquillity with two-part, four-part, 
three-part, or six-part, or various or regular verses of 
the Veda. 


35. (Praja Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
nemi recur fasar engt: usrdit:i 
fréflférerit ard: geit: ye cer aN 


Mahānāmnyo revatyo visva asah prabhuvarth. 
Maighirvidyuto vacah sucibhih $amyantu tva. 


Seekers of knowledge, citizens of the nation, may 
the universal words of wisdom, golden rich, great and 
sublime, ringing in all directions, raining like the clouds, 
roaring like thunder, and blazing as lightning — may 
all these great voices perfect you with their integrative 
and elevating message of peace and stability. 


36. (Women Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
wea unt ae fated miat i 
cart ucur fast: weffu: werd vem URI 


Naryaste patnyo loma vicinvantu manisaya. 
Devanam patnyo disah sucibhih $amyantu tva. 


Ruler, citizens, teachers, may the women, virgins 
and wives of the noble people, protectors of the nation, 
listen and gather your words with care and understanding, 
and may they, like the pure transparent quarters of space, 
stabilise and perfect you with their integrative words 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIII 743 
and acts of love and wisdom. 


37. (Women Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


waa Rot: dar ast ara cH: d 
andea erfsrdecrfer fant: spar vrzi«it: usi 


Rajata harinth sisa yujo yujyante karmabhih. 
A$vasya vajinastvaci simah Samyantu 
Samyantih. 


Women in love, lovely, captivating, arresting with 
love and loyalty, exciting and dedicated, are joined in 
marriage to the protection and embrace of handsome, 
virile and generous young men by their own will and 
action. Bound in the discipline of matrimony, may they 
be at peace in security, and may they provide for the 
love, peace and security of the young men of their choice. 


38. (Sabhasad Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


epferagr ada adam arya faa i gln 
eure ashi à aféar assia asta ngen 


Kuvidanga yavamanto yavancidyatha dantyanu- 
purvam viyuya. Ihehaisam krnuhi bhojanani ye 
barhiso nama’ uktim yajanti. 


Dear Sabhasad, eminent member of the council, 
just as farmers blest with rich barley harvest the grain 
with discrimination, some plants separately and some 
together, so do the teachers sit on seats of grass, receive 
food and water, and carry on the yajna of education 
accomplishing their work with the disciples with 
judgement. Here in this school, provide for their food 
and maintenance. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


744 YAJURVEDA 
39. (Adhyapaka Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


encres fer hea fast cred mator sre | 
PSS a vrfrar efe: sen 


Kastva chyati kastva visasti kaste gatrani 
Samyati. Ka u te $amita kavih. 

Young learner, who cuts, grinds and shapes you 
into form? Who teaches, directs and controls you? Who 
exercises your body-parts to suppleness and equipoise? 
Who is the sage and seer, high-priest of your education, 
giving the last oblation of completion? 


40. (PrajaDevata, Prajapati Rshi) 


wedded ue grin femen | 
Paced aster suu: sme vem ison 


Rtavasta’rtutha parva $amitaro vi $asatu. 
Samvatsarasya tejasa $amibhih $amyantu tva. 
Learner, seeker of knowledge and expertise, may 
the seasons and the teachers training you in peace and 
action instruct and temper you according to the needs 
of the time and the stage of your life, and may they 
complete and perfect you with the splendour of the sun 
round the year and peaceable action and refinement. 


41. (Praja Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


STEHTUT: Teste d asarna VTA: | 
adua med ë fefe: o a se 


Ardhamasah paruinsi te masa'acchyantu 
Samyantah. Ahoratrani maruto vilistam 
sudayantu te. 


Learner, seeker of knowledge, may the days and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIII 745 


nights, fortnights and months developing you refine and 
strengthen your body parts and life’s periods, and may 
the learned soften your roughness and eliminate your 
hardness. 


42. (Adhyapaka Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


Seulsareerdenemesud-] fa ot eg | 
matr wdsred Raat: oad sred«dt: SZ 


Daivya’adhvaryavastvacchyantu vi ca sasatu. 
Gatrani parvasaste simah krnvantu $amyantih. 


Learner, seeker, ruler, citizen, may the divine high- 
priests of the yajna and development of the nation instruct 
and refine you and develop the parts of your body, life 
and community from every joint and transition onward. 
May the loving motherly women wholly dedicated soften 
your heart and refine your mind. 


43. (Raja Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


det uferepafias ages um wi 
aed ab Ge cer Hild Aa sg 


Dyauste prthivyantariksam vayusSchidram 
prnatu te. Suryaste naksatraih saha lokam krnotu 
sadhuya. 


May the heaven (with its light), the earth (with his 
generosity and stability), the sky (with its expanse), the 
wind and air (with speed and energy) make up your wants 
and repair your weaknesses. And may the sun, lord of 
light and life, with the stars and planets, create for you a 
straight and simple world of beauty, freedom and 
progress. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


746 
44. 


YAJURVEDA 
(Raja Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
vi d uis mia: mea: | 
Teal Waa: sree ay ad ise 


Sam te parebhyo gatrebhyah $amastva- 
varebhyah. Samasthabhyo majjabhyah $amvastu 
tanvai tava. 


Peace and health to the higher parts of your 


personality. Peace and health to the lower parts of your 
body. Peace and strength to your bones and marrow. 
Peace and well-being to your body and mind all over. 


45. 


(Jijnasu-Seeker Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


ch: fedaenrent ha ass fierce wt: 
feekfefague dao fenremendd ved isan 


Kah svidekaki carati ka u svijjayate punah. Ki 
sviddhimasya bhesajam kimvavapanam mahat. 


Who moves alone? Who is born again and again? 


What is the antidote of cold? And what is the great field 
and hold of life, seed and sustenance? 


46. 


(Surya etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
aa suenrent ha a-gat Stadt WA: 
anam wast ghadi qed ines 


Surya’ekaki carati candrama jayate punah. 
Agnirhimasya bhesajam bhumiravapanam 
mahat. 


The sun moves alone. The moon is born again and 


again. Fire, heat, is the antidote of cold. And earth is the 
great field and hold of life, seed and sustenance. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIII TA7 


47. (Jijnasu Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


faxed uro fenem: | 
fexRetoieet atta: eer ara a fara arson 


Kiin svit suryasamam jyotih kim samudrasamam 
sarah. Kim svit prthivyai varstyah kasya matra 
na vidyate. 
What is the other light like the sun? What is the 
vessel-hold of water like the sea? What is larger than 
the earth? What is without limits in the world? 


48. (Brahma etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


sr ya o uri: ugue: | 
wd: uferetr asian cire are a feler «zu 


Brahma suryasamam jyotirdyauh samudra- 
samam sarah. Indrah prthivyai varstyan gostu 
matra na vidyate. 


Brahma is the light like the sun. The sky is the 
great vessel-hold of waters like the sea. The sun is 
greater than the earth. Word, divine speech, has no limits. 


49. (Question-Answer Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
yar vr feret dang afe ana HT Sn | 
ay fantitag aree ve fava yetrarfaagire rset 


Prcchami tva citaye devasakha yadi tvamatra 
manasa jagantha. Yesu visnustrisu pade- 
svestastesu visvam bhuvanamavivesa. 


Friend of the divine, I ask you for my 
understanding, if with your mind you can reach the 
answer: Does the living world exist in those three 
regions of the universe — the earth, the sky, and the 
heavens, wherein Vishnu, universal lord of the world, 
pervades? 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


748 
50. 


YAJURVEDA 


(Ishvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


sf wu fay uda ag feme spererfeneb | 
wa: ude yea ames faerssreg 
YER KON 


Api tesu trisu padesvasmi yesu visvam 
bhuvanamavivesa. Sadyah paryemi prthivimuta 
dyamekenangena divo’asya prstham. 


I am there, sure, in those three regions of the 


universe wherein the whole living world exists. I 
instantly and universally pervade the earth, the sky and 
the vault of heaven, each with one existential part of 
my omnipresence. 


51. 


(Purusheshvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 

eed: Geass falas ard: uesssrüdr | 
ude agdam ca fexfida: ufdare- 
ad uu 


Kesvantah purusa'a vivesa kanyantah puruse’ 
arpitani. Etad brahmannupa valhamasi tva kim 
svinnah prati vocasyatra. 


Who and how many does the Purusha, supreme 


spirit, pervade? Who and how many reside in the 
Purusha? This, O man of knowledge, we ask you so 
that we too may excel. What do you say to us on this 
question? 


52. 


(Parameshvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


Gstaad: hasenia aera: uGussmüdr i 
tara Reams cT maat wae 
AT RN 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIII 749 


Pancasvantah purusa’a vivesa tanyantah 
puruse 'arpitani. Etattvatra pratimanvano’asmi 
na mayaya bhavasyuttaro mat. 


In five (elements of Prakriti) does the Purusha 
pervade. These five elements reside within the Purusha. 
This I say on the question believing and asking you to 
accept and believe. Not by maya, nor by mere science, 
nor by knowledge alone of existence would you go farther 
than me (the Purusha). 


53. (Prashta-Questioner Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


on fedaretegydfelfur: fapsfidardia ges: | 
ant fielamdrfearferfurer enr Rearing usu 


Ka svidasit purvacittih kim svidasid brhadvayah. 
Ka svidasit pilippila ka svidasit pisangila. 
What is the first original structure in time? What 


is the great womb of the forms of life? What is the finest 
pliant material? What is the universal devourer? 


54. (Samadhata-Wise Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


winiuteudfdfersdssmeta usd: d 
arfetereirfeaferforem UPR Tease ux 


Dyaurasit purvacittira$va'asid brhadvayah. 
Avirasit pilippila ratrirasit pisangila. 

Heaven, light, i.e., divine vibration of thought 
energy is the first original step in creation. Mahat, the 
first mutation of original Prakriti, was the great womb of 
the forms of creation. Manifested Prakriti is the finest 
pliant material for creation. Pralaya, the night of 
annihilation devours the universe. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


750 YAJURVEDA 


55. (Prashta Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


criss at fagiigen Hiss epefusifgem i 


asmanda nsi went faddf nuun 

Ka’imare pisangila ka’im kurupisangila. Ka’ 

imaskandamarsati ka’im pantham visarpati. 
What is the cover of the forms of existence? Who 


destroys the beauty of the crops? Who moves jumping 
in leaps? Who creeps on the path? 


56. (Samadhata Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


arm fusrfaem verferebufusrfzem i 

yasema a Herz: wem far dfs usu 

Ajare pisangila $vavitkurupisangila. Sasa’ 

askandamarsatyahih pantham vi sarpati. 
Prakriti is the cover of forms. Porcupine is the 


destroyer of the beauty of crops in the field. Energy moves 
in currents. And the clouds sail upon their path. 


57. (Prashta Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


ade ferar: pantar enfe erate: enfaem afte: 
at ver faan yeaua ofa wrdivsseqsit 
fa usd 


Katyasya visthah katyaksarani kati homasah 
katidha samiddhah. Yajnasya tva vidatha 
prcchamatra kati hotara' rtu$o yajanti. 


How many permanent materials? How many 
operations? How many fuels and modes of lighting? I 
ask you these questions on the subject of yajna for 
knowledge. How many priests perform it according to 
the seasons? 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIII 751 


58. (Samidha Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


ade fermer stanentvasittaetat: ufus = 
fra: aget a feram udi aca dasg 
wa eel 


Sadasya visthah satamaksaranyasitirhomah 
samidho ha tisrah. Yajnasya te vidatha pra 
bravimi sapta hotara’rtuso yajanti. 


Six seasons are the pillars of yajna. Hundreds are 
the materials of permanent nature. Eighty are the 
operations. Three are the fuels. I speak to you of the 
knowledge of yajna. Seven priests carry on the yajna 
according to the seasons. 


59. (Prashta Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


aisem da yhe cur at umelufsrdts- 
aman (o cn: wer da gedt wa at oda 
agii AIST: usu 

Ko'asya veda bhuvanasya nabhim ko dyava- 


prthivi’antariksam. Kah suryasya veda brhato 
jJanitram ko veda candramasam yatojah. 


Who knows the centre-hold of this world? Who 
knows the earth, the sky, and the heaven, region of light? 
Who knows the great creator of the sun? Who knows 
the moon and wherefrom it was born? 


60. (Samadhata Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


aqua yhe mAr aq eatgfidts- 
aR bere ater gedt aPanat aq aaa 
AAMT: gol 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


752 YAJURVEDA 


Vedahamasya bhuvanasya nabhim veda 
dyavaprthivi’antariksam. Veda suryasya brhato 
janitramatho veda candramasam yatojah. 


I know the centre-hold of this world. I know the 
heaven and earth and the middle regions of the sky. I 
know the great creator of the sun. I know the moon and 
wherefrom it was born. (The man of real knowledge is 
one who knows Brahma, creator and sustainer of the 
world, and the world itself, who knows the efficient cause, 
Brahma, and the material cause, Prakriti, and the 
beneficiary, the jiva. The speaker is such a man of 
knowledge. Alternatively, the speaker is Brahma Itself.) 


61. (Prashta Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
qa cr urget uísreur wesrfü at spen 
Tat: ya car qosa td: wesrfd ere: 
drd edu use 


Prcchami tva paramantam prthivyah prcchami 
yatra bhuvanasya nabhih. Prcchami tva vrsno’ 
asvasya retah prcchami vacah paramam vyoma. 
I ask you: What is the highest end of the earth and 
where? I ask you: What and where is the centre of the 
world? I ask you: Where and what is the seed of the 
virility and fertility of the male? I ask you: What and 
where is the haven and home and ultimate preserve of 
the Word, universal speech? 


62. (Samadhata Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
ga afa: wirssrd: uferearssre «rit wees ATA: | 
TRAN qosay tat sme ara: drin 
eH" ug 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIII 753 


Iyam vedih paro’antah prthivya'ayam yajno 
bhuvansya nabhih. Ayain somo vrsno’asvasya 
reto brahmayam vacah paramam vyoma. 


This yajna-vedi is the supreme and ultimate end 
of the earth. This yajna is the centre and centre-hold of 
the world. This soma is the seed and source of the virility 
and fertility of the male. And Brahma is the haven and 
home and birth and preserve of the Word, divine speech. 


63. (Samadhata Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


Gy: way: danse | 
aà g migra ad wma: wordt: ts 3 t 


Subhuh svayambhuh prathamo ’ntarmaha- 
tyarnave. Dadhe ha garbhamrtviyam yato jatah 
prajapatih. 
Gracious and glorious, self-existent and at the very 
centre in this grand ocean of the universe is Brahma. He 
plants the seed of creation into Prakriti according to the 


season of the creative cycle, and thence is born Prajapati, 
the sun, lord of life. 


64. (Ishvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


gat uerarsmdfea eurer afer: | 
wan Aig urne Aad new 
Hota yaksatprajapatiin somasya mahimnah. 
Jusatam pibatu somam hotaryaja. 
The man of yajna performs the yajna in honour of 
Prajapati, father and sustainer of the world of creation 


by the grace and glory of Soma, lord of life and 
omnipotence. May he ever dedicate himself to the lord 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


754 YAJURVEDA 


and drink the nectar of life and immortality by divine 
grace. 


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna, relent not ever. 


65. (Ishvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
Walaa 4 craararzit fasat ssurfür af ar sisrar | 
wenn — wpEHequissnep aea Uday 
THOT dig I 
Prajapate na tvadetanyanyo vi$va rupani pari 


ta babhuva. Yatkamaste juhumastanno 'astu 
vaya syama patayo rayinam. 


Prajapati, lord of creation, no one other than you 
is supreme over and beyond all these and other forms 
of existence. 


Whatever our ends and aims for which we offer 
our homage to you, may all that come true for us. 


May we, by Grace, be masters, promoters and 
preservers of the wealths of the world. 


sta watfasttseara: d 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIV 755 


CHAPTER-XXIV 


1.  (Prajapati Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
sda thre uran: egeunitessmritr are 
Gre area Agerra warranty areal: 
"lardrer: vars mattar qase port 
quydik cilasrdacit gadaa: va: 
qasgha veueura aedurat ates: de 


Asvastuparo gomrgaste prajapatyah krsnagriva’ 
agneyo rarate purastatsarasvati mesyadha- 
staddhanvora$vinavadhoramau | bahvoh 
saumapausnah $yamo nabhyain sauryayamau 
$veta$ca krsna$ca parsvayostvastrau lomaSsa- 
sakthau sakthyorvayavyah $vetah puccha’ 
indraya svapasyaya vehadvaisnavo vamanah. 


The horse, the wild ram, the wild cow, these are 
sunny in character and quality, they belong to Prajapati; 

the black-necked animal foremost among the 
beasts is fiery in character and quality, it belongs to 
Agni; 

the sheep with twisted hair in the forehead has 
the quality for speech and intelligence, it belongs to 
Sarasvati; 

the goats having black spots below the jaws and 
on the lower parts of front legs have the qualities of the 
sun and moon, they belong to the Ashvinis; 

the animal which is black round the navel has 
the qualities of Soma and Pushan; 


those which are white and dark on the sides have 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


756 YAJURVEDA 


the qualities of the sun and air, they belong to Surya 
and Yama; 

those with long hair on the thighs have the 
qualities of Tvashta; 

those which have a white tail belong to the wind, 
Vayu; 

the small animal and the barren cow belong to 
Vishnu; 

Let all these be deployed in the service of Indra, 
the ruler, man of high values and action. 


2. (Soma & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


eat sorted: Heise «ire errteurslsr: 
kaye atem: fotfecsis-d: fyrkrcsr: wad 
Bitar ataa: Saagad: fraag: waa 
RiRagaA asmen: qudt aprdudt vererd'dit aT 
SiTemuu: us 


Rohito dhumrarohitah karkandhurohitaste 
saumya babhrurarunababhruh $ukababhruste 
varunah $itirandhro'nyatah $itirandhrah 
samantasitirandhraste savitrah sitibahu- 
ranyatah $Sitibahuh samantasitibahuste barhas- 
patyah prsati ksudraprsati sthulaprsati ta 
maitravarunyah. 


The red, smoky red and red-berry animals belong 
to Soma; 


the brown, red brown and parrot brown belong 
to Varuna; 


those with white holes in the wool on the one 
side or all over belong to Savita; 


those with white fore-legs, white on one side or 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIV 757 


white on all sides belong to Brihaspati; 


those with spots on the limbs, small ones, or large 
ones, belong to Mitra and Varuna. 


(All these should be pressesd into service.) 


3. (Ashvins and Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


yaaa: ddiskgaret wfürarereaserfser: yard: 
vadighseured Gers ugpqdsp enuri ararsstatercar 
Wet ebur: ust: 131 


Suddhavalah sarvasuddhavalo manivdlasta’ 
asvinah syetah syetakso’runaste rudraya 
pa$upataye karna yama 'avalipta raudra 
nabhorupah parjanyah. 

The animals with bright hair, wholly bright hair, 
and jewel-bright hair belong to the Ashvins. The white, 
the white eyed, and the red ones are for Rudra, lord of 
the animals. Those which are specially serviceable 
belong to Yama. Those of strong limbs belong to the 
pranas. And those which are sky-grey belong to the 
clouds. 


4.  (Maruts etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


yitar Te sedis Alsat: uenti f&drit 
deat ar: ahead: witgresut: smurenurt searcite- 
mud area: punta: Piaras aaas- 
erat: porissrcatisrdterssretssaet: wi 


Prsnistirascinaprsnirurdhvaprsniste marutah 
Phalgurlohitorni palakst tah sarasvatyah 
plihakarnah sunthakarno’dhyalohakarnaste 
tvastrah krsnagrivah Sitikakso’njisakthasta’ 
aindragnah krsnanjiralpanjirmahanjista’ 
usasyah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


758 YAJURVEDA 


Soft and dappled ones, those with transverse 
speckles, or upward speckles are of the quality and 
character of the Maruts; fruit-lovers, those with red hair, 
and those of quick quivering eyes belong to Sarasvati. 
The spleen-eared, white-eared, and the golden eared 
belong to Tvashta. Those of black neck, white flanks 
and heavy thighs are of the quality and character of Indra 
and Agni, wind and electric energy. And those of 
average or dark brilliance, little brilliance or great 
brilliance belong to the dawns. 


5.  (Vishvedevas Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


Rra dsa, titvacadat erersfelamarssrfster 
"rur sm deadat menu uei: uud 


Silpà vai$vadevyo rohinyastryavayo vace’ 


devanam patnibhyah. 


The animals useful in arts belong to all the noble 
people, all the divinities. Three kinds of mountain sheep 
used in climbing high are for knowledge and speech. 
The unknown breeds are for Aditi, the earth. Those of 
similar form are for the Protector, and the young calves 
are for the wives of the learned to look after. 


6.  (Agnietc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
Pumas: tand amea aoe- 
serarsatenrfenutsamfacurai aT: T: NN 
Krsnagriva 'agneyah Sitibhravo vasunam rohita 
rudrana n $veta'avarokina 'adityanam 
nabhorupah parjanyah. 
Black-necked animals have the quality and 
character of fire. Those with white brows are of the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIV 759 


Vasus such as earth. The red ones are of the quality and 
energy of pranas. The white ones and brilliant ones are 
of the nature of Adityas. And those of the colour of 
water and the sea are of the element of the clouds. 


7. (Indra and Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


saasa alaacastsasrasdsaa: ftag: 
feifrugsesasü-greréwucmn: hen aA: 
cReurdissfi-HrTEdT: SurHr: ATT: MoN 


Unnata’rsabho vamanasta'aindravaisnava' 
unnatah sitibahuh Sitiprsthasta’aindra- 
barhaspatyah $ukarupa vajinah kalmasa” 
agnimarutah $yamah pausnah. 

The tall, strong animals with supple and tortuous 
limbs are of the quality Indra and Vishnu, electricity 
and wind. The tall ones of razor-sharp stroke and 
adamantine back have the quality of Indra and 
Brihaspati, wind and the sun. Those of the form and 
colour of the parrot, fast as horse, white and black have 
the quality of Agni and Maruts, fire and the winds. The 
black ones have the quality of Pushan, energising as 
the cloud. 


8.  (Indragni etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


waster enset amassas 
ammà erem Suremusr-cdsu- Bm: eN 
Eta'aindragna dvirupa'agnisomtya vamana’ 
anadvaha"agnavaisnava vasa maitra- 
varunyo ’nyata’enyo maitryah. 

These animals of two colours or qualities are of 


the nature of Indra and Agni, wind and electric energy. 
Those of supple and tortuous limbs and the sturdy 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


760 YAJURVEDA 


bullocks are of the nature of Agni and Soma, and of 
Agni and Vishnu. The barren cow is of the nature of 
Mitra and Varuna, pranic energy. The rest anywhere are 
of friendly nature, wherever they are and wherever they 


go. 
9. (Agni & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
Fantasma ave: drm: ser enaeursarfa- 
wrarsarfeetr nur sm deadat serai Weisz: ue 11 
Krsnagriva'agneya babhravah saumyah sveta 
vayavya avijüata'adityai sarupa dhatre 
vatsataryo devanam patnibhyah. 
The black-necked animals are fiery, the brown 
ones are cool and gentle as soma, the white ones are 
airy. The unknown are for the earth, those of like form 


for the Protector, the young calves for the wives of the 
divines and for the sun-rays to foster. 


10. (Antariksha etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


epum dat gassata geat fear: raat 
Agm: fürenmedlrenr: Ngon 
Krsna bhauma dhumra'antariksa brhanto 
divyah $abala vaidyutah sidhmastarakah. 
The black ones, the farming animals, are for the 
earth. The brown ones are for the sky. The big, 


wonderful, whitish are live wires like electricity. The 
gentle ones are for the alleviation of suffering. 


11. (Vasanta etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


gar cherraretera vera TTS enum emuiets- 
amaa wur eumd fusrereefshe ue eu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIV 761 


Dhumran vasantayalabhate $vetan grismaya 
krsnan varsabhyo'runancharade prsato 
hemantaya pisanganchisiraya. 

For the spring season, you get the brown ones; for 
summer, whites; for the rains, black ones; for autumn, 
red ones; for freezing winter, thick ones; and for the cool 
season, you get yellow and orange. 


12. (Agni & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
eut mÀ waaa aad nici 
TrerarsstTezii quderéssfemgé ng 


Tryavayo gayatryai pancavayastristubhe ditya- 
vaho jagatyai trivatsa'anustubhe turyavaha’ 
usnihe. 


Animals of three six month periods of life are for 
the gayatri metre to sing; those of five periods are for 
trishtup; the burden bearing ones are for jagati; those 
with three calves are for anushtup; and those of the 
fourth stage of life are for the ushnih metre to sing. 


13. (Virajadaya metres Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


usat faurstssamuit FEM SHIM: mp saga: 
use Massa ues 


Pasthavaho viraja’uksano brhatya’rsabhah 
kakubhe'nadvahah | panktyai dhenavo’ 
ticchandase. 


Those which bear the burdens on their back are 
for the virat metre to sing; the virile bulls are for brihati; 
the sturdy and most excellent bulls are for kakup; the 
cart-bullocks are for the pankti; and the cows are for 
the ati-chhanda metre to sing of. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


762 YAJURVEDA 


14. (Agni etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
Puniassirma aad: Anss: ultfaar 
daad: Uae: Fara: drum: geet area teu 
derer erm eergferetret: ues 


Krsnagriva 'agneya babhravah saumya 'upadhva- 
stah savitra vatsataryah sarasvatyah $yamah 
pausnah prsnayo maruta bahurupa vaisvadeva 
vasa dyavaprthiviyah. 

Black-necked animals are fiery. The brown and 
generous ones are gentle. The weak ones close at hand 
are of Savita, children of the sun. The cows with young 
calves are of Sarasvati. The dark ones are darlings of 
the cloud. The dappled cows are favourites of the 
Maruts. The multi-coloured ones are for Vishvedevas, 
the noblest people. And the brilliant domestic animals 
are gifts of earth and heaven. 


15. (Indra & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
sat: Hansas: Hur ateur: ar 
ME: SATATEGURT: dieu 
Uktah sancara’eta’ aindragnah’krsna varunah 
prsnayo marutah kayastuparah. 

These animals described here and moving around 
are of Indra and Agni, airy and fiery. The black ones 
are of Varuna, most excellent lord of choice. The richly 
speckled ones are of the Maruts and for the stormy 
people. And the violent ones are for and of Prajapati. 
16. (Agnietc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 

sma sitwad usnrsmarederp Uem: urauid: 
Were regen AA afeher egi: 
mfe: UGE Heu veniens eur d$ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIV 763 


Agnaye 'nikavate prathamajanalabhate marud- 
bhyah santapanebhyah savatyan marudbhyo 
grhamedhibhyo baskihan marudbhyah kridi- 
bhyah sarmnsrstan marudbhyah svatavadbhyo’ 
nusrstan. 


The man of wisdom and discrimination favours 
and selects first-born heroes for admirable Agni, fiery 
commander of the army, acclimatised animals for the 
disciplined heroes of the speed of the winds, well reared 
animals for the homely yajnic people, well-trained 
animals for the sportive fun-loving people, and 
domesticated animals for the quiet settled people. 


17. (Indragni & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


sam: cHeensudisu-zrm: west ales shuxsur 
Ayao: ngon 


Uktah sancara’eta’aindragnah prasrnga 
mahendra bahurupa vaisvakarmanah. 


Described are these animals and the ways of raising 
and training them. Of divine care and purpose, they are 
of varied hue and beautiful horns, favourites of divinities 
and for divine purpose. Of Indra and Agni they are, of 
Mahendra and Vishvakarma. 


18. (Pitarah Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


pom: Geel: uci 
Dhumra babhrunikasah pitrnam somavatam 
babhravo dhumranikasah pitrnam barhisadam 
krsna babhruntkasah pitrnamagnisvattanam 
krsnah prsantastraiyambakah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


764 YAJURVEDA 


Smoky grey and dark brown animals are for kind 
and loving soma-natured parents and seniors. Brown and 
smoky dark are for the senior councillors. Black and 
brown are for those seniors who are experts of the science 
of fire. And black and spotted are for those who have 
three-fold responsibilities. (Honour the seniors with pet- 
gifts and protect the animals for them.) 


19. (Vayu Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


vam: Hasut: FARA: year alaeM: ver: 
drat: ngeu 


Uktah sancara’ etah sunastriyah $veta vayavyah 
Svetah sauryah. 

Described are these animals, white, beautiful, 

moving around, dedicated to the plough and the share, 


sustaining as the air, bright as the sunlight. They have 
the elements and virtues of the air and the sun. 


20. (Vasanta Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
are airtariedd tare enerfergrt-t aut 
Raai after tana cnehurfesfsiua 
Tat RON 
Vasantaya kapinjalanalabhate grismaya 
kalavinkan varsabhyastittirincharade varttika 
hemantaya kakarafichisiraya vikakaran. 


The bird specialist takes up the sparrow for the 
season of spring, the cuckoo for summer, the partridge 
for the rains, the quail for autumn, the kakara for freezing 
cold, and vikakara for the frosty season. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIV 765 


21. (Varuna Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


"gare Pianeta weiter agaaa rect 
Rard epefraura eeu MAA, RZ 
Samudraya $i$umaranalabhate parjanyaya 
mandukan adbhyo matsyan mitraya kulipayan 
varunaya nakran. 


The water-life specialist takes up the alligator in 
relation to the sea, frogs for the clouds, fish for the waters 
of lakes and rivers, kulipaya in relation to the sun and 
waters, and crocodile in relation to the oceans. 


22. (Soma & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
ata geurmetsr aad asg Ra sat 
ford Waa SUITS SASHA URN 
Somaya hainsanalabhate vayave balaka' 
indragnibhyam kruncan mitraya madgun 
varunaya cakravakan. 

The bird-expert takes up the hansa, geese, in 
relation to Soma, beauty and joy, the she-crane in 
relation to Vayu, breeze and pleasure, the krauncha in 
relation to Indragni, the warmth of fire and vibrations 
of energy, the madgu in relation to Mitra, sun and water, 
and the chakravaka in relation to Varuna, the love and 
vastness of space. 


23. (Agni etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


sma qea aaa assa eer 
areas teat aaaea Harry usa 
Agnaye kutarunalabhate vanaspatibhya 'ulukan- 
agnisomabhyam casan asvibhyam mayuran 
mitravarunabhyam kapotan. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


766 YAJURVEDA 


The specialist in birds and bird behaviour takes 
up the cocks for Agni, the owls for the Vanaspati, trees, 
the blue jays for Agni and Soma, the peacocks for the 
Ashvinis, and the pigeons for Mitra and Varuna. 


24. (Soma etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


arate ma ven cnrefrenr cilurétdara 
weil: peint casnfeaisma creda ure- 
"UIT URS 
Somaya labanalabhate tvastre kaulikan gosa- 
dirdevanam patnibhyah kulika devajamibhyo’ 
gnaye grhapataye parusnan. 
He takes up the laba birds for Soma, kaulikas for 
Tvashta, goshadis which hurt the cows for the wives of 


the nobles, kulikas for the sisters of the nobles, and 
parushnas for Agni of the homestead. 


25. (Kalavayavah, periods of time Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
ari ureararetsra tet diremqzernast: afeat 
war aeferdaanrt wea: door uud 

Ahne paravatanalabhate ratryai sicapuraho- 


ratrayoh sandhibhyo jaturmasebhyo datyau- 
hantsamvatsaraya mahatah suparnan. 


He takes up pigeons for the day, sichapus for the 
night, jatus for the morning and evening twilight, the 
crow for the months, and the big suparnas for the year. 


26. (Bhumi etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


qasar saaa ure fest RA 
farsa daar aman aT: uas 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIV 767 


Bhumya'akhunalabhate ’ntariksaya panktan dive 
ka$an | digbhyo | nakulan | babhrukan 
avantaradisabhyah. 


The expert studies the rodent holes for the earth, 
the rows of flying birds for the sky, the kasha birds for 
the light, the mungoose for the directions and the 
ichneumon for the interdirections. 


27. (Vasus etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


FEAST AT EKA SHAMS A ALT 
farde dasa: querere: HaSTL URI 


Vasubhya’ r$yanalabhate rudrebhyo rurun 
adityebhyo nyankun visvebhyo devebhyah 
prsatantsadhyebhyah kulungan. 

For the Vasu order of scholars, take up the study 
of the white footed rishya antelopes; for the Rudra 
scholars, take up the ruru antelopes; for the Aditya 
scholars, take up the nyanku antelopes; for the eminent 
and generous scholars, take up the prishata antelopes; 
and for the advanced researchers on yoga, the sadhyas, 
take up the kulunga antelopes. 


28. (Ishana etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
gota wat atta sm cra far sir ahora 
AeA, GEIS enis ssub uec 


Isanaya tvà parasvata à labhate mitraya gauran 
varunaya mahisan brhaspataye gavayanstvastra’ 
ustran. 

For the man of ruling power take up the parasvan 
antelopes of the forest, gauras for Mitra, the buffaloes 
for Varuna, wild cows for Brihaspati, and camels for 
Tvashta. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


768 YAJURVEDA 


29. (Prajapati and Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


Wed Geary shears att chad are ragà 
Uses set: usu 


Prajapataye purusan hastina a labhate vace 
plusinscaksuse masakanchrotraya bhrngah. 
Take up male elephants for Prajapati, flying white 
ants for speech, mosquitoes for the eye and moths for 
the ear. 


30. (Prajapati etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
wsdl cep emere ep INP eDGUITSTIUSH TIT Tara 
Pui ASNT ehe: vides xrfeduemed sreret 


furma atic eA: pt: ager ferent 
fenda gei uo 


Prajapataye ca vayave ca gomrgo varunay- 
aranyo meso yamaya krsno manusyarajaya 
markatah $ardulaya rohidrsabhaya gavayi 
ksipra$yenaya vartika nilangoh krmih 
samudraya sisumaro himavate hast. 

For Prajapati and Vayu, the wild cow; for Varuna, 
the wild ram; for Yama, black deer; for the ruler of 
people, the monkey; for the lion, red deer; for the bull, 
the wild cow; for the swift eagle, the partridge; for the 
blue-bodied, the insects; for the sea, crocodile; and for 
the snowy mountainous region, the elephant. 


31. (Prajapatya etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
ay: ugass gag quaxera sm farri 


wae speret dafag! cifeate: dencuraut 
Tater Area shed: ua? 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIV 769 


Mayuh prajapatya’ ulo haliksno vrsadamsaste 
dhatre disam kanko dhunksagneyi kalavinko 
lohitahih puskarasadaste tvastra vace kruncah. 
The wild human (gorilla, yati, etc.) is the care of 
Prajapati; the little creatures, lion and wild cat for Dhata, 
master controller; the heron is for the directions; 
dhunksha bird is fiery; the sparrow, red snake and tank- 
creatures are for Tvashta; and the crane is for speech. 


32. (Soma & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 

ana pag kos tact: vrenr a ater: 
wae Hees iT: fast aah: eneenewds- 
"uet ufaspenti aera: uaa 

Somaya kulunga aranyo’jo nakulah $aka te 
pausnah krosta mayorindrasya gauramrgah 
pidvo nyankuh kakkataste'numatyai prati- 
Srutkayai cakravakah. 


The antelope is for Soma; the forest-goat, 
mungoose and the bee are for Pusha; the jackal is for 
the wild human; the white deer is for Indra; the pidva, 
nyanku and kakkata are for Anumati; and the 
chakravaka is for Echo. 


33. (Mitra & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 

ant srement vm: daa: ERA Dar: uve 
mR: Year vara wiget qa: qateped 
Waa Uta Veh: ueuweren uss 

Sauri balaka $argah srjayah $ayandakaste 
maitrah  sarasvatyai $arih purusavak 
Svavidbhaumi $ardulo vrkah prdakuste manyave 
sarasvate $ukah purusavak. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


770 YAJURVEDA 


The female crane is for the sun; the sharga, the 
srijaya and the shayandaka, these birds are for Mitra; 
the human voiced parrot is for Sarasvati; the porcupine 
is for the earth; the lion, the wolf, and the snake, these 
are for Manyu (anger); and the human voiced male 
parrot is for the sea. 


34. (Agni & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


yaoi: ustassifadigal afr d aaa seda 
"rere irgreitsersr stata: wat Here 
Hinad emerqízrdrd: od: usw 


Suparnah parjanya’ atirvahaso darvida te 
vayave brhaspataye vacaspataye paingarajo' 
laja antariksah plavo madgurmatsyaste 
nadipataye dyavaprthiviyah kurmah. 

The eagle is for the cloud; the aati (an aquatic 
bird), the serpent and the wood-pecker, these are for 
Vayu, the air; the paingaraja is for Vachasapati 
Brihaspati; alaja is for the sky; the pelican, the cormorant 
and the fish, these are for the lord of streams; and the 
tortoise is for the earth and light. 


35. (Chandra & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


"irem epredepr aTeure vd erredi- 
pam: arf geet archer TRE mehr: pei- 
weedsehureer fea vreden: NLN 


Purusamrgascandramaso godha kalaka darva- 

ghataste vanaspatinam krkavakuh savitro harnso 

vatasya nakro makarah kulipayaste 'kuparasya 
hriyai $alyakah. 

The buck belongs to the moon; the alligator, the 

kalaka, the wood pecker, these belong to the trees; the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIV 771 


peacock belongs to Savita, the sun; the hansa is of the 
air; the iguana, crocodile, and the dolphin, they are of 
the sea, and the porcupine is for timidity. 


36. (Ashvinis & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


vaat usce After fafufrer watot eiramrs- 
stat: PON WAI Seal Gq: Meta asgan 
Weert ure uas 


Enyahno manduko musika tittiriste sarpanam 
lopasa’asvinah krsno ratrya’rkso jatuh susilika 
ta itarajananam jahaka vaisnavi. 


The doe is of the day; the frog, mouse and 
partridge, these are of the serpents; the lopasha is 
Ashvins’; black animal is for the night; the bear, the bat 
and the sushilika are for other people; and the hedgehog 
is for Vishnu. 


37. (Ardhamasa etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


aramitszdurar assit teat: vuota 
Arar, avant Xrfacbugumeit Sm koei 
"gerdsfü: ual 


Anyavapo 'rdhamasanamr$yo mayurah supar- 
naste gandharvanamapamudro masan kasyapo 
rohitkundrnaci golattika te’ psarasam mrtyave’ 
sitah. 


The cockoo belongs to the fortnights; the rishya 
deer, the peacock and the swan belong to the gandharvas 
(musicians); the crab belongs to the waters; the tortoise 
belongs to the months; the red deer, the house lizzard 
and the golattika belong to the water nymphs and the 
sunbeams; and the black deer is for death. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


772 
38. 


YAJURVEDA 


(Varsha & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


ager: cnet ureneted fuquri seitens 
ada misa: adtasscte: ered Poke aem- 
anual AG: use 

Varsahurrtunamakhuh kaso manthalaste 
pitrnam balayajagaro vasunam kapinjalah 
kapota’ulukah SaSaste nirrtyai varunayaranyo 
mesah. 


The frog is for the seasons; the mouse, the rodents 


and the flying fox, these are of the pitaras; the serpent 
is for strength; the partridge is for the Vasus; the pigeon, 
the owl and the hare are for adversity; the wild ram is 
for Varuna. 


39. 


(Aditya and Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
Rasati eame utter amaA Hemrsari uera 
Wan es Ug: afd: pekat st erfsrat carat 
fen: use 

Svitra’adityanamustro ghrnivan vardhrinasaste 
matya'aranyaya srmaro ruru raudrah kvayih 
kutarurdatyauhaste vajinam kamaya pikah. 


The white domestic animal is of the Adityas; the 


camel, the bright and tender animal and a big goat with 
streaks on nose are for intelligence; the wild cow is for 
the forest; the red deer is of Rudra; the kvayi, the cock 
and the crow, these are for the Vajins (speed); and the 
cuckoo is for love and desire. 


40. 


(Vishvedevas etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 

gam deeds: vat enum: quit tiene 
tatarftrsta der: fave uiua: ehenema: fuudenr 
srepfrer hka fasdat tart waa: nson 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIV 773 


Khadgo vaisvadevah $va krsnah karno 
gardabhastaraksuste raksasamindraya sukarah 
simho marutah krkalasah pippaka Sakuniste 
Saravyayai visvesam devanam prsatah. 


The rhino is for Vishvedevas; black dog, long- 
eared ass, the tiger, these are for the demons; the boar 
is for the king; the lion is for the winds; the chameleon, 
pippaka and the vulture are for the marksman; the 
spotted deer is favourite of the noblest persons. 


sft aafasitseara: d 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


774 YAJURVEDA 


CHAPTER-XXV 


1. (Sarasvati & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
smd afarcent axed eme ub qestateztes— 
maas sata fsnaretsscdreetn- Ae a- 
Sharassinast qumuvenay sifear vuastfsr: 
walt spat matye erdt vari fae anae- 
Baca Panel Pure tater ureter uagutuerarais- 
gsretsaragifor uent ursisgard: neu 


Sadam dadbhiravakam dantamulairmrdam 
barsvaiste gam dainstrabhyain sarasvatya' 
agrajihvam jihvaya'utsadamavakrandena tālu 
vajam hanubhyamapa’asyena vrsanamand- 
abhyamadityan smasrubhih panthanam 
bhrubhyam dyavaprthivi vartobhyam vidyutam 
kaninakabhyam $uklaya svaha krsnaya svaha 
paryani paksmanyavarya' iksavo’varyani 
paksmani parya' iksavah. 


By the teeth, test the efficiency of chewing and 
the texture of food, the strength of the teeth by the roots 
and gums, the protective enamel by the cavities, biting 
force by the fangs, the ease and elegance of speech by 
the fluent sweetness and suppleness of the tongue at 
the tip, the palate by the roll of the voice, the sweetness 
and energy by the action of the jaws, the deliciousness 
of drinks by the mouth, the maturity of manhood by the 
scrotum, the roll of years of maturity by the beard and 
moustache, the paths and manners of living by the 
eyebrows, the sense of heaven and earth by the orbits 
of movement, the inner light and energy by the pupils 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXV 775 
of the eyes. 


For the perfection of brahmacharya observe sexual 
and mental discipline. For the completion of the 
acquisition of knowledge observe the discipline of study. 


The actions for going across the river of life are 
indispensable like the lovely sugar-cane at hand this 
side of the river. And the actions this side of the river of 
life too must be like the lovely sugar-cane across the 
river. 


2. (Pranas etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
ard uana ater ssa ured ngo 
sitas siahai nuit eidem: aa 
fad ucl furefahferevireurt afi faeta yit 
HAN: WoT remmudeixque RN 


Vatam pranenapanena nasike'upayamama- 
dharenausthena saduttarena praka$enantara- 
manukas$ena bahyam nivesyam murdhna 
stanayitnum nirbadhenas$anim mastiskena 
vidyutam kaninakabhyam karnabhyarn srotram 
Srotrabhyam | karnau | tedanimadhara- 
kanthenapah suskakanthena cittam manyabhi- 
raditiin Sirsna nirrtim nirjarjalpena Sirsna 
samkrosaih pranan resmanam stupena. 


Receive the energy of the winds by the incoming 
breath of prana and the outgoing breath of apana by the 
nostrils. With the lower and upper lips observe the self- 
control of truth and the discipline of yama and niyama. 
With the light of higher knowledge illumine the inner 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


776 YAJURVEDA 


personality. With cleanliness, purify the outer 
personality. Take in the light of divinity by the brahma- 
randhra, top aperture of the head. Hear the voice of 
thunder (of omnipotence) without interruption. Create 
the flash of lightning with the brain. Let the light shine 
by the pupils of the eyes. Develop hearing by the ears 
and the ears by hearing. Take in the food smoothly by 
the lower throat. Value the drinks by the parched throat. 
Develop the mind and memory by reflection and 
meditation. Realize the boundless in freedom with the 
imagination. Move on to the existential void with the 
head and speech unimpaired. 


Develop the pranas with invocations to universal 
energy, facing the storm with shouts of joy. 


3. (Indra & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


quit Qaia aaa us t 


Masakan kesairindram svapasa vahena brhas- 
patiin $akunisadena kurmanchaphaira- 
kramanam sthurabhyamrksalabhih kapinja- 
lanjavam janghabhyamadhvanam bahubhyam 
jambilenaranyamagnimatirugbhyam pusanam 
dorbhyamasvinavainsabhyam rudra in 
rorabhyam. 


Ward off mosquitoes and insects with hair. 
Achieve the power and greatness of Indra with hard 
work and great action. Reach Brihaspati, great lord of 
knowledge and wisdom, by the ordeal of fire and 
patience. Get to the tortoise and the earth with the speed 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXV 777 


of the eagle. Shoot to the target on the hoofs of a horse 
and power of arms. Get to the kapinjala birds by stout 
action and double speed. Get to speed and cover the 
road with strong legs. Get to the forest with the grape 
fruit. Get to Agni, fire, by will and desire, to Pusha, 
good health, by strong arms, to Ashvins, ruler and 
people, by strong shoulders, and to Rudra, power of 
justice, by listening and discussion. 


4. (Agni & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


atm: dafrataitdartak ea qdrar urea aget- 
RA usatitard uct meatia agad- 
teada Ha dA VOT grasit 
"Hed erst wen 


Agneh paksatirvayornipaksatirindrasya trtiya 
somasya caturthyadityai pancamindranyai 
sastht marutam saptami brhaspaterasta- 
myaryamno navami dhaturdasamindrasyai- 
kadast varunasya dvadasi yamasya trayodast. 


The body-politic of the nation of humanity has 
thirteen ribs on the right side of the chest. The first is 
Agni's for light and fire. The second is Vayu's for air 
energy. The third is Indra's for sunlight and energy. 
The fourth is Soma's for coolness and life of vegetation. 
The fifth is Aditi's for the vastness and generosity of 
the sky. The sixth is Indrani's for electric energy. The 
seventh is Marut's for the winds. The eighth is 
Brihaspati's for cosmic energy. The nineth is Aryaman's 
for the working people. The tenth is Dhatri's for the 
cosmic law. The eleventh is Indra's for national honour, 
power and prosperity. The twenfth is Varuna's for the 
enlightened citizens. The thirteenth is Yama's for justice 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


778 YAJURVEDA 
and administration. 


(The world system thus is organismic. Every part 
is a living member, and every man, woman and 
community should play their part in the life of the system.) 


5. (Indra & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


Imre: tata: wea fudarfaffpred grat 
dest Prk u: west wuturtesererrt 
aoken yo "terr coreddgrir-sierenrasft ASOT 
SATA 1 


Indragnyoh paksatih sarasvatyai nipaksatir- 
mitrasya trttyapam caturthi nirrtyai panca- 
myagnisomayoh sasthi sarpanam saptami 
visnorastami pusno navami tvasturdasami- 
ndrasyaikadasit varunasya dvadasi yamyati 
trayodasi dyavaprthivyordaksinam parsvam 
visvesam devanamuttaram. 


The body-politic of the nation has thirteen ribs on 
the left side of the chest. The first belongs to Indragni for 
air and fire. The second belongs to Sarasvati for speech 
and education. The third belongs to Mitra for friendship. 
The fourth belongs to Aps, waters. The fifth belongs to 
Nir-riti, the earth. The sixth belongs to Agni-soma for 
fire and water. The seventh belongs to Sarpas, 
subterranean creatures. The eighth belongs to Vishnu, 
cosmic spirit. The nineth belongs to Pusha, health and 
nourishment. The tenth is Tvashta's for brilliance and 
refinement. The eleventh belongs to Indra, the soul, for 
self-culture. The twelfth belongs to Varuna, enlightened 
people. The thirteenth belongs to Yami, nation's women. 
The right side is for Dyava-prithivi, heaven and earth 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXV 779 


for light and life. The left side belongs to all the nobilities 
of nature and humanity for the joy of enlightenment. 


6.  (Maruts etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
meats rer fasakt cart wear erreur waruit 
fedtatssfacamt giat art: wesarririrdaratdar 
west stfttentrgagadissesat rarako- 
AMMA SHAVEN spei HSA gai 


Marutam skandha visvesam devanam prathama 
kikasa rudranam dvittya " dityanam trttya vayoh 
pucchamagnisomayorbhasadau kruncau 
Sronibhyamindrabrhaspati' urubhyam mitrā- 
varunavalgabhyamakramanain sthurabhyam 
balam kusthabhyam. 


The shoulders of the nation belong to the Maruts, 
that is, the stormy troops of defence are the shoulders 
of the nation. The first and top part of the spine belongs 
to Vishvedevas, that is, the generous and enlightened 
people are the top of the nation's spine. The second 
part of the spine belongs to the Rudras, men of law and 
justice. The third part belongs to the Adityas, brilliant 
people and children of the earth. The tail end belongs 
to Vayu, breath and fragrance of the nation. The hips of 
the nation belong to Agni and Soma, the heat of fire 
and coolness of water in the national mind. The poets 
and artists, two beautiful hansa birds, are comparable 
to the loins of the nation. Indra and Brihaspati, ruler 
and teachers, are comparable to the thighs. Mitra and 
Varuna, friendship and discrimination, are comparable 
to the groins. Develop force and advancement by the 
strength and suppleness of the thighs. Judge the strength 
and vitality of the nation by the slopes of the groin. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


780 YAJURVEDA 


(Note here that the rashtra/nation/Samraat 
purusha is compared to the individual purusha (Eka- 
raat purusha), and also to the universal purusha, i.e., 
the Viraat Purusha. Life thus is an organism at every 
stage from the individual to the universe.) 


7. (Pusha etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


yout arsada aa satfufégds- 
ardt efi qoos arsed wsmei - 


ear errert-t fret wer urat epguresanfuus: wo 


Pusanam vanisthuna’ndhahintsthulagudaya 
sarpan gudabhirvihruta’antrairapo vastina 
vrsanamandabhyam vajinain $epena prajain 
retasa casan pittena pradaran payuna 
kusmanchakapindaih. 

Compare national health to food digestion and 
assimilation, blind serpents to large intestines, snakes 
to the bowels, crooked people to the intestines, water 
storages to the bladder and lower abdomen, vital rains 
and clouds to the scrotum, passion to the virile seed, 
food consumption to the bile, clearances to wind 
discharges, and judge the force of governance by the 
concentrations of power. 


8. (Indra and Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


"gata CaS AAR Waa assai shart 
acti eeirafutreitferentt fea: wre«didarr 
epfarsutesvrgetur demi wredum edi 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXV 781 


Indrasya krodo’dityai pajasyam disam jatravo ’- 
dityai bhasajjimutan hrdayaupasenantariksam 
puritata nabha’ udaryena cakravakau 
matasnabhyam divam vrkkabhyam girin 
plasibhirupalan plihna valmikan kloma- 
bhirglaubhirgulman hirabhih sravantirhradan 
kuksibhyain samudramudarena vai$vanaram 
bhasmana. 


You are in the bosom of Indra, father of light, let 
not the light sink into darkness. 


Stand firm, the food and fertility of the earth is 
where you stand. The meeting of the directions of space 
is in the joints of the ribs. The light within is the light of 
heaven. Know the shower of the clouds by the joy of 
the soul in the blood, the broadness of the skies by the 
coronary artery, the soothing liquidity of atmospheric 
water by the serum juices of the belly, the energy of 
life, like the love of chakravaka birds, by the pulmonary 
arteries, the purity of light by the cleansing action of 
the excretory organs, the hardness of mountains by 
digestion and assimilation, the cloud-generosity by the 
spleen, the paths of movement by the blood vessels, 
concentrations and enlargements by the veins, streams 
and rivers by the blood-streams, gulfs and bays by the 
womb and ovaries, the sea by the stomach, and universal 
fire by the heat of the body system. 


(Note the correspondence of the microcosm (eka- 
raat-purusha) and the macrocosm (Viraat-purusha) and 
the correspondence of the working of the two systems. 
The individual system works within the universal system 
as a unit. And this correspondence is worth knowing. 
The human individual is in the bosom of the universal 
Indra.) 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


782 YAJURVEDA 


9. (Pusha & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


facie mat gee gon uiteitfénrafstHi - 
argent vit aden werserstfirgta-tlddteniforcem 
Tasha feraraergr-tatarfur vett uféreit are Sara 
wet usu 


Vidhrtim nabhya ghrtam rasenapo yusna 
maricirviprud-bhirniharamusmana $inam 
vasaya prusva’asrubhirhradunirdustkabhirasna 
raksainsi citranyangairnaksatrani rupena 
prthivim tvaca jumbakaya svaha. 


Know the centre-hold of the universe by the 
navel, liquid life of existence by the sap of nature, the 
waters of life by soup and decoctions, particles of light 
in rays by drops in a streams of oblations, the morning 
mist by vapours of steam, solid energy by frozen fat, 
precipitation of clouds by the tear glands, hail storms 
by shocks of disturbance, natural protections by 
immunity in the blood, wonders and mysteries by the 
limbs of the body, stars and planets by light and form, 
the crust of the earth by the skin of the body. 


Honour and homage to the Lord Supreme with 
surrender in truth of word and deed. 


10. (Hiranyagarbha Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


Rouat: erderciari speres sra: ufetensamHtq v 

«tere ufereit argent enel aere gferut fereraus o i 

Hiranyagarbhah samavarttatagre bhutasya 

jatah patireka 'asit. Sa dadhara prthivim dyamu- 
temam kasmai devaya havisa vidhema. 

The Great Golden Womb of the brilliant forms of 

existence, sole lord of the universe, existed by Himself 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXV 783 


long before the world was born. He it is who holds this 
earth and Heaven. To Him we offer our homage and 
worship in libations of praise in words and deeds in 
truth. 


11. (Ishvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
a: wordt Aiad Aasa sett at d 


a şs fgaavadaa: at ear giat 
faa nggu 


Yah pranato nimisato mahitvaika 'idraja jagato 
babhuva. Ya ise’asya dvipadascatuspadah 
kasmai devaya havisa vidhema. 


It is He who was and is the sole lord of the living, 
breathing and moving world of the eye (and ear). It is 
He who, by His own might, rules over the world of the 
humans and the animals. To that same lord of power 
and bliss we offer our homage and worship in libations 
of praise and fragrant havi in truth of word and deed. 


12. (Ishvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


mAN fered ats Gest GAS muet Gee: | AAT: 
uen eed ae wel dart zfeul fem nee 


Yasyeme himavanto mahitva yasya samudram 
rasaya sahahuh. Yasyemah pradiso yasya bahu 
kasmai devaya havisa vidhema. 


By whose might, they say, these snow-covered 
mountains have come into existence and the oceans roll 
with floods of water, and who by His arms of 
omnipotence wields these quarters of space, to Him we 
offer our homage and worship with oblations of praise 
and havi. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


784 YAJURVEDA 


13. (Paramatma Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
assitaeat deer ae fasdssarda ufsr cred 
dat) ae wrursud wet uer: wet dard efaat 
fades 


Ya’atmada balada yasya vi$va'upasate prasisam 
yasya devah. Yasya cchayamratam yasya mrtyuh 
kasmai devaya havisa vidhema. 

The Lord who is the giver of birth to the soul with 
its power and potential, whose glory all the divinities of 
the world celebrate in song, whose shade of protection 
is immortality and falling off is death, to Him we offer 
our homage and worship in hymns with havi. 


14. (Yajna Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
att al wet: mda rq fesedisasmdissrdianms- 


Shee: sar At aan waite gesamte viarant 
feafea nex 


A no bhadrah kratavo yantu visvato’ dabdhaso 
aparitasa udbhidah. Deva no yatha sadamid 
vrdhe asannaprayuvo raksitaro dive dive. 


May thoughts of wisdom and acts of yajna come 
to us from all directions—thoughts and actions noble 
and auspicious, pure and free from violence, irresistible 
and unobstructed, bursting forth and fruitful, so that 
young, energetic and brilliant people of divinity may 
arise in this assembly of ours and be the protectors and 
promoters of our advancement. 


15. (Vidvans Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


rerit ast daR ea eremeteserferzfur ir freier 
gats neda eb dat sam: ufdvd 
wired nea 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXV 785 


Devanam bhadra sumatirrjuyatam devanain 
ratirabhi no nivarttatam. Devanam sakhya- 
mupasedima vayam deva na’ayuh pratirantu 
jivase. 


May the auspicious wisdom of brilliant visionaries 
come to us. May the wealth and knowledge of simple, 
sincere and generous people come to us from all sides. 
May we enjoy the favour and friendship of noble and 
dedicated people of faith and excellence. And may all 
these nobilities thrive and promote our life for good and 
joyous living. 


16. (Vishvedeva Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


art year fifaat gue ad wt aani cata 
Tada | arent akorada aa atta A: nm 
eer ugg I 


Tan purvaya nivida humahe vayam bhagam 
mitramaditim daksamasridham. Aryamanam 
varunam somamasvina sarasvati nah subhaga 
mayaskarat. 


Those we invoke and honour in yajna with the 
ancient, eternal and self-proclaimed voice of the Veda: 
Bhaga, giver of glory, Mitra, universal friend, Aditi, 
mother of indestructible wisdom, Daksha, lord versatile 
and inviolable, Aryama, sustainer of creation, Varuna, 
best and highest, Soma, giver of peace, prosperity, 
knowledge and happiness, Ashvinis, givers of health 
and well-being, and all the teachers and scholars of the 
world. 


May mother Sarasvati, benevolent and beatific, 
give us all the good and gracious gifts of life. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


786 YAJURVEDA 


17. (Vayu Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
wat cemdb wary alg ast dana diet ferar 


a: | de mator: uri madf aa spUpd 
Rowa Fay ug 


Tanno vato mayobhu vatu bhesajam tanmata 
prthivi tatpita dyauh. Tad gravanah somasuto 
mayobhuvastadasvina $rnutam dhisnya yuvam. 


May the joyous wind blow for us with the breath 
of life. May mother earth be green and fruitful for her 
children. May the fatherly sun bless us with light and 
brilliance. May the blissful clouds replete with the 
waters of life be generous with showers. And may you, 
Ashvinis, both sustaining powers of all round growth 
of body, mind and spirit, listen to our prayers and be 
kind and gracious. 


18. (Ishvara Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


wins sateen fraisranda eae aa) 
gat at um eura qà tfarat urgras: 
verres eu 


Tamisanam jagatastasthusaspatim dhiyanjinva- 
mavase humahe vayam. Pusa no yatha’- 
vedasamasad vrdhe raksita payuradabdhah 
svastaye. 


For our protection, we invoke and worship the lord 
and ruler of the moving and the unmoving world who 
inspires our intelligence, dedication and devotion, so that 
He, lord supreme inviolable, may be the protector, 
sustainer and promoter of all our wealth of life for the 
sake of advancement and well-being. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXV 787 


19. (Ishvara Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


rata seal qagstar: verfu 4: gat asadar: | 
waa weredissiReam: vef at aa- 
daa Nge 


Svasti na’indro vrddhasravah svasti nah pusa 
visvavedah. Svasti nastarksyo 'aristanemih svasti 
no brhaspatirdadhatu. 


May Indra, great is His glory, be kind and grant 
us honour and greatness. May Pusha, lord sustainer and 
wielder of universal wealth, be generous and bring us 
health and wealth. May the inviolable lord of speed and 
security be watchful and grant us progress and freedom. 
And may Brihaspati, lord of the great world of existence, 
be gracious and bless us with all the good and well- 
being in life. 

20. (Vidvans Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
qdavar Hea: usar: sri arab faasty sate: | 
anaia ata: ataerat fase at gasaat- 


Taf IR ou 


Prsadasva marutah pr$nimatarah $ubham ya- 
vano vidathesu jagmayah. Agnijihva manavah 
suracaksaso vi$ve no deva'avasagamanniha. 


Great are the scholars, vibrant as the winds and 
brilliant as children of sunbeams. Riding on flying 
horses, they are ever on the move to goodness and glory 
in the battles of life. 


Fiery is their tongue and blazing are their eyes, 
and yet they are human, dedicated to thought and 
reflection. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


788 YAJURVEDA 


May all the scholars of the world come to bless 
us with protection and progress to our goal here in this 
life itself. 


21. (Vidvans Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
ag mult: sopra xem ug dma RRRA: d 
Ranea Ra gated sara: 9 u 


Bhadram karnebhih $rnuyama deva bhadram 
pa$yemaksabhiryajatrah. Sthirairangai- 
stustuvamsastanubhirvyasemahi devahitam 
yadayuh. 


Devas, men of knowledge and divinity, dedicated 
to yajna, may we hear only good with our ears, may we 
see only good with our eyes. Singing songs of praise 
with strong and stable limbs, may we live our full span 
of life, enjoying with strong and healthy bodies in the 
service of God and the divines. 


22. (Vidvans Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
waht mAsa Sar emt eurer Bet mu 
Gara eri ficit dia ar it gear Tea PAT UR 


Sataminnu $arado'anti devà yatra nascakra 
jarasam tanunam. Putraso yatra pitaro bhavanti 
ma no madhya ririsatayurgantoh. 


Scholars of knowledge and wisdom, while we are 
close to you, help us to live a full life of hundred years in 
good health of body wherein our children too may grow 
to be fathers of their children. Let not our life be hurt or 
injured. Let it not perish on the way in the middle of the 
course. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXV 789 


23. (Dyau etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


aftaka fercafigrafa frater wr fra a us: 
fesd gasen: uou AN Cd) 
ifie 3 t 


Aditirdyauraditirantariksamaditirmata sa pita 
sa putrah. Vi$ve deva'aditih pafica jana' 
aditirjatamaditirjanitvam. 

In the essence: Light is indestructible; sky is 
indestructible; mother Prakriti (matter-energy-thought) 
is indestructible; Father, the Cosmic Spirit is 
indestructible; Son, the soul (jiva), is indestructible; all 
the divinities of nature and humanity are indestructible; 
five people, Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra, 
others, are indestructible; whatever is born is 
indestructible; whatever will be born is indestructible. 
(All that was, is and shall be is indestructible in the 
essence.) 


24. (Mitra & Others Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


m cil fet ereuitssrdnrafis ssp reg: oer 
agit gastees ord: vast ferat efratfürisw u 


Ma no mitro varuno’aryamayurindra’rbhuksa 
marutah parikhyan.Yadvajino devajatasya 
sapteh pravaksyamo vidathe viryani. 


May Mitra, friend, Varuna, great, Aryama, guide 
and leader, Indra, ruler, Ribhuksha, mighty, and Maruts, 
powers of the world, never overlook and ignore our life. 
And we shall praise and celebrate the warlike exploits 
of the divine-born and tempestuous hero of the world 
of yajnic character. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


790 YAJURVEDA 


25. (Vidvans Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
vifafórsm tact wurde ule tsitat pad fai 
Gaisst fnuzdfagertsusg-urgenir: frerrodfa ure: uuu 


Yannirnija reknasa pravrtasya ratim grbhitam 
mukhato nayanti. Supranajo memyadvisvarupa’ 
indrapusnoh priyamapyeti pathah. 

The persons who gratefully receive the gifts of the 
lord giver and with that pure and sacred wealth move the 
cycle of charity on ward; and also the self-developing 
man of immortal spirit with initiative and versatile 
potential in many fields; they all go forward on the 
favourite path of Indra and Pusha, blest with power and 
progress. 


26. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


rere frat een 


Esa chagah puro’ asvena vajina pusno bhago 
niyate visvadevyah. Abhipriyam yatpuro- 
dasamarvata tvastedenam sau$ravasaya jinvati. 
When this aggressive leader, distinguished among 
equals of divine quality and loved of Pusha (the 
President), is advanced to the front by the dynamic 
nation, then Tvashta, maker of men and nations, receives 
him as a lovely gift of national yajna and, alongwith 
the nation, refines him with sanctification for honour 
and glory. 


27. (Yajna Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


wala daar fatter: wise aah 1 stat 
yar: waar sdi aa seed: ufreerdens: URI 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXV 791 


Yaddhavisyamrtuso devayanam trirmanusah 
paryasvam nayanti. Atra pusnah prathamo 
bhaga ''eti yajnam devebhyah prativedayannajah. 


When three orders of people take the man at the 
head of national yajna round the national vedi (the land) 
according to the seasons and circumstances of the 
country, then the man of immortal spirit, prime agent 
of the divinities of progress and development, Pushan, 
speaking in loud accents, takes the yajna forward for 
all the noble citizens. 


28. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


graissereurssrf4fpem ubeuressd PTT 
gimn wt att wand Rasa agosa 
urea RSM 


Hota’dhvaryuravaya’ agnimindho gravagrabha’ 
uta samsta suviprah. Tena yajnena svaran- 
krtena svistena vaksana’a prnadhvam. 


By the national yajna, cherished and well 
performed with dedication and grace, may all the 
functionaries, the hota with oblations, adhvaryu with 
meticulous organisation, agnimindha with lighting of 
the fire, gravagrabha with handling of soma stones, 
shansta with invocations, expert suvipra with vedic 
hymns, and all the other participants refresh, replenish 
and overfill all the streams of national life. 


29. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


qaaenissa À zuerereerarei assivagqara aatfen 
a reir where eutufirdftriss-m usu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


792 YAJURVEDA 


Yupavraska'uta ye yupavahas$casalam ye’ 
a$vayupaya taksati. Ye carvate pacanam 
sambharantyuto tesamabhigurttirna 'invatu. 


(We thank) the cutters of wood for the yajna post, 
the carriers of the post, the shapers of the ring for the 
post and all those who collect the materials and complete 
the preparations for yajna, and, (we pray), may all their 
efforts be for our good and success. 


30. (Vidvans Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


sata vat aeraummssd eade: i 
adi faust nafa Garbo ge seat | 
aAa NoN 


Upa pragatsumanme'dhayi manma deva- 
namasa upa vitaprsthah. Anvenam vipra 'rsayo 
madanti devanam puste cakrma subandhum. 
May the man of broad yajnic potential, the man 
able to realise the hopes of the learned, come to us 
spontneously and bear the wisdom of knowledge for 
us, so that the visionaries and intellectuals may rejoice 
with him and we may create a community of 
brotherhood among the brilliant scholars. 


31. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


"grfsritr ard Gass at ur SATA THAT TST 
Set ART WAAAY quredet aT ASAP AA 9 i 
Yadvajino dama sandanamarvato ya Sirsanya 
rasana rajjurasya. Yadva ghasya prabhrtamasye 
trnam sarva ta te 'api devesvastu. 
Whatever the waistband or the leg fetter or the 
bridle, or the reins over the head or strings of control, 
and whatever kind of grass is held in the mouth of the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXV 793 


fast and powerful horse (of national yajna), all these 
too should be under the control of the learned and the 
wise people, for you. 


32. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
aasde ma Aft gr vert verféleir erat 
eda: vri wet dr Asa dere! 
Yadasvasya kraviso maksikas$a yadva svarau 


svadhitau riptamasti. Yaddhastayoh $amitur- 
yannakhesu sarva ta te'api devesvastu. 


Whatever fly stings and eats of the flesh of the 
fast running horse of the yajna of the nation, whatever 
smears the tempered steel, or whatever soils the hands 
and nails of the performers of ritual, all these too should 
be under the control of the learned and the wise for you. 


33. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
agda tenar assed seferat vrsissrfidi 
Gerd mahan: poaa Aa TAA wen i3 
Yaduvadhyamudarasyapavati ya'amasya 
kraviso gandho'asti. Sukrta tacchamitarah 
krnvantuta medhain srtapakam pacantu. 


Whatever undigested waste is discharged from 
the stomach, and whatever are the gases of the half 
digested food, all that the expert yajamana (physicians) 
should relieve and rectify and they should also have 
delicious foods and fragrant materials prepared. 


34. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
rd tata weaatarafu vrei feeéavareemedfei 
"rc da gyf quy severeqasraset ra- 
TET UBS 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


794 YAJURVEDA 


Yatte gatradagnina pacyamanadabhi $ulam 
nihatasyavadhavati. Ma tadbhumyamasrisanma 
trnesu devebhyastadusadbhyo ratamastu. 


If your person is on the stake being developed 
and matured by fire, and you feel strained, exhausted, 
almost dead, then whatever cry of pain escapes your 
lips, let it not fall into the dust, nor let it be lost in the 
straw, but let it be a valuable subject of study for the 
noble scholars who are keen to rectify it. 


35. (Vishvedevas Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
a ah Rasdan vad usum: dart i 
a amd uresefuamqundassat quiufuifuis- 
gaq NZU 
Ye vajinam paripaśyanti pakvam ya'wnahuh 
surabhirnirhareti. Ye carvato mansabhiksa- 
mupasata'uta tesamabhigurtirna’ invatu. 
Those who watch the nation's food grow to 
ripeness, and those who say: It is fragrant, harvest it, 
and those who serve their share in the growth of the 


nation on the move, may all their effort be for the benefit 
of us all. 


36. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
SAAT nessa AT uratfür Bass ATT | 
Saar sitter eneumengr: Gat: UREA i35 t 
Yanniksanam mainspacanya 'ukhaya ya patrani 
yusna'asecanani. Usmanya'pidhana caruna- 
mankah sunah pari bhusantyasvam. 
Watchful stirring (replenishment) of the earth's 


fertility for the growth of grain and fruit, whatever 
containers and reservoirs of water there be for growth 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXV 795 


and irrigation, the clouds for showers and alleviation 
of heat, and beauty spots from place to place: these 
beautify and add to the grace of a nation on the march. 


37. (Vidvans Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
"qr astra gea sarstearferfeterr A: 
gu daR ated wd dare: wiper 
vay us 


Ma tva'gnirdhvanayid dhumagandhirmokha 
bhrajantyabhi vikta jaghrih. [stam vitama- 
bhigurtam vasatkrtam tam devasah prati 
grbhnantya$vam. 


May the fire enveloped in smoke never extinguish 
or diminish your light. May the shining and fragrant 
dawn never disturb you into isolation. The noblest 
generous divinities accept and honour you as a hero, 
dear, brilliant, industrious, sanctified and marching 
forward. 


38. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


fondo fred ferendi es uwadlynmma: | acet 
"wr cet at sara wet ar asarft sarda ui 


Nikramanam nisadanam vivarttanam yacca 
padvisamarvatah. Yacca papau yacca ghasim 
jaghasa sarva ta te'api devesvastu. 


The start and gallop of your horse, the stop and 
sitting, turning round and rolling, halting and the fetters, 
what it drinks and the grass that it eats, may all these be 
good and graceful, and may they be appreciated by the 
noblest people. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


796 YAJURVEDA 
39. (Vidvansah Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


wasala erdssusqurdefrare at fedus d 
"warme vadisi fran laara a used 


Yada$vaya vasa'uapastrnantyadhivasam ya 
hiranyanyasmai. Sandanamarvantam padvisam 
priya devesvayamayanti. 


The cloth for the horse, the overcloth and the 
golden ornaments which adorn it, the head-band, and 
the fetters which control this fast-moving steed, may 
all these be beautiful, good and appreciable among the 
noblest people. 


40. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


od ae aden yrka ore er estar at ata 
aad a gfeuissreeiw wat a d wav 
yan nson 


Yatte sade mahasa $ukrtasya parsnya va kasaya 
va tutoda. Sruceva ta haviso'adhvaresu sarva 
ta te brahmana sudayami. 

Swift and brilliant as you are with mighty strength 
and power, still if ever you feel weak and weary and 
someone hits you from the back with a whip (to hurt 
you or spur you on), then I replenish all your weaknesses 
and animate you to full form with the Vedic wealth just 
as we rekindle the fire in yajnas with ladlefuls of holy 
materials. 


41. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


ed feresrgrferat gades verfétfer: aaa 
stig tat agat auia. wsererqqen fer siae u 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXV 797 


Catustrimsadvajino devabandhorvankri- 
rasvasya svadhitih sameti. Acchidra gatra 
vayuna krnota parusparuranughusya vi Sasta. 


Just as a man of innate expertise and intelligence 
controls the thirty-four movements of a tempestuous 
horse, which is a favourite friend of the nobles, so should 
the leader, a man of innate and rightful intelligence and 
power, a friend of the noble and brilliant people, control 
the dynamic governance of a vibrant nation and maintain 
all the parts of the national machine in a faultless order 
of efficiency, having examined the system step by step 
and declared, every part as perfect and approved. 


42. (Yajamana Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
UREA Tasted ST GAIN STenTEEbS3ET:| 


a a Maung pur art fost uw ser 
ETÈ anxia 


Ekastvasturasvasya visasta dva yantara bhavat- 
astatha’rtuh. Ya te gatranamrtutha krnomi ta ta 
pindanam pra juhomyagnau. 

One is the marker of the sun's horse/chariot of 
time, that is the year, the annual cycle of seasons. Two 
are the guiding controllers, the summer solstice and the 
winter solstice. I take the divisions of your course, O 
sun, O ruler, O nation, according to the seasons, and I 
dedicate them to the fire of national yajna according to 
the seasons and the circumstances of the nation. 


43. (Atma Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
m wat wufuussmenfused ur vafitfreras- 
arfs ard qeqfasredtaeret fer matoa- 
fet fast cm: issn 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


798 YAJURVEDA 


Ma tva tapatpriya’ atmapiyantam ma- 
svadhitistanva'a tisthipatte. Ma te grdhnura- 
visastatihaya chidra gatranyasina mithu kah. 


While you are on your way up in life, may your 
dear soul not forsake you, nor torment you. May no 
tempered steel fix itself in your person, nor your own 
power arrest you. Nor must the covetous pervert mutilate 
your limbs, nor tear your body asunder with the sword, 
for no cause or weakness whatsoever. 


44. (Atma Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
a ersisudfsen a Refs gareusgate aah: 


at: at d gan wudrssrparguivengreft aft 
WaSsTeT sw 


Na va'u'etanmriyase na risyasi devan’idesi 
pathibhih sugebhih. Hari te yunja prsati 
abhutamupasthadvaji dhuri rasabhasya. 

This way, with this knowledge, you will not die, 
nor suffer wrong. Instead, you would rise to the state of 
the immortals by the straight paths of the divinities. Yoke 
your strong horses to the chariot, and let the fast horse 
be close to the bearer of the burden. 


45. (Praja Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
Pres ir asi waved usu: usta ussa fetgarqdexfengi 
ammm Asera: quite sra Arsstvat aaae- 
Bae S&H 


Sugavyam no vāji sva$vyam puinsah putran’ uta 
visvapusam rayim. Anagastvam no’ aditih krnotu 
ksatram no’ a$vo vanatain havisman. 


May our dynamic ruler work and provide for the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXV 799 


development of cows, horses, men and women, children 
and all round health and wealth of the nation. 


May the freedom of the land and abundance of 
the earth lead us to a state of freedom from sin and crime. 
May the leader, high-priest of national yajna, ever ready 
and well-provided with holy materials, build a great 
social order for humanity. 


46. (Vishvedeva Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


gHr cp eB Yaa creme feed cr dar: | 
amfacrfg: etn veterans sr hx | oat 
cb eat a wet aR AR: ae dieenfa ise 


Ima nu kam bhuvana sisadhamendraSca vi$ve 
ca devah. Adityairindrah sagano marudbhi- 
rasmabhyam bhesaja karat. Yajnam ca 
nastanvam ca prajam cadityairindrah saha 
sisadhati. 


Just as the sun and all the divinities of nature hold, 
sustain and bless these worlds, so may the ruler and the 
noblest powers of humanity govern and sustain the 
regions of the world. May they and we all realise the 
joy of life. 


Just as the sun with its light and planets and the 
winds through the months and seasons of the year 
blesses us with herbs and juices for health and vitality, 
so may the physician with all his aids, light and air 
provide us with tonics and medication for health. 


Just as the sun and cosmic energy through the 
movement of the months and seasons carry on the 
creative and restorative yajna of nature for the earth 
and her children, so may the ruler with the brilliant leaders 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


800 YAJURVEDA 


of the nation carry on and accomplish the social yajna 
for the health of the body-politic and the children of the 
nation. 


47. (Agni Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
arà cd saT«dusaa amar f?ret siam ens: 
enirfTdusrerssrest Afar Gaara at: wu 


Agne tvam no’ antama’uta trata Sivo bhava 
varuthyah. Vasuragnirvasusrava’accha naksi 
dyumattamam rayim dah. 


Agni, light of life, closest friend and saviour, be 
good to us, be the very spirit of our home. Pure and 
immaculate, warmth and vitality of life, rest and haven 
of all, universal creator and giver of wealth, come and 
bless us with the most brilliant knowledge and wealth 
of life. 


48. (Agni Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


a wat wifes dea: grr writes ada: a 
"b alfa spe way seer  UIDSSTHTSd: HA- 
SATA, 1rsi9 


Tam tva socistha didivah sumnaya nunamimahe 
sakhibhyah. Sa no bodhi $rudhi havam urusya 
no’ aghayatah samasmat. 


Lord of the universe, most briliant power, blazing 
with the light of knowledge and Dharma, we pray to 
you for the good and well-being of life sincerely for 
our friends and for ourselves. Such as you are, enlighten 
us, listen to our prayers, save and protect us from all sin 
and crime against Dharma and Society. 


gia weufasissam: d 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVI 801 


CHAPTER-XXVI 


1. (Agni & Others Devata, Yajnavalkya Rshi) 


aasa ufereit er ada a iri aA emqseun-«afisi 
a ada aa ou mara satara diva ada d 
Tp uaria ssmdser atua uale a fru dama: 
wu cueals ament dare centare ussredb epe 
ardue Hsu usu 


Agnisca prthivi ca sannate te me sam namata- 
mado vayu$cantariksam ca sannate te me sam 
namatamada 'aditya$ca dyau$ca sannate te me 
sam namatamada ’apasca varunasca sannate te 
me sam namatamadah. Sapta sainsado astami 
bhutasadhani. Sakaman’adhvanaskuru samjna- 
namastu me 'muna. 


Agni, vital heat, and Prithivi, earth, go together in 
harmony (for this side of life, for Dharma, righteous living, 
Artha, earthly prosperity, Kama, worldly fulfilment). May 
they be harmonious and favourable for me for the other 
side too (Moksha, ultimate freedom). 


Vayu, the air, and Antariksha, the sky, go together 
in harmony for this side of life. May they be favourable 
for me for the other side too. 


Aditya, the sun, and Dyau, heaven, go together 
in harmony for this side. May they be favourable for 
me for the other side too. 


Apah, spatial waters, and Varuna, the oceans, go 
together in harmony for me this side of life, may they 
be favourable for the other side too. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


802 YAJURVEDA 


Seven are the conjunctions between oceans, 
waters, sun, heaven, air, sky, heat and earth, which hold 
the world. The eighth, mother earth, sustains the forms 
of life. May all the conjunctions and the sustaining 
mother's lap help us realise our aims of life. 


O ruler, act well so that our aims of life be fulfilled 
and the paths of life be straight and clear. 


By dedication to the other side, may I have full 
knowledge of existence and beyond. 


2.  (Ishvara Devata, Laugakshi Rshi) 
adni ard enesmottarerad f Sasa: REA- 
Vera area a tara améUmep a oa fue dart 
aià arate yarani À ara: wudserarqdurat 
ug URN 


Yathemam vacam kalyanimavadani janebhyah. 
Brahmarajanyabhyam $udraya caryaya ca 
svaya caranaya ca. Priyo devanam daksinayai 
daturiha bhuyasamayam me kamah samrdhya- 
tamupa mado namatu. 


Just as this blessed Word of the Veda I speak for 
the people, all without exception, Brahmana, Kshatriya, 
Shudra, Vaishya, master and servant, one’s own and 
others, so do you too. 


May I be dear and favourite with the noble 
divinities and the generous people for the gift of the 
sacred speech. 


May this noble aim of mine be fulfilled here in 
this life. May the others too follow and come my way 
beyond this life. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVI 803 


3. (Ishvara Devata, Gritsamada Rshi) 


qes wadissréla eprfasnfa eda i 
agaras sque qavan] ufetui dfe ferui 
suanmiérdrsfar srxuadar wae sr eirfrsiguurdar vers t 


Brhaspate'ati yadaryo'arhad dyumadvibhati 
kratumajjanesu. Yaddidayacchavasa 'rtaprajata 
tadasmasu dravinam dhehi citram. Upayama- 
grhito'si brhaspataye tvaisa te yonirbrhas- 
pataye tva. 

Brihaspati, lord of the great universe, master of 
universal wealth, lord of light and yajnic actions among 
humanity, you shine by virtue of your own glory. 
Manifest in the law and order of existence and in the 
Veda, you blaze with your own omnipotence. Such as 
you are, Lord, bless us with the wonderful knowledge 
and wealth of the world. 


Man of knowledge, consecrated you are in the 
yajna of knowledge as if you are an oblation in the 
sacrificial ladle, upayama. I accept you in the service 
of Brihaspati, lord of the world and its knowledge, for 
the sake of Brihaspati, enlightenment of the scholars 
with divine knowledge. This now is your haven and 
home, your end and aim of life. 


4. (Indra Devata, Ramyakshi Rshi) 


v ndfseratfa faem arsed | aaan: 
"He rsuarertétarseir-star var virdesu «tr aha 
vem ca nsn 

Indra gomannihayahi piba somain $atakrato. 
Vidyadbhirgravabhih sutam. Upayamagrhito’st- 
ndraya tva gomata’esa te yonirindraya tva 
gomate. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


804 YAJURVEDA 


Indra, lord of the earth and the divine Word, 
highpriest of a hundred yajnas of life, come here and 
drink of the soma extracted by the existent scholars with 
the sacred stones and distilled by the clouds. 


Man of divine knowledge, master of your mind 
and senses, consecrated you are to Indra, lord of earth 
and Veda. I accept you for the service of Indra and 
education of the people. This service and dedication is 
now your haven and home, the end and aim of your life. 


5. (Surya Devata, Ramyakshi Rshi) 


sorte que fuer drdisraendr 1 tient a: 
ar! sasaa var virdasus et aaa 


vem Maa uuu 


Indrayahi vrtrahan piba somam Satakrato. 
Gomadbhirgravabhih sutam. Upayamagrhito’ 
sindraya tva gomata’ esa te yonirindraya tva 
gomate. 


Indra, lord of sunbeams, breaker of the clouds and 
high-priest of a hundred yajnas of creation, come and 
drink of the soma extracted by brilliant men of knowledge 
and wealth of self-control with the voice of thunder and 
showers of clouds. 


Man of brilliance and knowledge, accepted and 
consecrated you are like an oblation held in the 
sacrificial ladle for the service of Indra, lord of the sun 
and clouds. This service and dedication now is your 
haven and home, the very reason and justification of your 
existence. I accept you for Indra and the man of wealth 
and self-control. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVI 805 


6.  (Vaishvanara Devata, Pradurakshi Rshi) 


maat serene verfeaeaída | srshei are 
suanrdérirsfa verae ae ou Aand 


cat gg 


Rtavanam vai$vanaramrtasya jyotisaspatim. 
Ajasram gharmamimahe. Upayamagrhito’ si 
vaisvanaraya tvaisa te yonirvaisvanaraya tva. 


We love Vaishvanara, eternal fire, lord of the laws 
of truth and light of the world, and we pray for the vital 
fire of life acting on waters within the laws of nature. 


Man of knowledge and science, you are 
consecrated like an oblation held in the sacrificial ladle 
for service to Vaishvanara, fiery vitalizer of life. I accept 
you for service to the fire and waters of nature. This 
service and dedication now is your very haven and 
home, the very meaning of your life. 


7.  (Vaishvanara-Agni Devate, Kutsa Rshi) 


Asame upudr vata tet fe & years: à 
gat soe fardi fade àsa dad wur i 
suunnjérirsfü Asant we a Aan 


cat Well 


Vaisvanarasya sumatau syama raja hi kam 
bhuvananamabhisrih. Ito jato visvamidam vi 
caste vai$vanaro yatate suryena. Upayama- 
grhito'si vai$vanaraya tvaisa te yonirvai$va- 
naraya tva. 

Let us abide by the laws and wisdom of 
Vaishvanara, leader of the universe. Glorious light of the 
world, He creates the joy, beauty and glory of the worlds 
in existence. Manifesting from the world itself, He 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


806 YAJURVEDA 


watches and energises this whole universe and, as the 
vital heat energy of life, works with the sun for the 
sustenance of life and growth. 


Man of science and knowledge, accepted and 
consecrated you are by the laws of life and nature for 
the service of Vaishvanara. This service now is your 
haven and home. I accept you for the sake of 
Vaishvanara, science of heat and energy. 


8.  (Vaishvanara Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 


SmerWrchsmuussm uw ate used: is fTes8ra 
aden suannjérdrsfa avarrrt cm a art 
Jsa vem eu 


Vaisvanaro na'utaya'a pra yatu paravatah. 
Agnirukthena vahasa. Upayamagrhito’ si 
vai$vanaraya tvaisa te yonirvaisvanaraya tva. 


Vaishvanara Agni, brilliant power of light and 
knowledge, come from afar for our protection and 
advancement, with the Uktha Vedic verses, by a 
beautiful chariot. 


Brilliant man of knowledge and science, 
consecrated and dedicated you are like an oblation in 
the ladle for Vaishvanara, the fire of social yajna. This 
dedication is now your life and aim. I accept you for 
the sake of advancement in the field of science and 
technology. 


9.  (Vaishvanara Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 
a fife: udu: uresbers: wüfésa: (0 adie 
Terre | suais cT ebHSUN d 
rfr r aA s 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVI 807 


Agnirrsih pavamanah pancajanyah purohitah. 
Tamimahe mahagayam. Upayamagrhito'sya- 
gnaye tva varcasa esa te yonir- agnaye tva 
varcase. 


We worship Agni that is the light and vision of the 
world and knowledge, purifier of life, friend and protector 
of universal humanity, front leader of the yajnas of 
existence, and lord of wealth and home of all. 


Man of knowledge, vision and leadership, 
consecrated and dedicated you are to Agni, lord of light 
and life and advancement. This dedication is your haven 
and home. I accept you for the sake of enlightenment 
and progress of knowledge, purity and prosperity of life 
and all sections of society. 


10. (Indra Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


eis IgA eed: wrest sni aaa | ext ur 
Ase gf 1 suanejérgrsfur mad cu od 
Aadat vm ngon 


Mahan'indro vajrahastah sodast $arma 
yacchatu. Hantu papmanam yo'saman dvesti. 
Upayamagrhito’si mahendraya tvaisa te yonir- 
mahendraya tva. 


Indra, great and glorious ruler of the world, perfect 
with full sixteen virtues of nature and spirit, may, we 
pray, grant us peace and joy. Thunderbolt in hand, may 
He strike off and remove him who commits the sin of 
hate and hostility against us. 


Leader of power and perfection, consecrated and 
dedicated you are to Indra, Supreme ruler, like an 
oblation for the yajna of peace and friendship. This 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


808 YAJURVEDA 


dedication now is your end and aim of life. I accept and 
honour you for the sake of the unity of humanity and 
conquest of hate and fear. 


11. (Agni Devata, Nodha Gotama Rshi) 


wd el amdi euld-rmedu: | 
aif acd a vata Aase cüfinierm ue 


Tam vo dasmamrtisaham vasormandana- 
mandhasah. Abhi vatsam na svasaresu dhenava’ 
indram girbhirnavamahe. 


Just as cows in their stalls every day call forth the 
calf for the feed and rejoice, so do we, for you all, in 
songs of love and joy, invoke and celebrate Indra, the 
ruler, dynamic lord of wondrous deeds and felicity who 
takes delight in the food and nourishment of his people 
and loves to see them settled in good homes in a state 
of comfort and prosperity. 


12. (Agni Devata, Nodha Gotama Rshi) 


ages dana gece fererrerdt à 
uda 9 waghreagretssdtea een 


Yadvahistham tadagnaye brhadarca vibhavaso. 
Mahisiva tvadrayistvadvaja 'udirate. 


Vibhavasu, lord of brilliance and power, ruler of 
the world, honour and celebrate him who carries the 
highest and heaviest burdens of the state in the service 
of Agni, self-refulgent glory of the human nation. Like 
the queen of magnificence, all the wealth of food, power 
and prosperity of the nation issues forth from your palace 
and personality. Honour Him (Agni), let us honour Him. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVI 809 


13. (Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 
va Ww srenfur dsrisgedrdur Fr: | 
Ardaas ART: ues 
Ehyu su bravani te’ gna’ itthetara girah. 
Ebhirvardhasa 'indubhih. 
Agni, seeker of light, come gently without 
reservation. I would speak to you other words (than I 


have yet spoken) and you would then advance with these 
sparks of light and drops of soma (in health and wisdom). 


14. (Samvatsara Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 


sae wn fede unb xard 5 fA: 
dereud wb dena a: wat cw ufturg wu 


Rtavaste yajnam vi tanvantu masa raksantu te 
havih. Samvatsaraste yajnam dadhatu nah 
prajam ca pari patu nah. 

Man of knowledge, seeker of light, may the 
seasons expand your yajna. May the months protect and 
increase your holy materials of yajna. And may the year 
uphold your yajna, and may it sustain and advance our 
people in all directions. 


15. (Vidvan Devata, Vatsa Rshi) 
suat frfrure$ gu cw Cru i 
Brr fatsa uu 
Upahvare girinam sangame ca nadinam. Dhiya 
vipro 'ajayata. 


In the lap of mountains where flow the streams to 
meet and join, there with the dawn of holy intelligence 
the man of light is born. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


810 YAJURVEDA 


16. (Agni Devata, Mahiyava Rshi) 


ser t smard fafa naaa i 
soared ate sre: ngau 


Ucca te jatamandhaso divi sadbhumyadade. 
Ugram $arm mahi $ravah. 


Man of knowledge, up on high is your home in 
the light of heaven risen from holy food and soma juice, 
blazing, great and admirable. I watch it with reverence 
and pray it be as firm with the earth as it is in the light 
of heaven. 


17. (Indra Devata, Mahiyava Rshi) 


" assala ata ahora Wess: | 
akarfaaRea uv 


Sa na’indraya yajyave varunaya marudbhyah. 
Varivovit pari srava. 

Man of knowledge, light and power, knowing what 
is good and disposed to oblige, come overflowing like 
soma for elevating company for the sake of Indra, man 
of power and dominion, Varuna, man of excellence, and 
the Maruts, men of tempestuous speed. 


18. (Vidvan Devata, Mahiyava Rshi) 


wt favatadisan grits Aaron | 
fasted emm ngen 


Ena vi$vanyarya'a dyumnani manusanam. 
Sisasanto vanamahe. 


The lord and master of the world rules and 
watches all these powers, wealths and honours of men 
and women. Wishing to serve the master and humanity, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVI 811 
we pray for His grace and favour for all these. 


19. (Vidvanso Devata, Mudgala Rshi) 


sri etel garg Aar wur ue: | at 
uars adaa aa dar at aadaer er ug su 
Anu virairanu pusyasma gobhiranvasvairanu 


sarvena pustaih. Anu dvipada'nu catuspada 
vayam deva no yajnamrtutha nayantu. 


May the powers of divinity and the noblest people 
guide and conduct our yajna according to the seasons 
so that we may grow strong and powerful with healthy 
children and brave heroes, with fertile cows, with strong 
horses, with all other things, with all men and animals 
as our own. 


20. (Vidvan Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


am ucilierde tamtygrded i 
waht Rott 


Agne patnirihavaha devanamuSatirupa. 


Tvastaram somapitaye. 


Agni, master of knowledge and power, bring up 
the nobles’ wives, women of love and desire, bring 
Tvashta, lord maker of human forms, here to the yajna 
for a life-giving drink of soma. 


21. (Vidvan Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 
arr ag iè at mat Ate: fastsagqat | 
afè taessa ee 


Abhi yajnam grnihi no gnavo nestah piba’rtuna. 
Tvam hi ratnadha 'asi. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


812 YAJURVEDA 


Man of holy speech, leader and high-priest of 
yajna, drink the soma and praise and celebrate our yajna 
alongwith the season. You alone are the creator and giver 
of the wealth of the world. 


22. (Soma Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


glace: füdrwfe wera uw cw fme d 
Weare hte ure 


Dravinodah pipisati juhota pra ca tisthata. 
Nestradrtubhirisyata. 


The generous man of wealth and honour wants to 
drink the soma of health from the flask with humility 
according to the seasons. Feel the desire, you too search 
and you shall find the juice. Perform the homa, abide 
and win honour and settlement. 


23. (Vidvan Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


AAT aS Viva sarees ulfs i 
afore aféen frat arent srorsg-dfires usa 


Tavayam somastvamehyarvan $a$vattamain 
sumana'asya pahi. Asmin yajne barhisya 
nisadya dadhisvemam jathara’ indumindra. 


Indra, man of knowledge in search of honour and 
power, this soma is yours. Come straight on here and, 
happy at heart, protect, preserve and advance this eternal 
Dharma of joy in action. 


In this yajna, sit on the holy seats of blessed grass, 
take this nectar of life and light and hold it in your vital 
being. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVI 813 


24. (Vidvan Devata, Gritsamada Rshi) 


add 4: qasan fe wide fu aféft wart 
Totes | stat Water SDSTHTUTES 31-8 e eerte daha 
SAT: GAT: usu 


Ameva nah suhava’a hi gantana ni barhisi 
sadatana ranistana. Atha madasva jujusano’ 
andhasastvastardevebhirjanibhih sumadganah. 


Tvashta, man of knowledge, maker and shaper of 
men, centre of a happy company of scholars, loved, 
honoured and cordially invited, accept our hospitality and 


enjoy with the generous and brilliant people of divine 
birth. 


Come ye all, feel at home, sit on the holy seats of 
grass in our yajna and rejoice. Rejoice and enlighten us 
with knowledge and wisdom. 


25. (Soma Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi) 
vada ufauur usce aia sme | 
ghe urne wd: usu 


Svadisthaya madisthaya pavasva soma dharaya. 
Indraya patave sutah. 


Soma, come, spirit of life, distilled for the drink 
as well as the protection of Indra, leading powers of 
knowledge, honour, peace and prosperity, flow in in 
the most delicious and inspiring streams of nectar. Flow 
on and on freely. 


26. (Agni Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi) 


Tater fervercidfurzfur arated | 
sor wemerHmdaq ue 1 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


814 YAJURVEDA 


Raksoha vi$vacarsanirabhi yonimayohate. 
Drone sadhasthamasadat. 


Agni, man of fire and yajna, destroyer of evil and 
watchful saviour of the world with light, finds his haven 
and home safe and secure with others on the golden altar 
of yajna consecrated by the showers of soma from the 
clouds. 


sea wefesitseara: d 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVII 815 


CHAPTER-XXVII 


1. (Agni Devata, Agni Rshi) 


"qHbwersTassESe! aged daentsedar uri 
uem acu feat diffe trata fasars sm atte 
uaratanga 


Samastva’gna’rtavo vardhayantu samvatsara' 
rsayo yani satyā. Sam divyena didihi rocanena 
visva’ a bhahi pradisascatasrah. 


Agni, man of knowledge and light of the world, 
may the years, seasons, year cycles, visionaries of truth 
and acts of absolute truth whatever and wherever they 
be: may all these take you forward in life. Shine with 
celestial light and illuminate all the directions and 
interdirections of the world with your knowledge and 
brilliance. 


2.  (Samidhenis Devata, Agni Rshi) 
"d reme wc remped fers wea drei 
"rob figurer dss genuied ager: Gur 
HSAN 
Sam cedhyasvagne pra ca bodhayainamucca 


tistha mahate saubhagaya. Ma ca risadupasatta 
te'agne brahmanaste yasasah santu ma 'nye. 


Agni, brilliant power of knowledge, light up and 
rise and enlighten this yajamana, seeker of light and 
knowledge, and rise and stay up high for honour and 


glory. 
Agni, never shall your devotees suffer violence, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


816 YAJURVEDA 


while scholars of the Veda and your admirers, not others, 
shall win honour and brilliance. 


3.  (AgniDevata, Agni Rshi) 


verd quia marum s gÀ fratssha wato war 
"Ea Gate clsarferurfafsres ca wa wry 
PER UB 


Tvamagne vrnate brahmana'ime $ivo'agne 
samvarane bhava nah. Sapatnaha no' 
abhimatijicca sve gaye jagrhyaprayucchan. 


Agni, brilliant lord of light and knowledge, these 
Brahmanas, dedicated scholars of divinity, choose and 
elect you as guide and leader. 


Agni, in this position of eminence, be good to 
us. Destroyer of negativities, subduer of the proud and 
insidious, you are watchful, awake and alert in your 
own home. Keep us too awake, alert and ever watchful. 


4.  (AgniDevata, Agni Rshi) 


géareisarfélemeer Wa ur var Rekaan Preatkat: | 
apre Gade Gaya dagat dqsarfsteza: icti 


Ihaivagne'adhi dharaya rayim ma tva ni 
kranpurvacito nikarinah. Ksatramagne 
suyamamastu tubhyamupasatta vardhatam te’ 
anistrtah. 


Agni, brilliant lord of light and power, here itself 
hold and rule over the power and prosperity you have. 
Let not the veterans, experienced, alert and watchful of 
yajna, either ignore or denigrate you. May the social 
order be well-governed for your sake so that you and 
your devotees, supreme and unviolated, may move 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVII 817 
forward and rise high. 
5. (Agni Devata, Agni Rshi) 


aata vere: mia fears fewest aa | 
start vremeemsdfer «rater fageat dTferdre uy t 


Ksatrenagne svayuh sain rabhasva mitrenagne 
mitradheye yatasva. Sajatanam madhyamastha’ 
edhi rajnamagne vihavyo didihtha. 


Agni, bright and blazing like light and fire, youthful 
and golden is your age. Take over and start well here 
with this world-order of humanity. 


Agni, mighty intelligent ruler, rule and work with 
the spirit of friendship in the world state which is a 
covenant of friends. Go forward, seated in the centre of 
an assembly of equals who are like brothers and sisters. 


Agni, elected, invited and installed in office by 
the sovereign nations of the world, rule, shine and 
illuminate the world here. 


6.  (AgniDevata, Agni Rshi) 
atfa fetsstfa feremscafelfeuenifaun 1 fagar 
gA ufaroweverememedeugetvehiféa at: usi 
Ati niho’ati $ridho 'tyacittimatyaratimagne. 
Visva hyagne durita sahasvathasmabhyain 
sahaviram rayim dah. 


Agni, lord of light and wealth, repelling the false, 
eliminating the wicked, dispelling darkness and 
ignorance and fighting out all the evils of the world, 
give us a republic of brave good heroes overflowing 
with plenty, prosperity and generosity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


818 YAJURVEDA 

7. (Agni Devata, Agni Rshi) 
arie sadara e fare acrétfadte à 
fesarsamgri: wepoer-ardeifira: Brahive ufturfe 
aT aà mon 


Anadhrsyo jataveda 'anistrto viradagne ksatra- 
bhrddidihtha. Visva’asah pramuncan manusir- 
bhiyah Sivebhiradya pari pahi no vrdhe. 


Agni, lord and ruler of the world, undaunted, 
omniscient, inviolable, self-refulgent, holder and 
sustainer of the world-order, remove all human fear, 
hate, disease etc., shine and illuminate all the regions 
of the world, and now protect us for advancement with 
peace and benevolence. 


8. (Vishvedeva Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
ae ead naate ote faaea tN 
adda ngà Ahma fasdsuaradued Sar: eu 


Brhaspate savitarbodhayainam samsitam 


citsantaram sam $isadhi. Vardhayainam mahate 
saubhagaya visva’enamanu madantu devah. 


Brihaspati, guardian of all, Savita, giver of light 
and knowledge, educate and enlighten this intelligent 
and honourable ruler as well as the people in every way. 
Let him grow and advance for the greatness and 
prosperity of the nation. Let all the noble powers of 
divinity and humanity rejoice with him. 


9. (Ashvinis etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


ama FATS SIA FREI S stayed sa: | 
uaea Bearers BEST sreftfsr: ue u 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVII 819 


Amutra bhuyadadha yadyamasya brhaspate’ 
abhisasteramuncah. Pratyauhatamasvina 
mrtyumasmaddevanamagne bhisaja Sactbhih. 
Brihaspati, lord and saviour of all, guard the ruler 
against any curse or calumny or evil that may tarnish 
him in the life to come, and save him from any accusation 
or damnation of the law or constitution or Yama, the 
supreme and universal judge of human performance. 


Agni, lord of life and light, may the Ashvinis, 
nature's powers of health, teachers, preachers and 
physicians, with their best actions and research, keep 
off the onslaughts of ill-health and fatality from him. 


10. (Surya Devata, Agni Rshi) 
sgi mhh tq: ugd«rssdu | 
xe dam usu dedu gon 


Udvayam tamasaspari svah pa$yanta uttaram. 
Devam devatra suryamaganma jyotiruttamam. 


Let us rise beyond the dark, watching the heavenly 
light above, high and higher, and reach to the sun, highest 
light and most generous divinity of the saviour divinities 
of the world. 

11. (Agni Devata, Agni Rshi) 
satsa uf wercgeat vient IDefTeitu re: d 
gad gadne we: ue 


Urdhva’asya samidho bhavantyurdhva sukra 
Socimsyagneh. Dyumattama supratikasya sunoh. 


May the holy fuels of fire be great and best, may 
the flames of fire be blazing high and pure—fire, most 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


820 YAJURVEDA 


brilliant in splendour, most beautiful of form, dynamic 
impeller of life and life's growth. 


12. (Vishvedeva Devata, Agni Rshi) 


wp favacar gat ned sa: | 
usag WEST Tat ues 


Tanunapadasuro visvaveda devo devesu devah. 
Patho’anaktu madhva ghrtena. 


Vayu/Agni, which allows not the body to fall, 
which is breath of life, replete with universal vitalities, 
divine among divinities, and most generous, may that 
Vayu/Agni sprikle our path of life with the sweetest 
nectar of ghrta. 


13. (Yajna Devata, Agni Rshi) 
weal ub dere rum nN str |d 
apnea: fer favaalz: ngu 


Madhva yajnam naksase prinano narasamso 
agne. Sukrddevah savita vi$vavarah. 


Agni, with honey sweets you come to yajna, Agni, 
loved and inspiring, celebrated by yajniks, benevolent, 
brilliant, creator and sustainer, and universal treasure 
of life's wealth. 

14. (Vahni Devata, Agni Rshi) 
steoradta sider weder eade i 
sifavepatssteane ward uen 


Acchayameti Savasa ghrtenedano vahnirna- 
masa. Agnim sruco’adhvaresu prayatsu. 


In the yajnas conscientiously conducted with love 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVII 821 


and non-violence, the high-priest comes gracefully to 
the fire holding the ladle, celebrating Agni, the deity, 
with brilliant power of knowledge, water and ghee, and 
food for the fire. 


15. (Vayu Devata, Agni Rshi) 


a dae wear: ase uer quae: | 
agra agendar deu 


Sa yaksadasya mahimanamagneh sa’im mandra 
suprayasah. Vasu$cetistho vasudhatamasca. 


Let the high-priest, seated and seating others in 
yajna, conscientious and richest in yajna materials, 
worship the grandeur of generous Agni and offer 
fragrant exhilarating oblations into the fire. And he 
would know and feel and enjoy the gift of bliss. 


16. (Devyah Devata, Agni Rshi) 
ent mercede fase aar ATASAT: | 
mereut Met Uta: NAN 


Dvaro deviranvasya vi$ve vrata dadante’ agneh. 
Uruvyacaso dhamna patyamanah. 


By the light and splendour of this expansive fire 
emanating from its abode (vedi), the scholars of yajna, 
dedicated to the protection and promotion of life and 
nature, open the celestial doors, and reveal the laws and 
functions of this universal power. 


17. (Yajna Devata, Agni Rshi) 


asst aru feet 4 amtssararmact | 
gH aatan d: ngon 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


822 YAJURVEDA 


Te'asya yosane divye na yona' usasanakta. 
Imam yajnamavatamadhvaram nah. 


May the two divine mothers, the morning and the 
evening (the twilight, and the dawn), guard and expand 
this holy non-violent yajna of ours in the home of this 
fire in the vedi. 


18. (Agni Devata, Agni Rshi) 


eut eranismeddeat "isrifsrarafurduften i 
goi a: Rafn eeu 


Daivya hotara’ urdhvamadhvaram no’ - 
gnerjihvamabhi grnbitam. Krnutam nah svistim. 


May the two divine priests (seeker and teacher, 
fire and air) expand our holy non-violent yajna to the 
heights, raise and praise the flames of fire and 
propitiously do us the desired good. 


19. (Ida & Others Devata, Agni Rshi) 


fret ddidiSteaerdehasr ateadt arc i 
Wet Won ugs 


Tisro devirbarhiredam sadantvida sarasvati 
bharati. Mahi grnana. 


Three divine excellencies, Ida, potential speech 
of omniscience in the eternal mind in heaven, Sarasvati, 
speech of eternal knowledge of the Veda flowing across 
the space, and Bharati, actualized speech of knowledge 
articulated in the shastras, may these, great and holy, 
adoring the Supreme Lord and highly adored by us, 
consecrate our seats of yajna and the home. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVII 823 


20. (Tvashta Devata, Agni Rshi) 


mmg Teal enel wed | 
Tae fada ATR uso 


Tannasturipamadbhutam puruksu tvasta 
suviryam. Rayasposam vi syatu nabhimasme. 


May Tvashta, divine artist of the world, generous 
to all, gain for us fast-maturing, wonderful and virile 
health, wealth and noursihment, place it at the hub of 
the nation's movement and relieve us of want and 
suffering. 


21. (Scholars Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


atash whore qu i 
aifiadenestfirar daría eeu 


Vanaspate'va srja raranastmana devesu. 
Agnirhavyam $amita sudayati. 

Vanaspati, scholar and researcher of the science 
of yajna, just as the holy fire of peaceful yajna refines 
and universalizes the holy materials, so you, rejoicing 
at heart among noble and generous scholars, create 
refined and powerful holy materials for the fire of 
natioinal yajnas of production and purification. 


22. (Indra Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


ara taal Hulls madas ge | 
fasl gar zfefrs ww een 


Agne svaha krnuhi jataveda’indraya havyam. 
Visve deva haviridam jusantam. 


Agni, lord of world knowledge, take this holy 
offering and, in truth of word and deed, refine and raise 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


824 YAJURVEDA 


it to the grace and glory of Indra, spirit of power and 
prosperity of the world. And may all the noble people of 
the world and divinities of nature share this holy gift and 
rejoice. 


23. (Vayu Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


Ulatsstan tae: uim: yaa: Rafa Paar: | 
spera Gate fadeafaraat: TAC Sew: us 3 t 


Pivo'anna rayivrdhah sumedhah $vetah sisakti 
niyutamabhisrth. Te vayave samanaso vi 
tasthurvi$vennarah svapatyani cakruh. 


All the leading scholars of the world, well-provided 
for living, of equal mind and noble intelligence, 
concentrating on the knowledge of Vayu, wind and 
energy, promote the wealth of the world and produce a 
new generation of noble descendants. And Vayu, pure 
and immaculate spirit and essence of life, blesses these 
dynamic enterprising people with grace and dignity. 


24. (Vayu Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 
Ta ub wag Vadis wa sat firent enfer deni 


are] ara faad: asad xerssd vad agfa 
frs usu 


Raye nu yam jajnatu rodasime raye devi dhisana 
dhati devam. Adha vayum niyutah sa$cata sva' 
uta $vetam vasudhitim nireke. 


The Heavan and the earth generate Vayu for the 
wealth of energy. The divine intelligence activates Vayu 
to reveal the wealth of the divine Word. And then, that 
same Vayu, pure treasure of energy, all the living beings 
in existence together seek, enjoy and pursue (for the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVII 825 
sake of wealth and energy). 


25. (Prajapati Devata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi) 


al g aa deifir rd eerte Seay A 
ad gamiesadadaata: ae werd gft 
faðm Rei 


Apo ha yad brhatirviévamáyan garbham 
dadhana janayantiragnim. Tato devanam 
samavartatasurekah kasmai devaya havisa 
vidhema. 


When the cosmic waters of existence (that is, 
tanmatras, subtle elements of Prakriti, material cause 
of the universe, or, we can say, Mahan, the existential 
form of Prakriti) appear on the cosmic scene, holding 
the vishva-garbha, seed form of the universe in their 
womb, and give birth to Agni (vital heat of nature and 
mother of stars such as the sun), then arises Vayu, the 
one life-breath of the divine forms of existence. To that 
divine breath of life, let us pay homage with love and 
action in faith. 


26. (Prajapati Devata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi) 


"fysardt ufa vidya usnm werde i 
a aft asunsa wet zen fend 
faðm een 


Yascidapo mahina paryapa$yaddaksam 
dadhana janayantiryajnam. Yo devesvadhi deva’ 
eka'asi kasmai devaya havisa vidhema. 


The One Supreme Lord over all the divine forms 
of Prakriti, who overwatches the cosmic waters with 
His own might of immanence and omniscience — 
waters (tanmatras) conducting the great yajna of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


826 YAJURVEDA 


evolution and producing various forms of life, to that 
One Lord of Bliss let us pay homage and offer worship 
with acts of love and faith in yajna. 


27. (Vayu Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


"awaited avast aafaa ax 
ft at eai reme fü dit neat a 
tet: un 


Pra yabhiryasi dasvainsamaccha niyudbhirva- 
yavistaye durone. Ni no rayiin subhojasam 
yuvasva ni viram gavyamasvyam ca radhah. 


Vayu, by the waves of your own energy you fly 
so gracefully to the house of the generous yajamana for 
the desired objects. Bless us with enjoyable gifts of wealth 
and food. Bless us with brave heroes, wealth of cows 
and horses, and the power and dignity of life. 


28. (Vayu Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


am at fate: sreeüfuvsersdgfenüfwued arte 
"THO aasa R eae Fa uta taker: 
Gat A: Re 


A no niyudbhih satinibhiradhvarain sahasrini- 
bhirupa yahi yajnam. Vayo asmintsavane 
madayasva yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Vayu, tempestuous power of divine nature, by a 
hundred modes of action and a thousand currents of 
energy in this mighty yajna of creative evolution, you 
come to our holy yajna of love and action in the world. 
Come, rejoice in this yajna and bless us too with joy. 


Sages of knowledge and yajna, you too protect 
us with your knowledge and your blessings for peace, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVII 827 
prosperity and well-being. 
29. (Vayu Devata, Gritsamada Rshi) 


Raah eere vgreresrenrssterfi wai 

THU uper TEA us 

Niyutvan vayava gahyayam $ukro'ayami te. 
Gantasi sunvato grham. 

Divine Vayu, One universal inmanent life-breath 
of the universe, primary leading light of nature and 
humanity, just as this wind, pure and immaculate, moves 
and blesses the house of a devotee of soma and yajna, 
so you, pure and immaculate, come in response to my 
invocation. Here I come to you. 


30. (Vayu Devata, Purumeedha Rshi) 
arat setara à nesoni fafeferw i 
antèt mda mt de fra Non 
Vayo Sukro’ayami te madhvo’agram divistisu. 
A yahi somapitaye sparho deva niyutvata. 


Vayu, brilliant power divine, honey-sweet and 
pure, worthy of emulation and admiration, I come, 
invoke and invite you, leading light of holy gatherings 
of yajna. Come at the speed of the wind, and join here 
for a drink of soma. 


31. (Vayu Devata, Ajameedha Rshi) 


SRT Sait: Ae ata aA d 
Bea frafe: fsrerfid: sen 


Vayuragrega yajnaprih sakam ganmanasa 
yajnam. Sivo niyudbhih sivabhih. 


Vayu, leader ever in the forefront of the noble 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


828 YAJURVEDA 


activities of life, lover of yajna, come with your heart 
and soul to the yajna. Blissful you are, come with all 
your sagely acts and blessed powers. 


32. (Vayu Devata, Gritsamada Rshi) 


art 4 d owegfenrm tates | 
Raar 113211 


Vayo ye te sahasrino rathasastebhira gahi. 
Niyutvantsomapitaye. 


Vayu, leader and scholar of the speed of the winds, 
thousands are the paths and modes of your movement 
forward. Take them all and come for a wonder-work of 
joy with a holy drink of soma. 


33. (Vayu Devata, Gritsamada Rshi) 


uha a asse ves greatest fees i 
Rania aga aet a frafsatafee a 
feu 1330 


Ekaya ca dasabhisca svabhute dvabhyamistaye 
viin$ati ca. Tisrbhi$ca vahase triin$ata ca 
niyudbhirvayaviha ta vi munca. 

Vayu, master of your own innate powers and 
knowledge, you conduct the yajna of life by one and 
ten, two and twenty, three and thirty paths and modes 
and speeds for the desired end and aim of life. Come 
here and conduct the yajna, and then release everything 
and be free. 


34. (Vayu Devata, Angirasa Rshi) 


ad amaa census | 
aame endon uss 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVII 829 


Tava vayavrtaspate tvasturjamataradbhuta. 
Avainsya vrnumah. 


Vayu, sustainer of truth and the laws of nature, 
wonderful power, maker of new forms and shaper of the 
new generations for Tvashta, lord creator, we pray for 
your gifts of protection, sustenance and advancement. 


35. (Vayu Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


aR ver wr Aase s ga See 
Jae sila: cadorionafirg aed: aun 


Abhi tva Sura nonumo’dugdha’iva dhenavah. 
I$anamasya jagatah svardrsamisanamindra 
tasthusah. 


Indra, fearless and brave, lord and ruler of the 
moving and the unmoving world, it is bliss to see you! 
Like unmilked cows yearning for their calves, we invoke 
you to pay homage to you. 


36. (Parameshvara Devata, Shamyubarhaspatya Rshi) 
"1 cares satan faedr  urífslet «mat a sif reni 
sad maag ast teadeat gem 25! 


Na tvavan’anyo divyo na parthivo na jato na 
janisyate. A$vayanto maghavannindra vajino 
gavyantastva havamahe. 


Indra, supreme lord of power and glory, destroyer 
of pain and suffering, there is none other like you on 
earth or in heaven ever born or yet to be born in future. 
Blest with horse and speed, food and power, cows and 
wealth of holy Word, still yearning to move faster and 
higher, we come and offer homage and worship to you. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


830 YAJURVEDA 


37. (Indra Devata, Shamyubarhaspatya Rshi) 


varus cated mÀ ae aad: od 

wat qaftets Udit ATE Arse a: 3 
Tvamiddhi havamahe satau vajasya karavah. 
Tvam vrtresvindra satpatim narastvam 
kasthasvarvatah. 

Indra, lord of power and commander of the forces, 
sun among the clouds and defender of truth, we, leaders 
of men and achievers of success, invoke you in the 
battles of science and knowledge and do homage to you 
advancing into all directions like a horse on the wing. 


38. (Indra Devata, Shamyubarhaspatya Rshi) 


Ue tas erre sat gor qe verit saffarer: | 
mayda uw fer war art fum sen 
Sa tvam na$citra vajrahasta dhrsnuya maha 


stavano' adrivah. Gamasvam rathyamindra sam 
kira satra vajam na jigyuse. 


Indra, wonderful lord of the thunderbolt in hand, 
lord of the clouds and strong as adamant, highly praised 
and celebrated by virtue of your own glory, give us 
abundant wealth of cows, horses, chariot bullocks as 
well as true knowledge of science for the sake of victory. 


39. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


wat aaas Yagi werden cat | 
wa ea Fat use 


Kaya nascitra’a bhuvaduti sadavrdhah sakha. 
Kaya Sacisthaya vrta. 


Lord of light and knowledge, wonderful and awe- 
inspiring, be a friend of the progressive, bless us with 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVII 831 


protection and help us join with blissful and powerful 
mode of action and advancement. 


40. (Indra Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 
weal Gear vata mS naea: od 
get fearest end nson 


Kastva satyo madanam mainhistho matsad- 
andhasah. Drdha cidaruje vasu. 


Indra, the real soothing, genuine and most powerful 
essence of efficacious soma and herbal food which 
relieves and exhilarates you, that surely is the valuable 
and unfailing panacea for the cure of ill-health. 


41. (Indra Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 
amt | ur: adaa So à 
ya tarea ise it 


Abhi su nah sakhinamavità jaritrnam. Satam 
bhavasyutaye. 

Indra, lord of power and knowledge, you are the 
over-all saviour and protector of our friends and 
admirers. Be gracious to us in a hundred ways for our 
protection and well-being. 


42. (Yajna Devata, Shamyu Rshi) 
amda Asad firiftkt a aÀ | 
wi erae aeta fre fici 3 vista inest 


Yajna-yajna vo'agnaye gira-gira ca daksase. 
Pra-pra vayamamrtam jatavedasam priyam 
mitram na $ainsisam. 


In every yajna, by every word, for the sake of Agni, 
power of light, energy, intelligence and expertise, we 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


832 YAJURVEDA 


invite, honour and celebrate you. Let us all together 
celebrate and sing in praise of Agni, immortal and 
omniscient lord, as a darling friend of ours. 


43. (Agni Devata, Bhargava Rshi) 


urf& s amas ykan urea fedtdar d 
"rfe virférfrgfebessf ua urfz cage ies 


Pahi no'agna'ekaya pahyuta dvitiyaya. Pahi 
girbhistisrbhirurjam pate pahi catasrbhirvaso. 
Agni, lord of knowledge, action, love and 
freedom, master of life, energy and food, home and 
shelter of all forms of existence, protect and promote 
us by one voice, voice of the Riks, for knowledge. 
Protect and promote us by the second voice, voice of 
the Yajus, for action. Protect and promote us by the three 
voices of Riks, Yajus and Samans for knowledge, action 
and worship. Protect and promote us by the four voices 
of Riks, Yajus, Samans and Atharvans, for Dharma, 
Artha, Kama and Moksha. 


44. (Vayu Devata, Shamyu Rshi) 


west mulasu Roana gemelas i 
qagisteafaad yaa gassa GTUT AAA irswu 


Urjo napataim sa hinayamasmayurdàásema 
havyadataye. Bhuvadvajesvavita bhuvad vrdha’ 
uta trata tanunam. 


Scholar, sage, teacher, learner, promote the child 
of life and energy, vayu, agni and knowledge, which 
allow not the grandeur of life to diminish, so that nature 
and knowledge may be our friends, protect us in the 
battles of life and continue to be the saviours of our 
persons and people. Friends as they are, we invoke them 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVII 833 
for the oblations of holy offerings in yajna. 
45. (Agni Devata, Shamyu Rshi) 


PARISH URAC ISHATARRISHHECRISHAT ACERTS— 
fui sade cneuemHERTAHRRÉ aeoaedarart 
HOU AE HUAI Herds Haat 
CROUdTH | AASTA ure Wt are | qt 
Fadia cat ladas iea ga: die irs ii 


Samvatsaro’si parivatsaro’sidavatsaro’ sidvat- 
saro’si vatsaro’si. Usasaste kalpantamaho- 
ratraste kalpantamardhamasaste kalpantam 
masaste kalpantamrtavaste kalpantam 
samvatsaraste kalpatam. Pretya'etyai sam canca 
pra ca saraya. Suparnacidasi taya devataya' 
ngirasvad dhruvah sida. 


Agni, brilliant scholar, teacher, learner, you move 
by the law of nature like the current year, give up the 
weaknesses like the year gone by. You are wide-awake 
and comprehensive like the universally present year, 
and definite like the year cycle. May the dawns flourish 
and be favourable to you. May the day-night cycle be 
flourishing and favourable to you. May the fortnights 
flourish and be favourable to you. May the months 
flourish, may the seasons flourish, may the years flourish 
and be favourable to you. 


For coming and going, advancement and return, 
collect, expand, control and contain. 


You are the winner of life's golden beauties. Move 
forward in unison with that divinity of Time like the 
breath of life and stay fast and firm with Dharma like 
the fixed stars. 


sta acafaenseara: i 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


834 YAJURVEDA 


CHAPTER-XXVIII 


1. (Indra Devata, Brihaduktha Vamadeva Rshi) 


Ad aaaea arat ufsremnssrííb | 
fast emdiufdsagssmfsisseniuftugi acre 
grass ngu 


Hota yaksatsamidhendramidaspade nabha 
prthivya'adhi. Divo varsmantsamidhyata’ 
ojisthascarsanisaham vetvajyasya hotaryaja. 
Let the hota, man of yajna, offer faithful libations 
of holy materials, research and study in honour of Indra 
(agni, i.e., energy, heat and light) enshrined in the divine 
Word, latent at the centre of the earth, blazing on top of 
heaven and thundering in the clouds. 


And such a yajna, shining with lustre and most 
brilliant among men of might and valour, would enjoy 
the most delicious gifts of life. 


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna, never relent. 


2. (Indra Devata, Brihaduktha Vamadeva Rshi) 


ie CABE QU DESAIN lu gat- 
wafad aa asta Aeae 
Amit TEXT 


Hota yaksattanunapatamutibhirjetaramapara- 
jitam. Indram devain svarvidam pathibhir- 
madhumattamairnaras$ainsena tejasa vetv- 
ajyasya hotaryaja. 


Let the man of yajna offer service and oblations 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVIII 835 


to Indra, ruling power of the world, preserver and 
protector of the forms of life, victorious, unviolated, 
brilliant and generous, and heavenly, with oblations of 
defensive actions along the sweetest paths of virtue ; and 
with his own lustre and valour, celebrated in songs of 
praise in society, and he would attain the best gifts of 
life. 


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna in honour of 
Indra. 


3. (Indra Devata, Brihaduktha Vamadeva Rshi) 


Aat uerfaetfufadrfeaursaimeiq | cat ea: 
weflat ade: Gat demede grs usd 


Hota yaksadidabhirindramiditamajuhvanama- 
martyam. Devo davaih saviryo vajrahastah 
purandaro vetvajyasya hotaryaja. 


Let the man of yajna, with the holiest words and 
oblations offer yajna and service to Indra, immortal ruler 
of the world, honoured and worshipped by the noblest 
powers. And he, brilliant and generous, mighty of 
strength, wielder of the thunderbolt in hand, destroyer of 
the enemy forts, would lead you to the best and sweetest 
gifts of a prosperous society. 


Man of yajna, maintain the yajna, don't relent. 


4.  (RudraDevata, Brihaduktha Vamadeva Rshi) 


erat ara uidi frugi due setae pcendiít 
ented: aR ddiaa trast eu 


Hota yaksad barhisindram nisadvaram vrs- 
abham naryapasam. Vasubhi rudrairadityaih 
sayugbhirbarhirasadadvetvajyasya hotaryaja. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


836 YAJURVEDA 


Let the devotee of national yajna offer service 
with yajna to Indra, virile hero of manly deeds and chief 
of the council, sitting on the vedi along-with his 
colleagues of the Vasu, Rudra and Aditya order of 
education and national discipline. And Indra would 
grace the yajna of the people and lead them to the highest 
state of power and prosperity. 


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna, never relent. 


5. (Indra Devata, Brihaduktha Vamadeva Rshi) 


Slat AAA A AHN SLISHAA AL l YATS- 
afer at fatra ansat diet 
SITET BAST uud 


Hota yaksadojo na viryain saho dvara’indram- 
avardhayan. Suprayana' asmin yajne vi $ray- 
antamrtavrdho dvara’ indraya midhuse 
vyantvajyasya hotaryaja. 

Man of yajna, perform the yajna in honour of 
Indra, powerful and glorious personality of the nation. 
Just as wide open gates augment the flood of waters so 
may the doors of yajna augment the vigour, valour and 
brilliance of the nation. And in this national yajna, may 
the saints and sages going by the paths of rectitude and 
extending the bounds of truth open wide the gates of 
glory and advancement for the bountiful Indra. 


Man of yajna, go on with the yajna, relent not. 


6. (Indra Devata, Brihaduktha Vamadeva Rshi) 


Sia aag Asg oy yee arent wet penu 
aster erufirdueudi drarmreer eratst us 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVIII 837 


Hota yaksaduse 'indrasya dhenu sudughe matara 
mahi. Savatarau na tejasa vatsamindrama- 
vardhatam vitamajyasya hotaryaja. 


Let the hota, man of yajna, perform yajna in 
honour and service of the morning dawn and the evening 
twilight, which, like two great generous mother cows 
in the open air of universal energy, nourish Indra, the 
sun, like a calf and feed it with light and augment its 


glory. 
Hota, do the yajna, increase and extend the beauty 
and glory of the world and enjoy. Never relent. 


7. (Ashvinau Devate, Brihaduktha Vamadeva Rshi) 


Aat agza rater fares crater gfenrir-z fira: i 
wat dat wekrurfergia rasgia ae 
I3 eR MISIT 


Hota yaksaddaivya hotara bhisaja sakhaya 
havisendram  bhisajyatah. Kavi devau 
pracetasavindraya | dhatta' | indriyam 
vitamajyasya hotaryaja. 


Let the hota offer the oblations in honour and 
service for the Ashvinis, two high-priests of nature in 
the fields of health and well-being. They are the 
physicians, friends, who carry on the yajna for the health 
of Indra, the soul in body. Both of them, wise visionaries, 
brilliant and generous, masters of divine science, work 
for and extend the health and well-being of Indra. 


Hota, carry on the yajna, augment and extend the 
health and well-being of humanity and enjoy yourself 
too. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


838 YAJURVEDA 


8. (Indra Devata, Brihaduktha Vamadeva Rshi) 
Erat warren dat dust cedferemdersuusssr 


mead mi uel: | wducifeddredjeareler 
grass uu 


Hota yaksattisro devirna bhesajam trayastri- 
dhatavo' pasa'ida sarasvati bharati mahih 
Indrapatnirhavismatirvyantvajyasya hotaryaja. 

Let the hota, man of yajna, offer yajna for the 

sake of the health and happiness of the soul to the three 
great divinities, Ida, potential speech of divine 
omniscience, Saraswati, divine Word of knowledge, and 
Bharati, language of the world-knowledge of science. 


Let the three, teacher, preacher and physician 
(agents of great actions and creators of three supreme 
humors of body-health), as three servants of the regions 
of earth, sky and heaven, serve with yajna the three 
divinities of Ida, Saraswati and Bharati. 

And the three, teacher, preacher and the 
physician, and the three mother-sustainers of the soul, 
generous with the wealth of life, would bless the soul 
and the world with plenty of health and well-being. 


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna, never relent. 


9. (Indra Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


aa waremeirfing web Aga gada, a 
Weder ade currui wer adfatgaritr 
garde grass usu 

Hota yaksattvastaramindram devam bhisajain 
suyajam ghrta$riyam. Pururupam suretasam 
maghonamindraya tvasta dadhadindriyani 
vetvajyasya hotaryaja. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVIII 839 


Let the hota, yajaka, offer yajna to Tvashta, maker 
of refined forms beyond weaknes. He blesses, Indra, 
valorous, glorious and generous, physician, honourable 
in yajna, abundant and graceful, versatile in various fields 
and nobly virile, lord of power and grandeur. And Tvashta 
would bless you with the excellence of mind and sense 
and create all the knowledge of sense and mind and 
culture for you. 


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna, never relent. 


10. (Brihaspati Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 
Erat cenemeukdesrranesraehd far siren fa- 
Tags | neat cass uferui: ante: caatfa ae 
Teal Yast ATIF Blast geo 


Hota yaksadvanaspatim samitaram satakratum 
dhiyo jostaramindriyam. Madhva samanjan 
pathibhih sugebhih svadati yajnam madhuna 
ghrtena vetvajyasya hotaryaja. 


Let the man of yajna offer homage and honour to 
Vanaspati, lover of nature and brilliant as the lord of 
sunbeams, dedicated to peace, man of a hundred noble 
acts and admirer of intelligence and culture, and he 
would, thereby, moving ahead by the simple paths of 
honesty and virtue, adding sweetness and grace to the 
beauty and glory of life, he would taste the rapturous 
honey himself. 


Let the man of yajna extend and expand the yajna 
of life with honey and sacred water and ghee and add to 
the prosperity of society for all and for himself too. 


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna, relent not. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


840 YAJURVEDA 


11. (Indra Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


aint wrerfe-uwevemerssvehen taal Aaa: caret 
maa taetadtestaret garded | 
wt gasata Aans gsar cas 
sadet ngega 


Hota yaksadindrain svaha"jyasya svaha 
medasah svaha stokanain svaha svahakrtinain 
svaha havyasuktinam. Svaha deva'ajyapa 
jusana 'indra'ajyasya vyantu hotaryaja. 

Let the noble man of yajna offer libations of 
richest materials of truth of word and deed for the sake 
of Indra, universal power and honour of the world, 
libations of oils and fats with the best of words and 
actions, of the truthful actions of the children, of the 
young generations, of the truth of social conduct and 
behaviour, with the sacred words of yajna according to 
the Vedas and Shastras. 


And the noblest people, Indra and divinities 
enjoying the offerings in truth of word and deed with 
love and admiration would extend and expand the 
glories of life and humanity. 


Hota, dedicated man, carry on the yajna. 


12. (Indra Devata, Ashvinau Rshi) 


aa aR Aida eit eeneenzu d 
amti wera asea ae 
Adea aq ast ug 

Devam barhirindrain sudevam devairviravat 
stirnam vedyamavardhayat. Vastorvrtam 
praktorbhrtam raya barhismato’tyagad- 
vasuvane vasudheyaysya vetu yaja. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVIII 841 


Let the fire and splendour of yajna blazing in the 
vedi, invoked in the morning and preserved at night, 
advance Indra, power of world knowledge, divine 
among divines, surrounded by the noblest presences like 
a hero. Let the fire rise to the heavens across the air and 
waters in the sky and advance Indra with wealth and 
prosperity. 


Hota, man of yajna, carry on the yajna, advance 
the wealth and knowledge of the world for the world of 
humanity and enjoy yourself too. 


13. (Indra Devata, Ashvins Rshi) 


aieia deduttwageay 1 sm aaa 
aust PAR ww aandoe rupehenre aedi 
agat agqedea card ast de3 


Devirdvara’indram sanghate vidviryamanna- 
vardhayan. A vatsena tarunena kumarena ca 
mivataparvanain renukakatam nudantam 
vasuvane vasudheyasya vyantu yaja. 


Let the strong and celestial doors of the nation's 
march open wide and advance Indra onward in the social 
dynamics of progress, removing the whirlwinds of the 
dust of time and urging him on like a horse spurred on 
by a darling youthful prince brilliant as the rising sun. 


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna, let the wealth 
and honour of the nation rise for all, and enjoy. 


14. (Ahoratre Devate, Ashvinau Rshi) 


weftssurur eR cux Waaa 1 efasr: 
maeri uid agat npe dar 
ast uei 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


842 YAJURVEDA 


Devi usasanaktendram yajne prayatyahvetam. 
Daivirvisah prayasistain suprite sudhite 
vasuvane vasudheyasya vitam yaja. 

May the brilliant dawn and the starry night inspire 
and call forth the youthful yajamana, Indra, to the yajnic 
endeavour of the world, and may the two, loving and 
beneficent, bless the noble people and help them create 
and expand the wealth of the earth for all the people. 


Hota, man of yajna, carry on the creative 
endeavour. Never relent. 


15. (Indra Devata, Ashvinau Rshi) 


weit wirect endfirdt Gefirdusuidr | staterarar 
Jesena daga emeitfur amaa frat daat 
agda eftat ast ngan 

Devi jostri vasudhiti devamindramavardhatam. 
Ayavyanyagha dvesainsyanya vaksadvasu 
varyani yajamanaya Siksite vasuvane vasu- 
dheyasya vitam yaja. 

Two divine powers of nature, the dawn and the 
day, and the evening and the night augment the light 
and beauty of the sun. One, the evening, wards off the 
hate and sins of the mind and the other, the morning, 
proclaims and points to the choicest wealths of the 
world. May both create, promote, and bring down the 
wealth of heaven for the world and the yajamana. 


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna. 
16. (Indra Devata, Ashvinau Rshi) 


adisasied qt Yge wenRsHenzdrng | SAAS 
agaa alten ada us aaa uir Aaa 
aapi tsa aq ardifer astra 
Rra dgqat agder erat ast ues 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVIII 843 


Devi’ urjahuti dughe sudughe payasendrama- 
vardhatam. Isamurjamanya vaksatsagdhiin 
sapitimanya navena purvam dayamane 
puranena navamadhatamurjamurjahutt' 
urjayamane vasu varyani yajamanaya Ssiksite 
vasuvane vasudheyasya vitam yaja. 

Two sacred divinities of nature, day and night, 
holding strength and energy, both generous and 
abundant in joy and fulfilment, nourish and advance 
Indra, spirit of humanity and prosperity of the world. 
One of them, the night, begets food and replenishment 
of energy and the other, the day, begets a common meal 
and common drink for us. Full of peace and joy, they 
hold and join the old with the new, and the new with 
the old. 


Replete with the spirit and wisdom of divinity, 
blest with wealth of energy, blessing all with energy, 
they hold the choicest gifts of life in store for the 
yajamana, the human soul, and bring us showers of 
peace and grace of God upon the earth. 


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna in unison with 
the night and day. 


17. (Ashvinau Devate, Ashvinau Rshi) 


sar den grakt xefirdue«ara 1 garterserarstbet 
aq refer astamra fyrfariy duri enge 
atat ast usu 


Deva daivya hotara devamindramavardhatam. 
Hataghasainsavabharstam vasu varyani 
yajamanaya Ssiksitau vasuvane vasudheyasya 
vitam yaja. 


Two high-priests of nature and yajna, wind and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


844 YAJURVEDA 


fire, generous and brilliant, full of divine properties, 
feed the sun-beams with the fragrance of yajna and the 
smell of earth and add to the prosperity of the world. 
They eliminate the agents of sin and crime (by the 
elimination of poverty) and burn out the causes of 
disease. Full of the spirit of nature's wisdom, they beget 
choice gifts of wealth and water and promote the 
blessings of God upon the earth for the yajamana. 


Man of yajna, carry on with the yajna in unison 
with nature, never relent. 


18. (Indra Devata, Ashvinau Rshi) 


Sifters et: uferferciurerdert | orederamtdit 
fad: esis mader adudt era ueni ae 
Ader Sh Ast geil 


Devistisrastisro devih patimindramavardhayan. 
Asprksadbharati divam rudrairyajnaim 
sarasvatida vasumati grhan vasuvane 
vasudheyasya vyantu yaja. 


Three divine powers serve, strengthen and elevate 
Indra, the human soul, their master and servant both, 
with three sacred processes of action: Bharati, the speech 
and light of sattva, with the energy of the Rudra pranas, 
reaches the light of heaven. Sarasvati, the speech and 
currents of nature’s dynamics, with sacred chants 
through fire and wind, expands the yajna and refines 
the business of living. And Ida, the earth and holy 
libations, bear worldly wealth and bless the homes with 
prosperity. Thus the three divinities bring down the riches 
of the Divine Giver into the life of humanity, the receiver, 
on earth through yajna. 


Hota, devotee of yajna, carry on the yajna in tune 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVIII 845 
with Ida, Sarasvati and Bharati. 


19. (Indra Devata, Ashvinau Rshi) 


asa "msredferenserfidere nt casual 
rad fsrferaesrararfea: Gea w ebd firmermurdva 
eared gga Haamea aget ag 
Ada aq ast ues 


Deva’ indro narasamsastrivaruthastribandhuro 
devamindramavardhayat. Satena Sitiprsthana- 
mahitah sahasrena pra vartate mitravaru- 
nedasya hotramarhato brhaspati stotram- 
asvinadhvaryavam vasuvane vasudheyasya vetu 
yaja. 

The divine human soul, Indra, in pursuit of 
greatness, in love and admiration of humanity, in control 
of three councils, bound by three disciplines of 
knowledge, action and worship through Riks, Yajus and 
Samans, should dedicate himself in yajna to Indra, lord, 
life and energy of the universe. Such a person, favoured 
by a hundred forms of refined energy, moves forward 
in a hundred ways. His fastest food is the energy of 
prana and udana. Brihaspati, universal voice of 
sustenance is his song of divine praise. The Ashvinis, 
sun and moon, are the divine priests of his yajna. And 
these divine powers bring into the life of this devotee 
in search of wealth the blessings of the lord of the 
worlds. 


Man of yajna, keep up the yajna, relent not. 


20. (Indra Devata, Ashvinau Rshi) 


wer dadaertafetvacent veya: ufuuren 
eattguagadl feantumgatardiet uferetd- 
qed egere ad ast Roll 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


846 YAJURVEDA 


Devo devairvanaspatirhiranyaparno madhu- 
Sakhah supippalo devamindramavardhayat. 
Divamagrenasprksadantariksam prthivi- 
madrinhidvasuvane vasudheyasya vetu yaja. 


The lord of sun-beams, the Tree of life, brilliant 
with its lustrous virtues, of golden leaves, honeyed 
branches and delicious fruit strengthens and elevates 
the divine Indra, power of generosity and eliminater of 
poverty. With its top it reaches the light of heaven, 
energises and expands the skies, and strengthens and 
enriches the earth. And thus it brings for the dedicated 
world of humanity the riches as blessings of the lord of 
the treasures of the universe. 


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna in unison with 
the sun and the Tree, never relent. 


21. (Indra Devata, Ashvinau Rshi) 
aa aain eaftduadad 1 cvernuee- 


bi aay | adsan age ag 
I9 9 I 


Devam barhirvaritinam devamindrama- 
vardhayat. Svasasthamindrenasannamanya 
barhimsyabhyabhudvasuvane vasudheyasya 
vetu yaja. 


The divine ether worthiest among the choicest 
aspects of nature sustains and elevates Indra, brilliant 
human soul, as well as natural energy, well-nestled and 
happily placed with Indra, the Divine Presence. It holds, 
sustains and pervades the other parts of space and brings 
the wealth of the universe for the yearning human soul 
on earth. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVIII 847 


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna in tune with space 


and nature and enjoy. Never relent. 


22. 


(Agni Devata, Ashvinau Rshi) 


Asara: Reaveprafiduadeq 1 fate 
pdinducd Rena atid al agat engeren 
ad ast UI 


Devo’agnih svistakrddevamindramavardhayat. 
Svistam kurvantsvistakrt svistamadya karotu no 
vasuvane vasudheyasya vetu yaja. 


Blessed Agni, brilliant and generous divine fire 


energy, which purifies and sanctifies everything, may 
bless and elevate Indra, the human soul, turning 
everything to good and auspicious for us today. Power 
of good and blessedness, may it bestow the wealth of 
the world on the dedicated man of yajna yearning for 
wealth. 


23. 


Man of yajna, keep the fire burning. 


(Agni Devata, Ashvinau Rshi) 


sian gaara asta: wer] uerit: welt 
Asr aaa coniu | gasar dat 
amanata Orr (reri fiere: uiduerantit- 
adtags aE ch usd 


Agnimadya hotaramavrnitayam yajamanah 
pacan paktih pacan purodasam badhnann- 
indraya chagam. Supastha'adya devo 
vanaspatirabhavadindraya chagena. Adyattam 
medastah prati pacatagrabhidavivrdhat 
purodasena. Tvamadya rse. 


This yajamana, cooking the foods, preparing the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


848 YAJURVEDA 


delicacies, collecting the herbs and goat's milk, 
cleansing and strengthening, invokes the fire and selects 
the priest to-day. 


The lord of sun-beams and herbs, the sun, joins 
in presence with the herbs and the goat milk for the honour 
of Indra (through the fire). 


The fire receives the holy delicacies in response 
to the yajamana and advances his wealth and honour. 


O Rshi, man of vision and knowledge, may Agni 
advance your wealth and honour too. 


24. (Agni Devata, Sarasvati Rshi) 


eat agah uc: wpfna etuer 
wurendu a wrest wasshga cufé cm aat 
aaam gres uuu 


Hota yaksatsamidhanam mahadyasah susamid- 
dham varenyamagnimindram vayodhasam. 
Gayatrim chanda’ indriyam tryavim gam vayo 
dadhadvetvajyasya hotaryaja. 


Let the man of piety offer yajna in dedication to 
Agni, lighted, blazing, great and glorious, worthy of 
choice, and to Indra, lord of power and grandeur, giver 
of good health and long life. Let him chant the Gayatri, 
treasure of joy and giver of the freedom of thought, and 
he would be blest with wealth of mind and senses, riches 
of the thrice protective earth mother, good health and 
long age. 


Man of yajna, extend and expand the yajna and 
enjoy the best of knowledge and honour in the world. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVIII 849 


25. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi) 


eat agaaga a ocriufafadír whats 
adada | sfo weszbad feam m wt 
auger gr uuu 


Hota yaksattanunapatamudbhidam yam 
garbhamaditirdadhe $ucimindram vayodhasam. 
Usniham chanda’indriyam dityavaham gam 
vayo dadhadvetvajyasya hotaryaja. 


Let the devotee of yajna, seeker of knowledge, 
perform yajna for Indra, light of the rising sun, bright 
and pure, life-giving, self-preserving and self-risen as 
if through the folds of the earth, whom Aditi, mother 
nature, had borne in the womb of the Night. Offer 
libations to Indra like the first feed of an innocent new- 
born baby and you would create, promote and enjoy 
wealth of knowledge, wisdom of the ushnik verses of 
the Veda, strength and joy, brilliance of mind and sense, 
self-regeneration, sweetness and power of speech, health 
and long age, and the very nectar of life. 


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna. Relent not. 


26. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi) 


Erat agds gaeaf: 
wats a | amped wdsghga usalfa i 
am eager ene een 


Hota yaksadidenyamiditam vrtrahantama- 
midabhiridyam sahah somamindram vayo- 
dhasam. Anustubham chanda’indriyam 
pancavim gam vayo dadhadvetvajyasya 
hotaryaja. 


Let the man of yajna offer oblations to Indra, the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


850 YAJURVEDA 


Great Soul, worthy of love and praise, celebrated in 
sacred hymns, admirable breaker of the clouds of 
darkness, lord of courage and endurance, peace and bliss 
and the beauty and grace of life. And holding on to 
freedom and joy of the Anushtubh verses of the Veda, 
sensitivity of mind and senses, five streams of pranic 
energy and the beauty and poetry of life, the yajaka would 
create, promote and enjoy the wealth and prosperity of 
the world. 


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna, relent not! 


27. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi) 


adm | sedi sasia fat m ad 
aaae erat uu 


Hota yaksatsubarhisam pusanvantamamartyain 
sidantam barhisi priye'mrtendram vayodhasam. 
Brhatim chanda’ indriyam trivatsam gam vayo 
dadhadvetvajyasya hotaryaja. 


Let the devotee of yajna offer yajna to Indra, the 
Great Soul, lord of vast spaces, everflowing with 
nourishments, indestructible, graceful on the seat of 
cosmic yajna, dear, immortal and ever young. And 
holding on to the grand Brihati verses of the Veda, joy 
of freedom, sensitivity of sense and intelligence, 
devotion to knowledge, action and worship of the divine, 
nobility of speech and awareness and the beauty of life, 
he would create, promote and enjoy the wealth and 
prosperity of life. 


yajaka, carry on the yajna. Relent not. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVIII 851 


28. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi) 


diag m aà aapear Aet een 


Hota yaksadvyacasvatih suprayana’rtavrdho 
dvaro devirhiranyayirbrahmanamindram 
vayodhasam. Panktim chanda’ ihendriyam 
turyavaham gam vayo dadhadvyantvajyasya 
hotaryaja. 


Let the man of yajna consecrate the wide, open 
and spacious golden gates of heavenly truth for the 
expansion of divine virtue, offer reverence to the scholar 
of the Vedas and do yajna in honour of Indra, lord of 
grandeur and knowledge. And, holding on to the 
scientific truth of Pankti verses of the Veda, freedom, 
worldly wealth, and strong fourfold burden bearing bulls 
for transport, create, promote and enjoy the beauty and 
graces of life in this world. 


Man of yajna, keep up the yajna, never relent. 


29. (Ahoratre Devate, Sarasvati Rshi) 


at warequshur Ered dess vadrarar CT 
«sie faras ater | fred :-dssifuu duse 
"m an adders zm usu 


Hota yaksat supe$asa suSilpe brhati’ubhe 
naktosasa na darsate visvamindram vayo- 
dhasam. Tristubham chanda' ihendriyam 
pasthavaham gam vayo dadhadvitamajyasya 
hotaryaja. 


Let the hota, devotee of yajna, join and consecrate 
the night and day, both well shaped, beautiful, great 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


852 YAJURVEDA 


and pleasing to the eye and, like them, offer yajna to 
Indra, lord of the world's life and age, and holding on 
to the wisdom of the Trishtubh verses, strength, speed 
of progress, wealth and sensitivity, and strong burden- 
bearing bulls in this world, create, promote and enjoy 
the beauty and grace of life as do the night and day. 


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna in unison with 
the night and day. 


30. (Ashvinau Devate, Sarasvati Rshi) 


Aat aad derat sir zraizr deat edt 
"rupe sated a i w-dsgigadagare CU 
wer adame grass i201 


Hota yaksatpracetasa devanamuttamam yaso 
hotara daivya kavi sayujendram vayodhasam. 
Jagatim chanda’indriyamanadvaham gam vayo 
dadhadvitamajyasya hotaryaja. 


Let the hota join Prachetas, two wise and brilliant 
high-priests (such as the fire and the sun or the teacher 
and the disciple), both of divine nature, creative, and 
friendly as brothers, and offer yajna to Indra, most 
glorious among the generous powers of brilliance and 
giver of health, wealth and long age, and, holding on 
to the wisdom of jagati verses, freedom and joy of life, 
sensitivity and intelligence, bulls of the chariot and the 
wealth and beauty of life, create, promote and enjoy 
the sweetest graces of the world as the Prachetas do as 
friends. 


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna in unison with 
the friendly divinities of nature and society. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVIII 853 


31. (Vanyah Devata, Sarasvati Rshi) 


zat agadsa Rae sate ruereireritdrsigdriizt: 
Ufa mta 1 fere weszàfgd Ai m a 
wr aaga aA uat 


Hota yaksatpesasvatistisro devirhiranya- 
yirbharatirbrhatirmahih patimindram vayo- 
dhasam. Virajam chanda’ihendriyam dhenum 
gam na vayo dadhadvyantvajyasya hotaryaja. 
Let the hota invoke and join three divinities of 
the universal language of knowledge, beauteous, golden 
gracious, rich and elevating, vast and abundant as space, 
generous and compact as earth, and offer yajna to Indra, 
lord protector and giver of health and wealth in life, 
and, bearing the varied wisdom of virat verses, powerful 
joys of life, beauties and graces, good sense and 
intelligence, and wisdom of the universal Word like a 
generous cow, increase and enjoy the beauty and graces 
of knowledge, action and piety of life in this world as 
do the divinities of the Word. 


Hota, carry on with the yajna and promote life in 
unison with the universal knowledge of the sacred Word. 


32. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi) 


yes ad | gue wesztaguami uou 
amt cages etadst uaa! 


Hota yaksatsuretasam tvastaram pusti- 
vardhanam rupani bibhratam prthak pusti- 
mindram vayodhasam. Dvipadam chanda’ 
indriyamuksanam gam na vayo dadhadvet- 
vajyasya hotaryaja. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


854 YAJURVEDA 


Let the hota offer yajna to Tvashta, generous 
creator, lord giver of growth, maker and bearer of fine 
forms and their sustenance in the various world, and let 
him do honour to Indra, lord of the beauty and wealth 
of the world, and, holding on to the wisdom of the two- 
part verses of the Veda, freedom, honour and fame and 
the joy and generosity of life like a virile bull, increase 
and enjoy the beauty of the world. 


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna. 


33. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi) 


wrt fad aft watt aad 1 apa 
w-sgélud ai aed m cep aaga elt 
ast 133i 


Hota yaksadvanaspatim Samitaram satakratum 
hiranyaparnamukthinam rasanam bibhratam 
vasim bhagamindram vayodhasam. Kakubham 
chanda 'ihendriyami vasam vehatam gam vayo 
dadhadvetvajyasya hotaryaja. 


Let the hota do yajna in honour of Vanaspati, lord 
of sunbeams and greenery, inspiring hero of a hundred 
actions, golden winged, celebrated in Uktha verses, 
holding the reins of time, keeping the world to order, 
lord of glory, wielder of power and giver of life. And 
holding on to the kakubh verses, freedom of thought, 
power of sense and mind, dry cows and cows in season, 
and beauty of life, he may increase, promote and enjoy 
the wealth and sweetness of life. 


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVIII 855 


34. (Agni Devata, Sarasvati Rshi) 


aà aie ad 1 ares wdsstea 
weduW Tm aa aaguardeyd east uui 


Hota yaksatsvahakrtiragnim grhapatim prthag- 
varunam bhesajam kavim ksatramindram 
vayodhasam. Aticchandasam chanda’ indriyam 
brhadrsabham gam vayo dadhadvyantvajyasya 
hotaryaja. 


Let the hota, man of yajna, join and offer yajnic 
acts of piety for one and all of Agni, the light and fire of 
life, grihapati, master of the home, Varuna, the highest 
power of his choice, health and medicine, the man of 
wisdom and vision, the social order, Indra, ruler and 
master giver of life and joy. And, enjoying and holding 
on to the wisdom and knowledge of Atichhanda verses 
of the Veda, joy of freedom, great wealth of mind and 
sense, strong bulls and cows, and the health and vigour 
of living, may he and all increase, promote and sanctify 
the beauty and graces of life. 


Hota, keep up the yajna. 


35. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi) 


ad ade dahtreuagad | aan etat 
aga at adggqet engeren aq ast ouaudi 


Devam barhirvayodhasam devamindrama- 
vardhayat. Gayatrya chandasendriyam 
caksurindre vayo dadhadvasuvane vasudhe- 
yasya vetu yaja. 


The splendid fire, the sacred grass around the 
vedi, and the wide space of the sky exalt the divine Indra, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


856 YAJURVEDA 


sun, ruler of the world and giver of life and beauty, 
and, inspiring and investing Indra, the soul, with the 
joyous vision of the Gayatri verses of the Veda, freedom 
of spirit, wealth and sensitivity of mind and intelligence, 
vision of reality and the beauty and dignity of life, bring 
down the blessings of heaven to the earth for dedicated 
humanity. 


Man of yajna, keep the fire burning. Let it never 
go out. 


36. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi) 


Aiekin | sig tfi 
wie aa adg¢at engeren ard ast ua 


Devirdvaro vayodhasam $ucimindrama- 
vardhayan. Usniha chandasendriyam prana- 
mindre vayo dadhadvasuvane vasudheyasya 
vyantu yaja. 


The wide auspicious doors of yajna and the yajnic 
home bring in, vitalize and exalt Indra, divine air, pure 
and sacred, bearing the breath of life, and, inspiring and 
investing Indra, the soul, with pranic energy, health and 
good age, sensitivity and brilliance of mind and 
intelligence with the wisdom of the Ushnik verses and 
the beauty and joy of life, create and promote the beauty 
and graces of heaven on earth for the yearning soul. 


Pious soul, carry on the yajna, never relent. 


37. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi) 
wetssuruarTedd cated eren tat Gemiensani 


appe m sda satire edt adgqet ag 
ader drat ast zen 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVIII 857 


Devi usasanakta devamindram vayodhasam devi 
devamavardhatam. Anustubha chandasen- 
driya balamindre vayo dadhadvasuvane- 
vitam yaja. 

The glorious dawn and the starry night, both 
divine of spirit, exalt the noble and generous Indra, the 
soul, blest with the light and love of living, and, vesting 
it (the soul) with strength of will and vision, beauty and 
dignity, by the freedom and joy of the Anushtubh verses 
of the Veda, create and promote the bliss of heaven on 
earth for the dedicated soul. 


Man dedicated to yajna, carry on the yajna. 


38. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi) 


oat sire adit catrs errem cat demdendani 
get wddigaeistatrg wur adgqet ag 
eee drat ast sen 


Devi jostri vasudhiti devamindram vayodhasam 
devi devamavardhatam. Brhatya chandase- 
ndriyam $rotramindre vayo dadhadvasuvane 
vasudheyasya vitam yaja. 


Two brilliant motherly powers of nature, earth 
and heaven, both loving, generous and rich with the 
treasures of life, cherish, advance and exalt Indra, great 
and liberal lord sustainer of life, good health and well- 
being of society. And vesting him with the gift of hearing 
of the Word and the beauty and dignity of life by the 
grandeur and beauty of the Brihati verses of the Veda 
create and promote the beauty, prosperity and sublimity 
of heaven on earth for the yearning humanity. 


Dedicated man of yajna, carry on the yajna in 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


858 YAJURVEDA 
unison with the earth and the environment, relent not. 


39. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi) 


aisant gt yea wae cater gait got 
aay | uar sAn at augu 
ad engeren citer ast uas 


Devi urjahuti dughe sudughe payasendram 
vayodhasam devi devamavardhatam. Panktya 
chandasendriyain | $ukramindre vayo 
dadhadvasuvane vasudheyasya vitam yaja. 


Rich and generous oblations of refined and 
excellent holy materials into the fire like fertile motherly 
cows nourish and promote, with the rain of nectar-like 
water, Indra, brilliant and generous humanity blest with 
health and wealth. And vesting the soul with vitality 
and virility, beauty and dignity of life by the power and 
joy of Pankti verses, they create and promote the beauty 
and prosperity of heaven on earth for the dedicated soul. 


Man of yajna, offer the richest oblations without 
neglect. 


40. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi) 


dat det gant dafirz emend eat cadadars 
Ren wed ferfufn- at adgy eur 
Adea dtat ast soll 


Deva daivya hotara devamindram vayodhasam 
devau devamavardhatam. Tristubha chanda- 
sendriyam tvisimindre vayo dadhadvasuvane 
vasudheyasya vitam yaja. 


Two divine priests, hota and adhvaryu (like fire 
and wind, sun and moon, the Ashvinis, the teacher and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVIII 859 


preacher) both generous and brilliant, promote and exalt 
Indra, the living soul blest with the divine spirit, life 
and joy, and, vesting sensitivity of mind and intelligence, 
beauty and dignity, and the fire and brilliance of 
lightning into the soul by the freedom and power of 
Trishtubh verses of the Veda adorn the earth with the 
beauty and majesty of heaven for cherishing humanity. 


Hota, keep up the blazing fire of yajna without 
let up. 


41. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi) 
edhe seite eere ufafirduesgs i sate 


webs fne at adggqat aged orgy 
at seu 


Devistisrastisro devirvayodhasam patimindra- 
mavardhayan. Jagatya chandasendriyam 
Susamindre vayo dadhadvasuvane vasudheyasya 
vyantu yaja. 


Three divinities (Ida, Sarasvati, Mahi/Bharati), 
yes three divinities (Executive or Raja Sabha, 
Legislature or Dharma Sabha and Council of Education 
or Vidya Sabha) help, guide and exalt Indra, the ruler 
(Samrat), lord of dignity and regality, protector of the 
commonwealth of humanity, and, vesting him with 
power and prosperity, sensitivity of mind and 
intelligence, dignity of excellence and resounding songs 
of celebration by the felicity of the jagati verses of the 
Veda, create, promote and universalize the beauty and 
majesty of heaven on earth for the people. 


Man of yajna, maintain the excellence of yajna 
and never neglect the sacred fire of the commonwealth. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


860 YAJURVEDA 


42. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi) 


Wer Teal daft adie cat demens | 
faust wx abgaceufir at adaga eere 


Ag At RN 


Devo narasamso devamindram vayodhasam 
devo devamavardhayat. Viraja chandase- 
ndriyain rupamindre vayo dadhadvasuvane 
vasudheyasya vetu yaja. 


The resounding songs of praise and the brilliant 
tributes of the noble scholars exalt Indra, the great ruler, 
lord of power and prosperity and protector of the world, 
and, vesting him with the vitality of body and mind, 
beauty and grace of person, and the dignity and majesty 
of living by the sublimity of the Virat verses of the Veda, 
create, promote and universalize the kingdom of heaven 
on earth for the people. 


Noble citizen, sustain the yajna without rest or 
remiss. 


43. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi) 


we ermeufddefnz ated wem dadagad | 
fada wf a adr usgqent agter 
ad ast 1s 


Devo vanspatirdevamindram vayodhasam devo 
devamavardhayat. Dvipada chandasendriyam 
bhagamindre vayo dadhadvasuvane vasudhe- 
yasya vetu yaja. 


The brilliant lord of sunbeams and the forests 
proclaim and exalt the great Indra, the ruler and the 
enlightened people blest with the wealth of health and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVIII 861 


education, and, vesting the ruler and the people with 
sensitivity of mind and soul, beauty and prosperity of 
society and the art and excellence of happy living by 
the grace of the Dvipada verses of the Veda, they 
stimulate and advance the desire and dignity of the land 
from the earth to the heights of heaven for the dedicated 
humanity. 


Noble citizen of the yajnic commonwealth, 
sustain and promote the fire of yajna without rest or 
remiss. 


44. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi) 
aq afai dated acted Ge endende a 
PSM Shs usrsz-a aa adgqet empire 
ad ast ss 


Devamı barhirvaritinam devamindram vayo- 
dhasam devam devamavardhayat. Kakubha 
chandasendriyam yasa’indre vayo dadhad- 
vasuvane vasudheyasya vetu vaja. 


The divine splendour of fire in the vedi, the sacred 
grass around the vedi, and the celestial oceans of water 
in the spaces of the skies sustain and exalt Indra, 
generous, brilliant and enlightened lord of life, and 
protector of the earth, and, vesting him and the people 
with the greatness of mind and soul, health and wealth 
for a long age, and honour and renown of life in life by 
the dignity of the kakubh verses of the Veda, create, 
promote and exalt the glories of heaven upon the earth 
itself for the dedicated souls. 


Dedicated soul, keep the fire burning. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


862 YAJURVEDA 


45. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi) 


Aasaa: Riepas enini dat garaged 
antosan wx bus aa aat signi ag 
der Ad Ast Usa 


Devo’agnih svistakrddevamindram vayodhasam 
devo devamavardhayat. Aticchandasa chand- 
asendriyam ksatramindre vayo dadhadvasuvane 
vasudheyasya vetu yaja. 


Agni, lord omniscient of light and life, who turns 
all our endeavours to good, may advance and exalt Indra, 
brilliant and pious living soul and ruler of divine 
potential and possibility, and, vesting that human power 
with the strength of body, mind and soul, wealth of 
existence and a grand social order of humanity by virtue 
of Atichhanda verses of value beyond the words, may 
invoke, create and promote the bliss of heaven on earth 
for the dedicated souls. 

Dedicated soul, enlightened citizen, servant of 
Agni, keep the fire burning and blazing. Never relent, 
no rest, no remiss. 


46. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi) 


shane Jakaa asta: Wey uerit: wa 
ist aaa ater wrty | xgueemsaTer 
«eir arava] erarerer Orr | stad Here: 
ufduerandsiraetasrrerni-4 verme SRT wes 


Agnimadya hotaramavrnitayam yajamanah 
pacanpaktih pacan purodasam badhnann- 
indraya vayodhase chagam. Supastha’adya devo 
vanspatirabhavadindraya vayodhase chagena. 
Aghattam medastah pratipacatagrabhidavi- 
vrdhat purdasena. Tvamadya rse. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXVIII 863 


To-day this yajamana, cooking the holy food, 
cooking the pudding, and tending and binding the goat 
for the holy milk of health for Indra, lord of life and 
wealth, may choose to honour the divine Agni, brilliant 
scholar, as the high-priest of yajna. 


To-day may the divine Vanaspati, lord of sun- 
beams and the fascinating forest and meadow come 
close to grace the yajamana with the goat for milk and 
with catalytic holy materials of yajna in honour of Indra, 
lord of the commonwealth and the social order. 


O Rshi, man of vedic vision, may the yajamana 
invite and entertain you to-day with the holy food being 
cooked and seasoned with delicacies. 


And may the yajamana and the priest and the Rshi 
and you all partake of the holy food today and grow 
higher and ever higher. 


sta srerfasttseara: d 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


864 YAJURVEDA 


CHAPTER-XXIX 


1. (Agni Devata, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi) 


wfigrssros pat dra gash uei fda: | 
ant aga ak weaet darit afa fran 
gada ngu 


Samiddho' añjan krdaram matinam ghrtamagne 
madhumat pinvamanah. Vaji vahan vajinam 
jatavedo devanam vaksi priyama sadhastham. 


Agni, universal energy, well-lighted, proclaiming 
and materialising the ideas and imagination of the 
learned, consuming lots of precious fats and waters for 
fuel and, as carrier, bearing the rider at the speed of the 
wind, take us to the favourite assembly of the divines. 


2.  (AgniDevata, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi) 


ese uen Saat ws area eum i 
at var wur ufasi: werdre$veremu aster 
afs usu 


Ghrtenanjantsam patho devayanan prajanan 
vajyapyetu devan. Anu tva sapte pradisah 
sacantam svadhamasmai yajamanaya dhehi. 


Agni, fire energy, generated and fed on fuels and 
holy waters, lighting up and opening the paths traversed 
by generous and brilliant scholars, rises up at top speed 
to the divinities on high. 


Scholar of the science of fire and energy, fast 
advancing like a winged horse in pursuit of knowledge, 
rise up to the heights of space in all directions and bring 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIX 865 
wealth and power to this yajamana. 
3.  (AgniDevata, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi) 


$euswrfü ava erfsrarspeenfu Sever wur og 
arfi-erat dade: asirat: wid ate aed wmd- 
det: ut 


Idyascasi vandyasca vajinnasuscasi medhyasca 
sapte. Agnistva devairvasubhih sajosah pritam 
vahnim vahatu jatavedah. 


Vajin, scholar technologist of the speed of the 
winds, working restlessly like a restive courser, worthy 
of praise you are, a celebrity, quick in action and revered 
on the vedi of science-yajna. May Agni, lord omniscient 
of light and life, lover and admirer of His devotees, 
reveal to you the secrets of fire and energy cherished 
by you, alongwith the treasures of the powers of devas 
and Vasus such as earth, air and sky. 


4. (Agni Devata, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi) 


iof afé: qeit wruruire uer wear uferegrqi 
wefsispeaufsfr: mA: xri oar dfe 
Sag ul 


Stirnam barhih sustarima jusanoru prthu 
prathamanam prthivyam. Devebhiryuktamaditih 
sajosah syonam krnvana suvite dadhatu. 


We collect and develop in proper order the 
splendid fire-energy spread around, vast, great, 
expansive over the earth, and immanent in all the natural 
powers of the universe. May Aditi, infinite and eternal 
mother spirit of creativity, loving, loved and admired 
by her devotees, always doing good to her children, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


866 YAJURVEDA 


strew our paths of progress with the energy sought for 
by us. 


5. (Agni Devata, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi) 
Wars a: Gert araar fa usilfsr: srebaramssamt:i 
ee: "Hel: aa: Beta gn get: Curae 
WaT UG 


Eta’u vah subhaga visvarupa vi paksobhih 
Srayamana’udataih. Rsvah satıh kavasah 
sumbhamana dvaro devih suprayana bhavantu. 


(By the grace of the Mother Spirit of the world) 
may these doors of movement along the paths of 
progress be divinely blest, various and manifold, wide 
open with flexible leaves, lofty, high and sublime, strong 
and stable, resounding, bright and beautiful, auspicious, 
and pleasant for easy movement, for all of you. 


6. (Manushya Devata, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi) 


stan Raae wit qa aamiahrtaar | 
smat ereiufergs dicta dmifag ta- 
mf ngu 


Antara mitravaruna caranti mukham yajna- 
namabhi samvidane. Usasa vain suhiranye 
susilpe'rtasya yonaviha sadayami. 


The splendid dawn and the beauteous twilight, 
both rejoicing with the light of the day and resting in 
the oceanic womb of the starry night, and both heading 
towards the wide open doors of the yajna of humanity 
to join in the celebration, I consecrate you in the golden 
glorious divinely sculpted seat of nature's law in the 
vedi of eternity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIX 867 
7.  (Ashvinau Devate, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi) 


yam atesat gantt aer uet qatar fara 
aftra wea at fiar zrahr =f: ufasnd 
fest uen 


Prathama vam sarathina suvarna devau 
pasyantau bhuvanani vi$va. Apiprayam codana 
vam mimana hotara jyotih pradisa disanta. 

I love and admire you both, lights of the world 
(teachers like the Ashvins or like the dawn and the 
twilight), first and foremost to move, riding the same 
chariot, handsome of form, brilliant in bearing, watching 
the entire regions of the world, inspiring, measuring 
and ascertaining the facts of life, two high-priests of 
life and learning, and filling the quarters of space with 
light for both of you (learners). 


8.  (Sarasvati Devata, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi) 
RAA mid eme aax cea cue etsan 
ssrdgar at: wem ag at xedrudu era cu 


Adityairno bharati vastu yajriain sarasvati saha 
rudairna avit. Idopahuta vasubhih sajosa yajnam 
no deviramrtesu dhatta. 


May Bharati, voice of the knowledge of the 
world, alongwith the scholars and sages of the pre- 
eminent Aditya order, grace our yajna. May Sarasvati, 
voice of science and prayer, alongwith the scholars of 
the eminent Rudra order protect and promote our yajna. 
May Ida, voice of the spirit and meditation alongwith 
the sages of the noble Vasu order grace and extend our 
yajna. May the three divinities of the divine voice 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


868 YAJURVEDA 


invoked and worshipped elevate our yajna to the regions 
of the immortals. 


9.  (Tvashta Devata, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi) 
weal at ale VISTA acetal TAA STING: | 
wad fava yh warm ET aaae dia 
Slat: usd 


Tvasta viram devakamam jajana tvasturarva 
jayata’asurasvah. Tvastedam visvam bhuvanam 
jajana bahoh kartaramiha yaksi hotah. 


Tvashta, lord creator, creates and shapes the brave 
hero, lover and loved of the divines. The bright sun as 
the windy horse is born of Tvashta. Tvashta it is who 
creates the entire worlds of the universe. 


Man of yajna, honour and serve the great creator 
by yajna — through worship, charity and good 
fellowship. 


10. (Surya Devata, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi) 
svat uaa erum wdegssd gare SRAT: WAS- 
Ud | cpufdéseden tara gen xdfeaarhi 
AJA URN 


Asvo ghrtena tmanya samakta’upa devan’rtusah 
patha’etu. Vanaspatirdevalokam prajanann- 
agnina havya svaditani vaksat. 


May Agni, in unison with ghrta and waters, 
moving at the speed of sunbeams and by virtue of being 
what it is in itself, carry food to the divinities according 
to the seasons. May Vanaspati, the sun and the sacred 
Tree, conscious of the regions of the divinities and 
nobilities of humanity, by subservience to the eternal 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIX 869 


law, carry to them by agni delicious foods worthy of 
the sacred fire. 


11. (Agni Devata, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi) 
wadeerder areas: Get wrat fen aaa ag 


welp fet aim ae ate grata 
dar: NgZ 


Prajapatestapasa vavrdhanah sadyo jato 
dadhise yajnamagne. Svahakrtena havisa 
puroga yahi sadhya haviradantu devah. 


Agni/brilliant and sagely scholar, rising and fast 
advancing by the austere discipline of Prajapati, lord of 
creation and the people, carry on the yajna by offers of 
refined and sanctified foods to the fire. 


Go on, and may the noblest of humanity, leaders 
and pioneers, and the divinities of the higher regions of 
the world partake of the libations offered by you into 
the fire. 


12. (Yajamana Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi) 
Ward: Wa adiasa at atta | 
vane uam zfrured agsu ufi wid As- 
AAT NQR 


Yadakrandah prathamam jayamana 'udyant- 
samudraduta va purisat. Syenasya paksa 
harinasya bahu'upastutyam mahi jatam te’ 
arvan. 
Man of knowledge of the speed of sun-beams, 
whether you emerge from the depths of meditation or 


from the consciousness of the Divine like energy of the 
wind, first-born of nature, then whatever you speak or 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


870 YAJURVEDA 


do becomes great and worthy of celebration like flights 
of the hawk or bounds of the deer. 


13. (Agni Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi) 


at ad Rasiah werdrs 
Trereissler Wrarhpuneniasd emer fide uad 


Yamena dattam trita’enamayunagindra’enam 
prathamo adhyatisthat. Gandharvo'asya 
rasanamagrbhnat surada$vam vasavo niratasta. 


The Vasus, abodes of life and life energy, receive 
the heat of sunbeams from the sun. Indra, universal 
electric energy, first controls this heat energy given by 
yama (vayu, wind) from three sources, i.e., earth, water 
and sky. Gandharva, the sun, which holds and supports 
the earth holds the reins of the flow. And the vasus, 
scholars of the first order of natural knowledge, 
receiving it from the sun, refine and develop it further 
for use in life. 


14. (Agni Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi) 
sift anissrattensstdaft fret eb act à 
aif mA ana fedeassmerd Aot fafa 
wee esi 


Asi yamo’asyddityo’arvannasi trito guhyena 
vratena. Asi somena samaya viprkta 'ahuste trini 
divi bandhanani. 


By the intrinsic law of your own existence, you 
are Yama, controller and judge; you are Aditya, sun and 
source of light; you are Arvan, moving fast as light. 
You arise from three because of three, earth, water and 
sky. You are one with, undivided from, Soma, peace, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIX 871 


prosperity and joy. And they say your bonds are three 
in heaven. 


(You are Agni, the sun, therefore you have to be 
brilliant because you cannot be the sun without the light. 
You are at peace in security as one member of the galaxy 
family of suns and stars. And you are happy with the 
prosperity of your own solar family. You have to observe 
this triple bond.) 


15. (Agni Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi) 
Aft assrefeta aes Aa aad: dus | 
de À atupe<adaat asang: Ura AP ean 


Trini ta’ahurdivi bandhanani trinyapsu 
trinyantah samudre. Uteva me varunasch- 
antsyarvanyatra ta’ahuh paramam janitram. 


Arvan, lord of the dynamics of existence, three 
are your bonds in heaven, they say, three in the waters 
of space and three in the womb of the sea. Wherever, 
they say, your ultimate origin be, you declare your 
presence as Varuna, lord of our choice and lord of 
judgement and approval. 


16. (Agni Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi) 
gur d erfsmrenursiariur meaa | 
aat à ua Ygrassfusauae curssffurradfur 
THOT: NLN 
Ima te vajinnavamarjananima Saphanai sani- 
turnidhana. Atra te bhadra ra$ana'apasya- 
mrtasya ya abhiraksanti gopah. 


Warlike hero, lord of spirit and speed, I see these 
tools of the cleansing and freshening of your war-horses. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


872 YAJURVEDA 


I see the treasures of the beneficiaries of their hoofs. I 
see the auspicious reins of your power and force which 
are all-round defenders of truth and law and which 
protect the law-abiding. 


17. (Agni Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi) 
smear d mdunrésmanrer feat Uda uds I 
fsritssrassi ufzrfil: vprfstarrfsrsidurd Taft ngon 


Atmanàüm te manasdradajandmavo diva 
patayantam patangam. Siro’apasyam pathibhih 
sugebhirarenubhirjehamanam patatri. 


Agni, fire energy, with my own mind and 
knowledge, I know your soul in body form so close 
being flown from down below through space to the sun. 
I see your head soaring up, voraciously sucking the air 
and struggling to ascend by clear and dustless paths of 
the sky. 


18. (Agni Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi) 


aat à wudamduss fsribururfssm ua i: | 
Gat aA misna wea mesadte- 
THT: uz 


Atra te rupamuttamamapasyam jigisamanamisa’ 
a pade goh. Yada te marto'anu bhogamanadadid 
grasistha’osadhirajigah. 


Agni, victorious power, here I see your most 
splendid form eager to win the wealth of food and energy 
of the earth. Only when your people have received their 
portion of the food, only then you, most voracious 
though, take your share of the nourishing foods and 
herbs. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIX 873 


19. (Manushya Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi) 


ard var veitsarT Ta sataday masg wt: Reta 
a ated aeh gar dfar dif a een 


Anu tva ratho’anu maryo'arvannanu gavo' nu 
bhagah kaninam. Anu vratasastava sakhya- 
miyuranu deva mamire viryam te. 


Arvan, tempestuous victorious hero, the chariot 
follows you. The humans and cows follow you. The 
power and passion of youth follows you. Multitudes of 
people love to be friends and followers with you. Even 
the divinities have watched, measured and admired your 
courage and valour. 


20. (Agni Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi) 


fatvaggisatsera urar witsrarsardisg«tsamtqi 
aasseea — wfeehnraedssrd-d WASA- 
fats mon 


Hiranyasrngo’yo’asya pada manojava’avara’ 
indra’ asi. Deva’idasya haviradyamayan yo’ 
arvantam prathamo 'adhyatisthat. 


(Who can ride and control the tempestuous horse 
that is agni, fire power of nature and humanity?) 


Indra, master ruler, youthful and new. Golden is 
his crown. Of golden steel are his legs moving at the 
speed of mind. New and youthful, he is supreme. The 
noblest of humanity share power with him and partake 
of his holy food. First among all, he alone can ride and 
control the speed and power of agni. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


874 YAJURVEDA 


21. (Manushyah Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi) 
gaara: fufelengsauma: wespumar faemirssred:i 
wurde AÀ daa eraríaluf&cermenmmyed: uu 


Irmantasah silikamadhyamasah sai $uranaso 
divyaso’atyah. Hainsa'iva $reni$o yatante 
yadaksisurdivyamajmamasvah. 


Warriors of horse, with steeds which are broad- 
chested, full-haunched and sensitively trained, slim in 
the middle, fiery, superb, of electric speed, when they 
are ranked like swans in battle array and fight, then they 
penetrate the enemy defences and clear the paths to 
wonder victories. 


22. (Vayavah Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi) 
we vns wafawadad fad asza spera à 
qa Fetter ferfedar qeanvay referam referti 3 t 
Tava $ariram patayisnvarvantava cittam 
vata'iva dhrajiman. Tava $rngani visthita 
purutraranyesu jarbhurana caranti. 
Arvan, tempestuous hero, your body loves to soar 
like a bird's, your mind moves at the speed of the wind, 


the flames of your glory are various and blazing, and 
they range around steadily across distant lands. 


23. (Manushyah Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi) 
suunmesds3 erret segre wur diu: sns: 
att vibe rfr usar ara TAT: usa 


Upa pragacchasanam vajyarva devadrica 
manasa didhyanah. Ajah puro niyate 
nabhirasyanu pascat kavayo yanti rebhah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIX 875 


The tempestuous horse, fast as the wind, worthy 
of the gods, fiery within and rushing to the heat of battle 
at the speed of mind, instant like a beam of the sun, is 
shot forth by the rider on the back, and then poets and 
singers follow with songs of praise. 


24. (Manushya Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi) 
So Unio aean saret frat urat = ad 


am manea fe mensan qÀ 
art uu 


Upa pragatparamam yatsadhasthamarvan' 
accha pitaram mataram ca. Adya devanjusta- 
tamo hi gamya 'athasaste dasuse varyani. 

The man of knowledge, will and action who goes 
to the highest assembly, who does homage to father, 
mother and brilliant holy people, and offers liberal gifts 
of service and reverence to generous teachers and 
philanthropists, is worthy of highest love and 
admiration. 

O seeker of knowledge and virtue, such a person 
is worthy of company. Go straight and meet him. 


25. (Vidvan Devata, Jamadagni Rshi) 


wfikgrssrer wet ater dat careisifa wade: | 
at a ae faanefvateard aa: pnt 
wer uu 


Samiddho'adya manuso durone devo devan 
yajasi jatavedah. A ca vaha mitramahascikitvan 
tvam dutah kavirasi pracetah. 


You are the man, jataveda, light of the day as Agni, 
brilliant inspired and generous, in company with the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


876 YAJURVEDA 


noblest at yajna in the home. Call upon the divinities, 
best of friends, bring them to the yajna. Wide awake 
you are, harbinger of light and good fortune, poet 
creator, wise and luminous. 


26. (Vidvan Devata, Jamadagni Rshi) 


wimWuruersmde urmeeei Garda ufui 
Tah efrférea aaea eb PA ARs tl 


Tanunapatpatha’rtasya yanan madhva samanyj- 
antsvadaya sujihva. Manmani dhibhiruta 
yajnamrndhan devatra ca krnuhyadhvaram nah. 


Sagely scholar, self-preserver, protector of the 
good things of life, sweet of tongue and speech, 
sprinkling the paths of truth and modes of progress with 
honey, enjoy the march to freedom and prosperity. And, 
surrounded by the noblest saints and scholars, leading 
our plans and prayers to resounding success, render our 
yajna of life free from hate and violence with your 
guidance. 


27. (Vidvan Devata, Jamadagni Rshi) 


mere aaa asareret ast: 1 a 
Gerda: per ferent: xem assualt 
SST 
Narasainsasya mahimanamesamupa stosama 
yajatasya yajnath. Ye sukratavah $ucayo 
dhiyandhah svadanti deva’ubhayani havya. 
We celebrate with songs of praise and yajnas the 
greatness of the man of universal honour and admiration 


and the greatness of these brilliant scholars of 
exceptional intelligence and noble action, pure at heart, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIX 877 


who taste the sweets of success in matters both material 
and spiritual (on way to freedom and prosperity by the 
paths of Truth and eternal Law). 


28. (Agni Devata, Jamadagni Rshi) 


savigasien wavaatera ad: wei: 1 
aantate ag erar asu-rrafrferar ersita we N 


Ajuhvana'idyo vandyascá yahyagne vasubhih 
sajosah. Tvam devanamasi yahva hota sa’ 
enanyaksisito yajryan. 


Agni, brilliant power of light and life, challenging 
and inviting, adorable, admirable, delighted to be with 
the generous lovers of life, you are the most fluent and 
dynamic of divinities, giving and sacrificing. Excellent 
power of yajna, cherished and implored, come and join 
these sacrificers at the yajna. 


29. (Antariksha Devata, Jamadagni Rshi) 


wert afé: uart uf?rem acer dvudssnis- 
agm | ed wad faat atta gAs 
nm us 


Pracinam barhih pradisa prthivya vastorasya 
vrjyate'agre'ahnam. Vyu prathate vitaram 
vartyo devebhyo’aditaye syonam. 


Just as sacred grass, old and ancient, is gathered 
at dawn, in the early morning, before the rise of the 
day, from the sacred quarters of the earth, grows further, 
softer and more excellent for the yajnics and the earth, 
so realized awareness of Brahma, Eternal Spirit, vast as 
space, is distilled from the inspiring regions of silent 
nature in the sacred hours of dawn before the rising of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


878 YAJURVEDA 


the day and, by the mystique of the Veda grows further, 
higher and more blissful for the pious souls for their 
rise towards Divinity and Infinity. 


30. (Striyah Devata, Jamadagni Rshi) 
aade fasta ufdszi a sta: SAT: 
adight sredifeserfirer dew wad GUT: NoN 


Vyacasvatirurviya vi $rayantam patibhyo na 
janayah $umbhamanah. Devirdvaro brhatir- 
visvaminva devebhyo bhavata suprayanah. 


Just as noble, beautiful, generous women provide 
ample unlimited joy and solace to the husbands, so may 
the divine doors of yajna, wide open, grand, all- 
embracing, provide free access and universal movement 
to the dedicated divines of yajna. 


31. (Striyah Devata, Jamadagni Rshi) 
aT yade srerpssuleBssurHDTeed cedi fT 
art | fet ardut smdt deatsarfer force first 
aat nagu 


A susvayanti yajate 'upaáke'usasanaktà sadatàm 
ni yonau. Divye yosane brhati surukme’adhi 
Sriyam Sukrapisam dadhane. 

The day and the night, like two heavenly women, 
wearing light and dark, inspiring and comforting, 
adorable, great and sublime, wielding and commanding 
the wealth of the world, may, we pray, come in unison 
and grace the vedi, seat of yajna. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIX 879 
32. (Vidvan Shilpis Devata, Jamadagni Rshi) 


den drat wearer gerer fier eni AA ate 
wae feast are weit A: ufavn 
fasrad seu 


Daivya hotara prathama suvaca mimana yajnam 
manuso yajadhyai. Pracodayanta vidathesu karu 
pracinam jyotih pradisa disanta. 

Two divine high-priests of the first order, scholars 
of the language (of science and architecture), masters 
of measurement and design, and expert builders, 
pointing to the directions of the ancient and eternal light 
(of the Veda) inspire people to join in scientific yajnas 
of development and construction. 


33. (Vag Devata, Jamadagni Rshi) 


eT at aa anit qaakast ere eae viet a 
frat setsiféta cp ewiedi cade: cau said 


A no yajnam bharati tuyametvida manusvadiha 
cetayanti. Tisro devirbarhiredam syonain 
sarasvati svapasah sadantu. 


May Bharati (bearing the knowledge of science) 
come soon to advance our yajna of development. May 
Ida, the Vedic vision, shine, enlightening us like a 
human teacher. May Sarasvati, bearing the knowledge 
of the Shastras, come and inspire us. 


May three supernal divinities of the Word of the 
Veda, light and inspiration of the Shastras, and 
knowledge of science and technology, Ida, Sarasvati, 
and Bharati, mothers of noble yajnic acts, come and 
grace this auspicious seat of yajna. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


880 YAJURVEDA 


34. (Vidvan Shilpi Devata, Jamadagni Rshi) 
"sgH matge wit Enfre 
fasat | quer elated asitarm xe aeh 
ofa fera "avi 
Ya'ime dyavaprthivi janitri rupairapimsad- 
bhuvanani vi$va. Tamadya hotarisito yajtyan 
devam tvastaramiha yaksi vidvan. 


High-priest of shilpa (science and technology), 
scholar, inspired and dedicated, offer yajna here and now 
in honour of that divine artist, Tvashta, creator of the 
universe, who made all these worlds of existence, carved 
out the generative heaven and earth, and adorned them 
with all the beautiful forms of life and nature. 


35. (Agni Devata, Jamadagni Rshi) 


Soe at aA derat uretsasqer ates fa 
amf: vrfüar dsa: wd get welt 
Tet Uae 


Upavasrja tmanya samanjan devanam patha’ 
rtutha havimsi. Vanaspatih $amita devo’agnih 
svadantu havyam madhuna ghrtena. 


Scholar, sprinkling and seasoning the holy 
materials of yajna, food for the divinities, with honey 
and ghrta, offer the libations yourself with your heart 
and soul so that Vanaspati, lord of light and vegetation, 
the sun, the generous cloud, giver of the showers of 
peace and prosperity, and Agni, the holy fire, may relish 
their food seasoned with delicacies. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIX 881 


36. (Agni Devata, Jamadagni Rshi) 


"Her irr aaa aAAPAarMtasad GEM: | 3T 
ad: uasa arf taretcefatard dem: WBE U 


Sadyo jato vyamimita yajnamagnirdeva- 
namabhavat purogah. Asya hotuh pradisyrtasya 
vaci svahakrtam haviradantu devah. 

Agni, lord of light and life, brilliant scholar, 
instantly responsive, ever young, going ahead of the 
divines, enacts and accomplishes the yajna of the 
business of life within the word and spirit of the laws of 
truth. May all the divinities of nature and humanity taste 
the sweets of the holy offerings of this sacrificer. 


37. (Vidvan Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 
od puaka A nas | 
PHILS: WRI 


Ketum krnvannaketave peso marya’apeSase. 
Samusadbhirajayathah. 

Agni, lord of light and life, man of knowledge, 
creating light for the man in the dark, providing plenty 
for the man in adversity, as mortals do, you arise with 
the light of the dawns and the fires of the generous 
yajamanas. 


38. (Vidvan Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 
Siea vata ude wei aft atga od 
samtaga dal Wa wax a wa cendum ufear 
fdod ncn 


Jimutasyeva bhavati pratikam yadvarmi yati 
samadamupasthe. Anaviddhaya tanva jaya tvam 
sa tva varmano mahima pipartu. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


882 YAJURVEDA 


A very image of the cloud he seems to be when 
the hero in armour goes forward to join the ardent 
warriors in the raging battle. Come victorious, warrior, 
with your body unscathed. May the mighty grandeur of 
the armour protect and promote you. 


39. (Viras Warriors Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 
ada m edass sia ada dior uus 
was | er: ska chuirfa erem uet: ufavil 
WaT sen 


Dhanvana ga dhanvana "jim jayema dhanvana 
tivrah samado jayema. Dhanuh $atrora- 
pakamam krnoti dhanvana sarvah pradiso 
jayema. 


Let us win the earths by the bow, win the battle 
by the bow, win the violent wars by the bow. The bow 
it is that shatters the enemy's ambition for evil. Let us 
win in all directions by the bow. 


40. (Viras, Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi) 
aariat cuf fuere wate utara 
am | ada fire aaa ease gax unu 
unde nxon 


Vaksyantivedaganiganti karnam priyam 

sakhayam parisasvajana. Yoseva Sinkte vitatadhi 
dhanavafijya iyain samane parayanti. 

This string stretched on the bow is drawn close 

to the ear and, like a young woman embracing her dear 


husband and whispering love into his ear, twangs, 
carrying the warrior across the battle to victory. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


41. 


CHAPTER-XXIX 883 


(Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 

assent waa curet aad ua fiag | 
ama ya ferseares«fearisancit sgn fauprts— 
arfiat4 wes u 


Te’ acaranti samaneva yosa mateva putram 
bibhrtamupasthe. Apa $atrun vidhyatam 
samvidane 'artni' ime visphurantt'amitran. 


Behaving as a beloved wife one at heart with her 


husband, the two ends of the bow joined together by 
the string may hold the arrow like a mother holding her 
baby in her arms, and, shaking the enemies with fear, 
may pierce them with the arrow and scatter and drive 
them away with the twang. 


42. 


(Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 


admi fuer ager watrenzer quitter erd-rermed i 
gufu: ug: yeya cred: ges Fret wate 
ws: sen 

Bahvinam pita bahurasya putra$ci$ca krnoti 
samanavagatya. Isudhih sankah prtanas$ca 
sarvah prsthe ninaddho jayati prasutah. 


Father protector of many forces, mighty are his 


sons. His arrow clangs when he engages the enemy. 
Hero of the bow and arrow and the quiver inspired and 
shooting forth, he takes on the once organized but now 
scattered forces of the enemy and comes out victorious. 


43. 


(Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 
va feredsrerfer ase: att at erp enr ETP: | 


sadist aem ward ad: asoa 
TH «s t 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


884 YAJURVEDA 


Rathe tisthan nayati vajinah puro yatra-yatra 
kamayate susarathih. Abhisunam mahimanam 
panayata manah pa$cadanu yacchanti 
rasmayah. 


An able and expert driver sitting on the controls 
in the chariot drives the horses wherever he wants to. 
Know and admire the great value of the reins: the reins 
(controlled by the driver on the wheel), those which 
control the movement and direction of the mind from 
behind. 


44. (Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 


dart rui quad qduroisyar 3f: e 
amda: aama: udarfirat« fora vris ns- 
mheaa: xII 


Tivran ghosan krnvate vrsapanayo' '$va rathe- 
bhih saha vajayantah. Avakramantah 
prapadairamitran ksinanti SatruA' ranapavya- 
yantah. 
Warriors Heroes of war manned with strong- 
hoofed horses flying by the chariots raise frightful cries 
of war while the horses, unremitting in their force, 


trampling upon the enemy with their hoofs, destroy his 
army. 


45. (Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 


Taare gata «mar ward Pier end! à 
«T vend yr Han favatet Gas GATT: Is li 


Rathavahanain havirasya nama yatrayudham 
nihitamasya varma. Tatra rathamupa $agmarn 
sadema visvaha vaya sumanasyamanah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIX 885 


The warrior is ‘Rathavahana’, hero of the chariot, 
and the chariot is whereon the armour, arms and 
ammunition of this hero are safely kept. And that mighty 
protective chariot, we, people of positive and faithful 
mind, love, and wish to ride every day, all time. 


46. (Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 


verau Ua: fintar: Ffa: reitera efie: | 
faa thisstacnsantr: UARRA omar: nes N 


Svadusamsadah pitaro vayodhah krcchresritah 
Saktivanto gabhirah. Citrasena’isubala’ 
amrdhrah satovira'uravo vratasahah. 


Let us honour senior veterans of war, of pleasant 
company, mature and widely experienced, facing and 
challenging dangers, strong and brave, serious and wise, 
commanding wonderful armies, trained in powerful 
weapons, invincible of body, equally valiant, broad- 
chested and muscular, and conquering hosts of armies. 


47. (Dhanurveda teachers Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 
mehe: fudz: areata: fore at emetufzretsstie uti 


gat d: urd gR vam rfendissTHgieu 
SEMA nson 


Brahmanasah pitarah somyasah $ive no 
dyavaprthivi'anehasa. Pusa nah patu 
duritadrtavrdho raksa makirno’aghasamsa’ 
1$ata. 
May the Brahmanas, scholars of Veda and divine 
vision, parental seniors, lovers of peace, joy and yajna- 


soma, defenders and promoters of truth and Law, guide 
and protect us. May Heaven and earth, auspicious, pure 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


886 YAJURVEDA 


and sinless, be kind to bless us. May Pusha, lord giver 
of health and growth, protect us from sin and promote 
us. May no sinner and supporter of evil rule over us. 


48. (Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 


gat det yssen at WHY: Gao vata 
vdm | dat ag: Wa fa a gate aaraa: 
yr ASL Use 


Suparnam vaste mrgo'asya danto gobhih 
sannaddha patati prasuta. Yatra narah sam ca 
vi ca dravanti tatrasmabhyamisavah Sarma 
yamsan. 


The army of the brave wears the battle array of a 
falcon. Its tooth, i.e., attack, strikes as a mriga, tiger, 
falls upon the game. Equipped with shields and mailed 
in armour, passionate for the kill, it falls upon the enemy. 
The warriors there fall upon the enemy in united strength 
as well as attack in different directions. May the arrows 
of this army bring us peace and well-being. 


49. (Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 


asia Raefa Atsvat wad er: 
Asafa Arsteta: wrt wresq seit 


Rjite parivrndhi no'$ma bhavatu nastanuh. 
Somo 'adhi bravitu no’ditih Sarma yacchatu. 


May the spirit of health, peace and progress ward 
off ills from us all round. May our body be strong as 
granite. May soma, spirit of life, inspire us from above. 
May the earth as well as the sky bring us peace and 
happiness. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


50. 


CHAPTER-XXIX 887 
(Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 


an deka ardet serat ussdfsrernt à 
asaka welhautssel-uned wu guo 


A janghanti sanvesam jaghanan'upajighnate. 
AS$vajani pracetaso '$vantsamatsu codaya. 


The warriors spur the horses on the sides and 


strike them with the goad on the shanks. Expert teacher, 
the horses are intelligent and responsive, train them in 
quick curves and movements of battle. 


51. 


(Mahavira Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 

afta wirft: waite ae urat fà ditaretars: | 
xerit farai cari fergra gard atest Raa 
fagat: 1&2 u 

Ahiriva bhogaih paryeti bahum jyaya hetim 


paribadhamanah. Hastaghno vi$va vayunani 
vidvan puman pumainsam pari patu visvatah. 


Like the hand-guard warding off the strikes of 


the bow-string with its coils and protecting the hand of 
the archer, the expert commander of the army and the 
man of laws and ways of the world, by the blows of his 
arms and himself facing the challenges, protects the 
people from all round and, like the cloud, showers all 
the peace and comfort on them. 


52. 


(Suvira Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 

ated digas fe samea wedtur: wei: | 
mh: adsa Aedan d wad 
Beats uu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


888 YAJURVEDA 


Vanaspate vidvango hi bhuya'asmatsakha 
prataranah suvirah. Gobhih sannaddho’asi 
vidayasvasthata te jayatu jetvani. 


Hero and protector of the land and forests, 
brilliant as the sun, our friend and heroic leader crossing 
over crises and challenges, be strong of body and power. 
Committed you are to the earth and traditions of 
humanity. Grow stronger and expand in power. And 
may your commander win all the battles for you. 


53. (Vira Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 

fea: diem: qissaga amanha: matas 
we: a ufr Anaa ae 
TA ST gU 

Divah prthivyah paryoja'udbhrtam vanaspati- 
bhyah paryabhrtain sahah. Apamojmanam pari 
gobhiravrtamindrasya vajram havisa ratham 
yaja. 

Man of knowledge and power, receive, cultivate 
and socially promote the light and energy emanating 
from the sun and earth. Receive, cultivate and promote 
the strength, courage and endurance emanated from the 
trees. Cultivate and promote the energy of the waters. 
Refine and strengthen the chariot invincible as thunder 


and blazing with the rays of the sun, and develop it 
further by sacrifice and investment. 


54. (Vira Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 
zw enm wearer fracas vit enGure f: 
aa al gaat wernt ed wa ufd xeu 


[ura gxi 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIX 889 


Indrasya vajro marutamanikam mitrasya garbho 
varunasya nabhih. Semam no havyadatim jusano 
deva ratha prati havya grbhaya. 

Brilliant leader and warrior, devoted to the 
thunderbolt of Indra, army of the winds, light of the 
sun and depth of the sky and the ocean as ideals, in love 
with the power of lightning, inner thoughts of friends, 
and conscience of the best man, and enjoying our love 
and trust, may now receive our gifts and homage for 
further growth and development. 


55. (Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 


sdyerer uferetqa at dear d vrai faa srta 
a oar cated added drsardérer srd- uaa I 


Upa svasaya prthivimuta dyam purutra te 
manutam visthitam jagat. Sa dundubhe 
sajurindrena devairduraddaviyo'apa sedha 
Satrun. 

Heroic leader, loud and bold, let the war-drum 
of action, your clarion-call to the nation, resound over 
earth and sky. Let the wide world, moving and non- 
moving, know you and hear the call. And, in unison 
with the power and grandeur of the nation and the best 
of nobility, let the call drive off the enemies farthest 
away. 


56. (Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 
arkaa serre asena Hef aia ame- 


man atta wp gasgas feda 
erede ua 


A krandaya balamojo na’adhda nistanihi durita 
badhamanah. Apa protha dundubhe ducchuna’ 
ita’indrasya mustirasi vidayasva. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


890 YAJURVEDA 


Thunderous hero, rally the forces with the beat 
of the war drum. Loud and bold, instil and inspire us 
with passion for action. Resisting and suppressing evil, 
let the call resound as thunder. Fight and throw off the 
dogged enemies far from here. You are the measure and 
concentration of the power and glory of Indra, lord of 
humanity. Grow, expand and glorify the human nation. 


57. (Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 


amet werd: enquedsaferditadtfa 1 agd- 
uniseta at -ursenrehfüm RA wmm uud 
Amiuraja pratyavarttayemah ketumaddundu- 


bhirvavaditi. SamaSvaparnascaranti no 
naro 'smakamindra rathino jayantu. 


Indra, mighty hero, rout those enemy forces to 
annihilation. Bring our armies back home with flying 
colours. The drum, with the flag flying, resounds. 
United, our men on the wings of horses fight on. May 
our heroes of the chariot be ever victorious. 


58. (Vidvans Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 

ama: panita: reet Hat ay: rer: aro: 
vara: Riya alder: fyredt Aralas Ase 
"led: aedis ara: defedisanta: arfaat ater: 
epeursuchfsrfeurered: UGS 

Agneyah krsnagrivah sárasvati mesi babhruh 
saumyah pausnah syamah sitiprstho barhas- 
patyah silpo vaisvadeva’aindro’runo marutah 
kalmasa’aindragnah saimhito’dhoramah savitro 
varunah krsna’ekasitipat petvah. 


The animal with black neck is holy, it has the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIX 891 


qualities of fire immanent in nature, so it is the favourite 
love of Agni. So the sheep is the favourite love of 
Sarasvati. The brown one is favourite of Soma. The dark 
one is favourite of Pusha. The one with white back is 
favourite of Brihaspati. The one of varied colour is 
favourite of Vishvedevas. The red one is favourite of 
Indra. The black and white is favourite of Maruts. The 
strong-bodied is favourite of Indra and Agni. The one 
which is white below is favourite of Savita. And the 
black one with one leg white and swift of speed is 
favourite of Varuna. (Know this, and take advantage of 
nature.) 


59. (Agni & Others Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 


amàs iraa Xrfdarfssrrgaraeindr arfaat area 
Tahi avadet füsrgl quir ated: cards: 
gausa: Utada Hur ebeur Uc: usd 


Agnaye 'nikavate rohitanjiranadvanadhoramau 
savitrau pausnau rajatanabhi vai$vadevau 
pisangau tuparau marutah kalmasa'agneyah 
krsno’jah sarasvati mest varunah petvah. 


The bull with a red mark on the forehead is for 
Agni, front rank of the army. Two animals with white 
below are for Savita. Two animals with silver navel are 
for the Pushas. Two animals of yellow colour and 
without horns are for Vishvedevas. The multicoloured 
is for Maruts. The black goat is for Agni. The sheep is 
for Sarasvati. And the fast one is for Varuna. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


892 YAJURVEDA 


60. (Agni & Others Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 


agent — Bm sae 3 We: dfaas- 
afta maay Yen grdsTeRUTe:: UTSI- 
Were fereutucst erexit Semen ETAT 
HUH SAMA STET RATA: GON 


Agnaye gayatraya trivrte rathantarayastakapala' 
indraya traistubhaya pancadasaya barhatay- 
aikada$akapalo vi$vebhyo devebhyo jagate- 
bhyah saptadasebhyo vairupebhyo dvadasaka- 
palo mitravarunabhyamanustubhabhyame- 
kaviin$abhyam vairajabhyam payasya brhas- 
pataye panktaya trinavaya $akvaraya caruh 
savitra 'ausnihaya trayastriin$aya raivataya 
dvada$akapalah prajapatyascaruradityai 
visnupatnyai caruragnaye vai$vanaraya 
dvadasakapalo numatya' astakapalah. 


For Agni, sung in Gayatri metre and worshipped 
in three-part Stoma Rathantara Sama, eight-bowl 
oblations. 

For Indra, sung in Trishtubh metre and 
worshipped in fifteen part Stoma Brihat Sama, eleven- 
jar oblations. 

For Vishvedevas, sung in jagati metre and 
worshipped in seventeen-part Stoma Vairupa Sama, 
twelve-bowl oblations. 

For Mitra and Varuna, sung in Anushtubh metre 
and worshipped in twenty-one part Stoma Vairaja Sama, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXIX 893 


milky oblations. 

For Brihaspati, sung in Pankti verses and 
worshipped in twenty-seven part Stoma Shakvara Sama, 
charu oblations of rice, barley and pulses boiled in milk 
and butter. 

For Savita, sung in Ushnik metre and worshipped 
in thirty-three part Stoma Raivata Sama, twelve-bowl 
oblations. 

For Prajapati, caru oblations. 

For Aditi, sustained by Vishnu, caru oblations. 

For Vaishvanara Agni, twelve-bowl oblations. 

For Anumati, eight-bowl oblations. 


Note: Forpractical application, Swami Dayananda 
interprets the Devatas as:- 


Agni: brilliant scholar of science with knowledge 
of matter, energy and mind, specialist in modes of travel 
over land, sea and sky. 

Indra: man of power and glory who is dedicated 
to the power and glory of humanity. 

Vishvedevas: generous brilliant people. 

Mitra-Varuna: pranic energies. 

Brihaspati: guardian of the great and seniors. 

Shakvara: man of potential and action. 

Raivata: relating to wealth. 

Savita: creator, producer, sustainer. 

Prajapatya: relating to the guardian of creation. 

Aditi: earth and sky. 

Vishnu: of extensive power and potential. 

Vaishvanara Agni: universal vitality. 

Anumati: social discussion, agreement, approval. 


JARAS: N 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


894 YAJURVEDA 


CHAPTER-XXX 


1.  (Savita Devata, Narayana Rshi) 


ad ufeag:cu da aa uode aad sie oq ferent 
"herd: aq: cad cto cur aafaa =: 
Waq e 


Deva savitah pra suva yajnam pra suva yajna- 
patim bhagaya. Divyo gandharvah ketapuh 
ketam nah punatu vacaspatirvacam nah svadatu. 


May Savita, generous lord creator of life, expand 
our yajna of light and action. May He inspire and bless 
the master of yajna for the achievement of wealth and 
honour. Glorious is Savita, sustainer of the earth and 
purifier and sanctifier of knowledge. May the lord 
sanctify our knowledge. Lord of Speech Divine, may 
He sweeten, sanctify and bless our tongue and speech. 


2.  (Savita Devata, Narayana Rshi) 


wedfergeius want xeu size i 
feet at 4: were usa 


Tat saviturvarenyam bhargo devasya dhimahi. 
Dhiyo yo nah pracodayat. 


That blazing splendour of lord Savita, self- 
refulgent giver of light, which is the sole light worthy 
of choice, we perceive, meditate upon and absorb in 
the soul. May He inspire, enlighten and bless our vision 
and intelligence to follow the path of light and rectitude. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXX 895 


3. (Savita Devata, Narayana Rshi) 


fasaa èa cufaaifenir un wma 
dag masada uad 


Visvani deva savitarduritani para suva. 
Yadbhadram tanna a suva. 


Savita, glorious lord of inspiration, light and life, 
remove all the evil of the world from us, and bless us 
with all that is good. 


4.  (Savita Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 
fana werde adane crete: | 
aaam qaen inei 


Vibhaktaram havamahe vasościtrasya radhasah. 
Savitaram nrcaksasam. 


We invoke Savita and sing in praise of the 
ultimate judge and dispenser of the fruits of Karma and 
giver of the wondrous joys of life, who makes everything 
possible, who creates all and watches over all (what 
they are and what they do). 


5.  (Parameshvara Devata, Narayana Rshi) 

ada accht aren Gest urari ecitsmisnarats- 
svar arate dswcrTHÍdseseTer ARTEL GU 
Brahmane brahmanam ksatraya rajanyam 
marudbhyo vaisyam tapase $udram tamase 
taskaram narakaya virahanam papmane 
klibamakrayaya’ ayogum kamaya punscalum 
atikrustaya magadham. 


Give us, we pray, the Brahmanas for education 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


896 YAJURVEDA 


and research, culture and human values; the Kshatriyas 
for governance, defence and administration; the 
Vaishyas for economic development, and the Shudras 
for assistance and labour in the ancillary services. 


Remove, we pray, the thief roaming in the dark, 
the murderer bent on lawlessness, the coward disposed 
to sin, the armed terrorist bent on destruction, the harlot 
out for pleasure of flesh, and the bastard fond of scandal. 


Note: In mantras 5-22 in which various aspects 
of organised life are listed, there is repetition of *asuva' 
and ‘parasuva’ from mantra 3, which means: ‘Give us, 
we pray, what is good’, and, ‘Remove, we pray, what is 
evil'. This is the prayer. 


Also, there are echoes of ‘havamahe’ from mantra 
4, which means: ‘We invoke and develop’, and, ‘we 
challenge and fight out’. This is the call for action under 
the divine eye. 


6. (Parameshvara Devata, Narayana Rshi) 


wart ga iard ste eta aren felit sitaci 
anit treaty Ra etre gerd garg 
wer tae Adta eur sadi 


Nrttaya sutam gitaya sailusam dharmaya 
sabhacaram naristhayai bhimalam narmaya 
rebhain hasaya karim anandaya strisakham 
pramade kumariputram medhayai rathakaram 
dhairyaya taksanam. 


For dance, the dancer; for song, the singer; for 
dharma, the active councillor; for social morale, the 
mighty man; for refinement, the poet; for fun, the 
comedian; for pleasure, fair company; for indulgence, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXX 897 


the child of wantonness; for finesse, the chariot-maker; 
for patience, the carpenter. 


7. (Vidvans Devata, Narayana Rshi) 
ade aei rur nus wurd aforeares vp 
Rer woes nere yeaa vara wei 


Tapase kaulalam mayayai karmaram rupaya 
manikararin $ubhe vapain $aravyaya 'isukarain 
hetyai dhanuskaram karmane jyakaram distaya 
rajjusarjam mrtyave mrgayum antakaya 
Svaninam. 


For heat-treatment, the potter or metallurgist; for 
furnishing, the decorator; for ornament, the jeweller; 
for beauty, the beautician; for archery, the arrow-maker; 
for shooting, the bow-maker; for the target, the bow- 
string maker; for marking and delimitation, the string- 
maker; for killing, the hunter; for the border, the watch- 
dog. 


8. (Vidvans Devata, Narayana Rshi) 


adie: drfszresuafrentvzir "rata! wewearard qd 
maata rel usps uwdassrnms 
truanda: fenaeniriaturssrfehas  fusmeneit 
Rean aiqeriezr: enueentenntW ue t 


Nadibhyah paunjisthamrksikabhyo naisadam 
purusavyaghraya durmadam gandharva- 
psarobhyo vratyam prayugbhya'unmattain 
sarpadevajanebhyo' pratipadam ayebhyah 
kitavamiryataya akitavam pisacebhyo 
bidalakarim yatudhanebhyah kantakikarim. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


898 YAJURVEDA 


For the rivers, the fisherman; for the fast she- 
bears, the forester; for the tiger-man, the drunken fool; 
for the musicians and dancers, the brute; for the farmers, 
the demented; for the snakes and nobles, the neurotic; 
for the desirables, the gambler; for the retiring, the non- 
gambler; for the frustrated, the cynic; for travellers, the 
thorns; for the sake of these former ones, keep off the 
latter ones. 


9.  (Vidvan Devata, Narayana Rshi) 


WSTH Ie 


Sandhaye jaram gehayopapatimartyai pari- 
vittam nirrtyai parivividanam araddhya' 
edidhisuh patim  niskrtyai pesSaskarim 
samjnanaya smarakarim prakamodyayopa- 
sadam varnaya-nurudham balayopadam. 


Keep off the paramour out to meet his mistress; 
the adulterer heading to the house of his married love; 
the unmarried elder brother with his eye on the wife of 
his younger brother; the younger brother grabbing and 
encroaching upon the elder brother’s share of land; the 
husband of younger sister entertaining love for the 
unmarried elder sister-in-law; the self-decorated sex- 
doll impatient to make up for lost opportunities; the 
amorous woman excited for sex; the inmate intending 
to abuse the house-mate; the solicitor trying for 
acceptance; the corrupt official in search of gratification 
for work. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXX 899 


10. (Vidvan Devata, Narayana Rshi) 


sees: post und emm gni: ees carat 
aema aft ufaata fat Yara NEED 
asintitanrt ufy-dmafsramatssrfrafy-rt watery 
WSHfeemTenH 9o 


Utsadebhyah kubjam pramude vamanam 
dvarbhyah sramam svapnayandhamadharmaya 
badhiram pavitraya bhisajam prajnanaya 
naksatradar$am | a$iksayai pras$ninam- 
upasiksaya'abhipra$ninam | maryadayai 
prasnavivakam. 
Remove the crooked on way to destruction, the 
small man addicted to gaiety, disease spreading to house 


doors, the man blind to dreams, and the deaf in love 
with adharma. 

Develop medicine for health and purity, help and 
encourage the astronomer for science, inquisitive learner 
for education, the seminary for confirmation and 
application of learning, and analysis and discrimination 
for the judgement of truth and value. 


11. (Vidvan Devata, Narayana Rshi) 
Welarssrarerfartór enamel terete wenn were 
gus Speer ferasraresiesmed8rem ue 9 i 
Armebhyo hastipam javaya$vapam pustyai 
gopalam viryayavipalam tejase 'japalamirayai 
kinasam kilalaya surakaram bhadraya grhapain 
$reyase vittadham adhyaksyayanuksattaram. 

Create, develop and promote the elephant keeper 
for tourists, the horse keeper for fast movement, the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


900 YAJURVEDA 


cowherd for nourishment, the sheep-keeper for virility, 
the goat keeper for lustre, the farmer for food, the soma- 
maker for vitality, the house keeper for good living, the 
treasurer for honour and credit, the burser for financial 
distribution and control. 


12. (Vidvan Devata, Narayana Rshi) 
ar area matsa see ferutarfsraear 
aesa mata fierent decirse afar Wer 
cient ventas Uae eirenvebssutreerids- 
we eemehunuferan ene ara: uegett deararet 
THAT ug 2 


Bhayai darvaharam prabhaya’agnyedham 
bradhnasya vistapayabhisektaram varsisthaya 
nakaya parivestaram devalokaya pesitaram 
manusyalokaya prakaritaram sarvebhyo 
lokebhya’upasektaram ava’ rtyai vadha- 
yopamanthitaram medhaya vasah palpulim 
prakamaya rajayitrim. 

For light, the wood-man, for illumination, fire 
and fuel, for the horse-course, the water sprinkler, for 
high satisfaction and comfort, the cook and steward, 
for a vision of heaven, the scholar visionary, for a vision 
of humanity, the well-wisher, for the public, the public 
servant, for get-togethers, the launderer, for happy turn- 
out, the printer and dyer, and fearsome guard to ward 
off danger. 


13. (Ishvara Devata, Narayana Rshi) 
mead Aaa eaa fuyti fattest at- 
e cers sroencre = - vanis TT amm 
asma «renis RAER ue 31 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXX 901 


Rtaye stenahrdayam vairahatyaya pisunam 
viviktyai ksattaram aupadrastryayanuksattaram 
balayanucaram bhumne pariskandam priyaya 
priyavadinam aristya'a$vasadain svargaya 
lokaya bhagadugham varsisthaya nakaya 
parivestaram. 


Remove the thievish hypocrite bent on envy and 
attack, and the slanderer bent on enmity and attack. 


Give us the saviour for judgement and 
discrimination, the loving guide for vigilance, the 
supporter for strength, virile generosity for expansion, 
sweet talker for love, the horse rider for good news and 
safe arrival, just commonalty for a joyous community, 
and enlightened superintendence for all round 
happiness. 


14. (Rajeshvara Devata, Narayana Rshi) 
masam stata frat cpm lerne 
sirentarfWerwiz aata fendreeenerrpenzd- 
Mafisi ade me sienaresneüeni Freer 
ANAR STHTSITSTH duel 


Manyave 'yastapam krodhaya nisaram yogaya 
yoktarain $okayabhisartaram | ksemaya 
vimoktaram utkulanikulebhyastristhinam vapuse 
manaskrtam silayanjanikarim nirrtyai 
kosakarim yamayasum. 

For moral passion, give us the heat of the furnace 
of steel, for cooling anger, the generous giver, for yoga, 
the persuasive teacher, for moral lustre, the man of 
foresight, for peace and well-being, the paternal 
protector, for the ebb and flow of water, the man who 
knows both and surveys from above, for good of the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


902 YAJURVEDA 


body form, the man of thought, for the good of character, 
the giver of right vision, for the avoidance of adversity, 
the economic budget maker, for proper control, impartial 
administration. 


15. (Rajeshvarau Devate, Narayana Rshi) 
— -— CON — 23 I — — 
ukara strat ra Tere Tar tt eat agana- 
fà taana fasishtes Hanta unpas- 
Rman MAAA RLN 
Yamaya yamasum atharvabhyo’vatokam 
samvatsaraya paryayinun parivatsarayavijatam 
idavatsarayatitvarum idvatsarayatiskadvarim 
vatsaraya vijarjarain samvatsaraya paliknun 
rbhubhyo’jinasandham sadhyebhyascarm- 
amnam. 


For the man of law and order, give the law-maker 
; for the men of peace and meditation, the protective 
force; for the first year of a five-year plan for women, a 
woman who knows how time passes; for the second 
year, an unmarried woman; for the third year, a dynamic 
woman; for the fourth year, a white-haired woman; for 
the fifth year, an extremely wise woman; for any year, 
a woman of long age and experience; for the experts, 
an indefatigable man; for the men of achievement, a 
man of super-knowledge. 


16. (Rajeshvarau Devate, Narayana Rshi) 
mi amand amet eran aa 
deaerea: virehot unt urikdanrt chad 
vitsivzisamt ferdirezit trees vertus: qoto Weta: 
feas arisen eeh cease: Teer ea 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXX 903 


Sarobhyo dhaivaram upasthavarabhyo dasam 
vaisantabhyo baindam nadvalabhyah sauskalam 
paraya margaram avaraya kaivartam tirthebhya’ 
andam visamebhyo mainalain svanebhyah 
parnakam guhabhyah kiratain sanubhyo 
jambhakam parvatebhyah kimpurusam. 


For the lakes, the ferryman; for the tanks close 
by, a knowledgeable caretaker; for the pools, a forest 
man; for the reed beds, a dryer; for crossing over, the 
knowing forester; for damps and marshes, the man of 
marshes; for tourist and sacred places, the bridge and 
dam maker; for unknown lands, the man of self- 
discipline; for forest sounds, the man specialising in 
leaves; for the caves, the caveman; for the mountain 
peaks, the ferocious guard; for the mountains, the hill 
ranger. 


17. (Rajeshvarau Devate, Narayana Rshi) 
Aua uieend cuia fixusenm qed afer 
draad vemfeni fagesar sas: fuenei yet 
BUT TATA SATA STARA SSTNTOTE 
dent ufesdu gen 


Bibhatsayai paulkasam varnaya hiranyakaram 
tulayai vanijam pascadosaya glavinam 
visvebhyo bhutebhyah sidhmalam bhutyai 
jagaranam abhutyai svapanam artyai jana- 
vadinam vyrddhya’apagalbham sain$araya 
pracchidam. 
Remove the brute bent on cruelty, the non- 
performer suffering from faultfinding, the slothful 


heading to adversity, the slanderer causing mischief and 
injury, the pessimist inviting poverty, the saboteur 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


904 YAJURVEDA 


causing damage and destruction. 


Give us the sun and the goldsmith for beauty of 
form, the measurer for correct measurement, all round 
capability for all living beings, wakefulness for 
prosperity, the public voice against adversity. 


18. (Rajeshvarau Devate, Narayana Rshi) 
gravterférenfeatureee ure erareemut yard airemas- 
"rene "iare ger eir vri felepsrei farsbururssufendfe 
aera cwnenremd urerd ST uci 


Aksarajaya kitavam krtayadinavadarsam 
tretayai kalpinam dvaparayadhikalpinam 
askandaya sabhasthanum mrtyave govyaccham 
antakaya goghatam ksudhe yo gam vikrntantam 
bhiksamana 'upatisthati duskrtaya carak- 
acaryam papmane sailagam. 


Remove the gambler playing for his den-master, 
the tormenter of the cow to death, the butcher who 
slaughters the cow, the man who impairs the cow to 
satisfy hunger, the man who approaches the beef carver 
asking for food, the beggar serving his master of the 
den, and the robber out for sin and crime. 


Give us the man of original vision for the age of 
truth (Krita-yuga), the man of imagination for the age 
of thought and resolution (Treta-yuga), the man of 
imagination and resolution for the age of thought and 
passion (Dvapara-yuga), and the man-pillar of the 
council for speedy progress and development. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXX 905 


19. (Rajeshvarau Devate, Narayana Rshi) 


i geet UR Sq do qe, Vi 

* wrexlurersuTHTd wea dinar cine 
LL d yga atta aaao 
TATA NLN 7 


Pratisrutkaya’artanam ghosaya bhasam antaya 
bahuvadinam anantaya mukain $abdaya- 
dambaraghatam mahase vinavadam krosaya 
tunavadhmam avarasparaya $ankhadhmam 
vanaya vanapam anyatoranyaya davapam. 


For promise and agreement, simplicity of 
language and content, for proclamation, the announcer, 
for conclusion, the comprehensive speaker, for the 
endless talker, silence, for loud proclamation, the beat 
of the drum, for celebration, the notes of the lute, for 
sentiment, the flute player, for far and near, the conch 
blower, for the forests, the protector of the forest and 
gardens, for large heaths and forests, the fire-guard. 


20. (Rajeshvarau Devate, Narayana Rshi) 


areata Veram i01 

Narmaya punscalum hasaya karim yadase 

Sabalyam gramanyam ganakam abhikrosakam 

tanmahase vinavadam panighnam tunavadh- 

mam tannrttayanandaya talavam. 

Remove the flirt disposed to sport, the buffoon 

disposed to farce, and the courtesan disposed to 
voluptuous play. 


Give us for reverence and honour the village 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


906 YAJURVEDA 


headman, the statistician, and the leader who gives the 
clarion-call. 


Give us the music of the lute, the drum player, the 
flute player, and song and celebration for dance and joy. 


21. (Rajeshvarau Devate, Narayana Rshi) 
and ah uferet deao ara osre- 
flava arrai fa cafes getha wat fran: 
fdgran usu 


Agnaye pivanam prthivyai pithasarpinam 
vayave candalam antariksaya vainsSanartinam 
dive khalatim suryaya haryaksam naksatrebhyah 
kirmiram candramase kilasam ahne suklam 
pingaksam ratryai krsnam pingaksam. 


For fire and heat work, the strong man and solid 
materials; for ground work or earthwork, the carrier on 
the back; for work in the wind, a man of special strength; 
for work in the sky, a bamboo dancer; for work on and 
in space, a man who knows the dynamics of space; for 
work on the sun, a man with green eye-glass; for work 
on stars and planets, a man with orange eye-glass; for 
work on the moon, a clear glass; for work on day-light, 
aman in white with brown eyes; for work on the night, 
a man in black with brown eyes. 


22. (Rajeshvarau Devate, Narayana Rshi) 
*w | aigtetsstataromed Wbsmucgr: | arte: U vut 
fasaa: acitatssterssratarored ubsmucm: NRR N 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXX 907 


Athaitanastau virupanalabhate'tidirgham 
catihrasvam catisthulam catikr$am catisuklam 
catikrsnam catikulvam catilomasam ca. ASudra’ 
abrahmanaste prajapatyah. Magadhah punscali 
kitavah klibo’sudra’ abrahmanaste prajapatyah. 


The good human being accepts and works with 
these eight classes of people of different forms and 
colours: too tall, too short, too fat, too thin, too white, 
too dark, too hairless, too hairy. Also they are neither 
Brahmanas nor Shudras (nor the others). They too, all 
of them, are children of God, Prajapati. Even the bastard 
and the ‘despicable’, the wanton, the gambler, and the 
coward and the eunuch, neither Shudras nor Brahmanas 
(nor the others), they too are children of God, Prajapati, 
father of all. 


sta Amsa: N 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


908 YAJURVEDA 


CHAPTER-XXXI 


1.  (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi) 


presi ada: agea: MeT, | 
wr owpfHx udt ense, dei 


Sahasrasirsa purusah sahasraksah sahasrapat. 
Sa bhumiin sarvata sprtva tyatisthaddas- 
angulam. 

Purusha, the Cosmic Soul of Existence, is the soul 
of the universe of a thousand heads, a thousand eyes 
and a thousand feet. It pervades the universe wholly 
and entirely and, pervading and sustaining the universe 
of ten constituents of living Prakriti, It transcends the 
world of existence. 


2.  (Ishvara Devata, Narayana Rshi) 


uewsuser Ud ue ya ues ure | 
sadaa —— cedarkuref usd 
Purusa'evedain sarvam yadbhitam yacca 


bhavyam. Utamrtatvasyesano yadannenati- 
rohati. 


All this that is and was and shall be is Purusha 
ultimately, sovereign over immortality and ruler of what 
grows by living food. 


3. (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi) 


urate mend iia gee: | 
aats fasat sort Gorder fafer uu 


Etavanasya mahimato jyayansca purusah. Pado’ 
sya visva bhutani tripadasyamrtam divi. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXI 909 


So great as the universe is the grandeur and glory 
of It, and yet the Purusha is greater. The entire worlds 
of existence are but one fourth aspect of Its reality (just 
like the foot-stool of a mighty monarch). Three parts of 
Its mystery are in the transcendental heaven of 
immortality, Infinity, beyond the created universe of 
existence. 


4.  (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi) 


forged sdegeu: matsen: à 
aA ferre eusbETHeHTSraTSrAS3TPW qned 


Tripadurdhva udaitpurusah pado 'syehabhavat 
punah. Tato visvan vyakramat saSananasane’ 
abhi. 


Thrice more glorious arises the Purusha above 
the created universe wherein one measure of His 
greatness and grandeur manifests again and again, 
pervading all the eating and non-eating world, and 
thence remains transcendent across and over the 
universe. 


5.  (Srashta Devata, Narayana Rshi) 
ad fareéareaa ferrsitserfar gee: | 
a aisaen usua yaa Te: GU 


Tato viradajayata virajo’adhi purusah. Sa jato’ 
atyaricyata pa$cad bhumimatho purah. 

From Purusha arises Virat, the cosmic form, 
Prakriti. The Purusha manifests therein and remains 
sovereign over the Virat. Yet, even while manifest in 
the Virat, He remains apart and uninvolved before and 
after the creation and then creates the earth and human 
habitations. (That is cosmic yajna.) 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


910 YAJURVEDA 


6.  (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi) 


qamla: wet gram | 
Ways Terum MASA J os 
Tasmadyajnatsarvahutah sambhrtam prsad- 
ajyam. Pasunstanscakre vayavyanaranya 
gramyas$ca ye. 
From that cosmic yajna was born the sacred ghrta, 
universal material of creation. He created the animals, 


all those birds of the air, rangers of the forest and inmates 
of the village. 


7.  (Srashteshvara Devata, Narayana Rshi) 


wenienrededgdsaro: creat sia | 

Dashes Al VTEHTETSPRTEHISUSTSRT dol! 

Tasmadyajnat sarvahuta’rcah samani jajnire. 

Chandamsi jajnire tasmad yajustasmadajayata. 
From that Lord of universal yajna were born the 


Riks and the Samans. From Him were born the 
Chhandas, and from Him were born the Yajus. 


8. (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi) 


qayana T ch ulsarda: | 
mat z fax denraenivsarsstsmes: ue t 


Tasmadasva “ajayanta ye ke ee 


From That yajna were born the horses, and ee 
which have two rows of teeth up and down. From That 
were born the cows, and from That were born the goats 
and sheep. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXI 911 


9. (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi) 


w aa aféfe wert gee wrath: d 
at earsstasrd HIEHTSSESSISUI GE usu 


Tam yajnam barhisi prauksan purusam jatam- 
agratah. Tena deva'ayajanta sadhya’rsayasca 
ye. 


The Rishis of universal vision, and sages of 
universal achievement, and scholars of the Veda invoke 
and worship the eternal Purusha, self-manifested in 
advance of everything else. They sprinkle and 
consecrate the sacred grass of yajna in their mind and 
offer the oblations in the fire with Vedic mantras. 


10. (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi) 


aed eqdsp pian edeceus | 
We artemia ag fene mass got 


Yatpurusam vyadadhuh katidha vyakalpayan. 
Mukham kimasyasit kim bahu kimuru pada’ 
ucyete. 

How do the Rishis visualise the various 
manifestive modes of the Purusha? What was His 
mouth? What the arms? What the thighs? What are the 
feet as they are said to be? 


11. (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi) 


Mesa quura ae viue: sa: 

Fe dde aged: Tastes ASAT de 
Brahmano’sya mukhamasid bahu rajanyah 
krtah. Uru tadasya yadvaisyah padbhyam sudro’ 
ajayata. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


912 YAJURVEDA 


The Brahmana, man of divine vision and Vedic 
Word, is the mouth of the Samrat Purusha, the human 
community. The Kshatriya, man of justice and polilty, 
is created as the arms of defence. The Vaishya, who 
produces food and wealth for the society, is the thighs. 
And the man of sustenance and support with labour is 
the Shudra who bears the burden of the human family. 


12. (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi) 
am wet arava: Wu ssrsmad | 
sataa wonsa qalatatsrad ue 
Candrama manaso jatascaksoh suryo’ajayata. 
Srotradvayusca pranasca mukhadagnirajayata. 
The moon is born of the cosmic mind, the sun is 


born of the eye, the air and prana energy is born from 
the ear, and the fire is born from the mouth. 


13. (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi) 
wats smra-dfisre vito et: adada à 
"was spar: starcat cient usstacary Ue 3 
Nabhya'asidantariksain sirsno dyauh sama- 
varttata. Padbhyam bhumirdisah $rotrattatha 
lokan’akalpayan. 

The Rishis visualise that the sky was born of the 
navel of the Cosmic Purusha, that is, the sky is the navel 
part of the universe, the heaven of light arose from the 
head, the earth solidified from the dust of the feet, the 
space directions emanated from the ear, and similarly 
the other regions of the universe arose from the Purusha. 


14. (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi) 


ephuur few xem o adaa | 
aan Seated sgen: snae: uw 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXI 913 


Yatpurusena havisa deva yajnamatanvata. 
Vasanto'syasidajyam | grisma' idhmah 
Saraddhavih. 


When the saints and sages visualise the universal 
yajna in terms of nature and enact it in the mind with 
universal materials in communion with the Cosmic Soul 
in meditation, then the spring season is the ghrita 
(clarified butter), summer is the fuel of fire and winter 
is the havi (fragrant materials) for oblations. 


15. (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rishi) 
wore Reana: wur afte: qa: 
dal ada dart s steer Gee UST nea 


Saptasyasan paridhayastrih sapta samidhah 
krtah. Deva yadyajnam tanvana’abadhnan 
purusam pasum. 


Seven are the bonds and bounds of the vedi (altar) 
of the mental yajna in meditation, thrice seven, i.e., 
twentyone are the samidhas (fuel sticks) ordained. When 
the saints and sages enact the yajna within, they 
concentrate on the Purusha, the universal observer, 
whose presence they crystallise and fix upon in the soul. 


Note: Seven bounds and thrice seven samidhas 
is the mystique of yajna which has been explained in 
different ways. Swami Dayanand explains it thus: 


Seven bounds are the seven chhandas (metrical 
compositions) of the Veda-mantras such as Gayatri. 


Twenty-one samidhas are: Prakriti (the potential 
material cause of the universe), Mahat (actualised 
material cause), Ahankara (individualized identity of 
the universe), five subtle elements or Tanmatras, five 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


914 YAJURVEDA 


gross elements, five faculties of perception, and three 
qualities of the material universe which are Sattva, Rajas 
and Tamas (Thought/intelligence, energy and matter). 


In Rgvedadi-Bhashya-Bhumika, his Introduction 
to the Commentary on the Vedas, he explains the same 
thing in a different and detailed manner in the chapter 
on Creation. 


For an average reader, the simpler way to 
understand is to refer to the seven stages of creative 
evolution: Prakriti, Mahan, Ahankara, Tanmatra, 
Perception faculty, Volition faculty, and gross elements. 
These stages of evolution are the seven bounds of 
creative yajna performed by Purusha. These are also 
the Samidhas because each succeeding evolute arises 
from yajnic consumption of the previous one. And each 
one has three orders of quality, Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. 
That makes it thrice seven. 


This is the Sankhya order of evolution, and 
‘Sankhya’ is the word from which comes the English 
word ‘Science’ through Latin in which it is written as 
'Scienkia'. 

Another way to realise the seven boundaries is 
to refer to the seven Vyahritis: Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svah, 
Maha, Janah, Tapah and Satyam which are the boundaries 
of each loka or region in ascending order. 


16. (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi) 


wb ater caren easier waaay dod 
x eh ae: Gerd aa us ure: Ut Sar: eg ul 
Yajnena yajnamayajanta devastani dharmani 
prathamanyasan. Te ha nakam mahimanah 
sacanta yatra purve sadhyah santi devah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXI 915 


By that yajna of the mind the sages worship the 
master of cosmic yajna and realise the eternal and 
original Dharmas of existence. Blest with the light of 
the Divine they experience that heaven of freedom 
which the primeval sages of the world enjoyed at the 
dawn of creation. 


17. (Aditya Devata, Uttara Narayana Rshi) 


aaqa: una: uf?rer tater favachtor: atat- 
at | tea eret aaga aaeter tac 
TT ngon 


Adbhyah sambhrtah prthivyai rasacca visva- 
karmanah samavartatagre. Tasya tvasta 
vidadhadrupameti tanmartyasya devatva- 
majanamagre. 


Before the essence of the waters was distilled by 
Vishvakarma for the creation of the earth, the model of 
the universe existed in the eternal mind of the Purusha, 
Prajapati Vishvakarma. Tvashta, the maker- 
manifestation of Purusha, sculpted that form of the 
universe. The origin of the divinity of the human being 
too existed in the eternal mind. (That too Tvashta 
brought into existence.) 


18. (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi) 


Aed wu werdurfacredut ata: areata | ave 
aea gaa ara: user aesa ec 


Vedahametam purusam mahantam aditya- 
varnam tamasah parastat. Tameva viditvati 
mrtyumeti nanyah pantha vidyate 'yanaya. 


I know this great and glorious Purusha of the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


916 YAJURVEDA 


brilliance of the sun beyond the dark. Having realized 
Him only does man transcend the world of existence, 
birth and death. There is no other way than this to the 
final freedom of Moksha. 


19. (Aditya Devata, Uttara Narayana Rshi) 


wsrdfaventa WH ssa agen fer sre à 
wer att ut usata iane aqua 
fagat ngeu 


Prajāpatiścarati garbhe'antarajayamano 
bahudha vi jayate. Tasya yonim pari pasyanti 
dhirastasmin ha tasthurbhuvanani vi$va. 


Prajapati, father spirit of the created universe, 
immanent deep in the soul, moves everywhere, and 
although ever unborn He variously manifests Himself with 
all the forms of life. Men of thought and wisdom feel His 
presence manifest all round. In Him alone do all the 
worlds of existence find their haven and repose. 


20. (Surya Devata, Uttara Narayana Rshi) 


at sonda at mend atte: 
weit a xax saat aut wma arala Ron 


Yo devabhya'atapati yo devanam purohitah. 
Purvo yo devebhyo jato namo rucaya brahmaye. 


That which blazes with the sun for the divinities 
such as the earth, who is the high-priest and prime mover 
of the generous excellencies of the world, who rises 
first and foremost for the nobilities of the world, to that 
divine light our homage and offer of reverence. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


21. 


CHAPTER-XXXI 917 


(Vishvedeva Devata, Uttara Narayana Rshi) 

"reb Ae p ded aso aaa d 

aad sarai feram Rasa usu 
Rucam brahmam janayanto deva'agre 


tadabruvan. Yastvaivam brahmano vidyat tasya 
deva 'asan vase. 


The sages of yore rising in vision of the divine 


glory saw the light of the dawn and proclaimed of that: 
Oh! the Brahmana who would know you thus ! The 
lights of the world would be at his command. 


22. 


(Aditya Devata, Uttara Narayana Rshi) 

sitet A agira uatan ued craharfur 
suua edu | goror sgar adet 
"HsgWTUT RRI 


Srisca te laksmi$ca patnyavahoratre pārśve 
naksatrani rupamasvinau vyattam. Isnannisa- 
namum ma’isana sarvalokam ma''isana. 


Beauty is yours. Glory is yours. The day and night 


like consorts are at your sides. The stars and planets are 
your form incarnate. The sun and moon are your open 


face. 


Kind, loving and generous, give me that bliss of 


freedom, that supreme wealth of joy. Wish me all well 
and the world is mine. 


ZARASTA: d 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


918 YAJURVEDA 


CHAPTER-XXXII 


1.  (Paramatma Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi) 


weerfeneredfacnmasnp | UT: | 
Wea Yoh Wu Tel WTSSITU: HD UAA: uei 


Tadevagnistadadityastadvayustadu candramah. 
Tadeva $ukram tadbrahma ta'apah sa 
prajapatih. 


The One Eternal Lord Supreme is Agni, self- 
effulgent and omniscient. That is Aditya, all-consuming 
on annihilation. That is Vayu, omnipotent, all- 
sustaining. The same is Chandrama, blissful giver of 
joy. The same is Shukra, instant and immaculate. That 
is Brahma, greatest and infinite. That is Apah, immanent 
and omnipresent. And He is Prajapati, lord of creation 
and father of all His children. 


2.  (Paramatma Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi) 


wei fure stfat faga: qearatet | 
Sayed ferdioui a neat URSA URI 


Sarve nimesa jajnire vidyutah purusadadhi. 
Nainamurdhvam na tiryancam na madhye pari 
jagrabhat. 


From the brilliant supreme Purusha are born all 
the divisions of time from the moment onward, and all 
the movements from the twinkling of the eye onward. 
No one can ever catch or hold this Lord from above or 
middle or crosswise. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXII 919 


3. (Hiranyagarbha Paramatma Devata, Svayambhu 
Brahma Rshi) 


"red ufaarssiita ee art neut: | feruamis- 
sare ar at fücxifecrur eT asg AT: BU 


Na tasya pratima’ asti yasya nama mahadyasah. 
Hiranyagarbha'ityesa ma ma hiinsidityesa 
yasmanna jata’ityesah. 


There is none and nothing like Him, no picture, 
no icon, no simile, no metaphor. Great is His Name, 
mighty His glory. “He is the Golden Seed of the 
universe", it is apparent. *No, no, do not kill me, do not 
punish, I pray”, such is the prayer of humanity to Him. 
^No one ever born is greater than He or beyond Him", 
such is clearly the voice of the Veda. 


4. (Atma Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi) 


wat d Xe: uars wei: gat = wa: ass 
Taf saiet:| asya Id: U Streator: Were Sat 
fasi udaa: we 


Eso ha devah pradiso’nu sarvah purvo ha jatah 
sa' u garbhe' antah. Sa'eva jatah sa janisya- 
manah pratyan janastisthati sarvatomukhah. 


Children of divinity, verily this glorious lord of 
the universe pervades all regions and quarters of space. 
First born, i.e., manifested, of existence, in truth, He is 
at the very centre of the universe and in the depths of 
the soul. Existent and manifest, He continues to manifest 
every moment and abides everywhere in everything 
facing forward in all directions. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


920 YAJURVEDA 


5.  (Paramatma Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi) 


ama cr a fe ara a atta yaa 
fervet | wsmdfe: wsrat axeroreitiar rites 


werd uw West 


Yasmajjatam na pura kim canaiva ya ababhuva 
bhuvanani vi$va. Prajapatih prajaya sainra- 
ranastrini jyohmsi sacate sa sodasi. 


The glorious lord is He, nothing whatever was 
born before Him, none of all those worlds of the universe 
which came into existence later. Father and sustainer, 
abiding and rejoicing with His creation, lord of sixteen 
powers of perfection, He pervades and feeds the three 
lights of the earth, sky and heaven, i.e., fire, electric 
energy and sunlight. 


Note:- Sixteen seems to be the number of kalas 
(qualities, attributes, virtues and faculties) which 
comprise the model of perfection from different points 
of view. From Prashnopanishad, 6, 4, for example, we 
learn that ‘sixteen kalas’? means the sixteen creative 
powers of the Purusha, sixteen evolutionary stages of 
the created universe, and sixteen virtues, qualities and 
faculties of both cosmic and individual existence. These 
kalas are : Prana or energy and the Hiranyagarbha or 
the universally fertilized golden seed of the universe, 
shraddha or faith, akasha or space, vayu or wind energy, 
agni or fire and light, apah or waters, prithivi or earth, 
indriya or faculties of perception and volition, mana or 
mind, anna or food, virya or vitality of generation, tapa 
or discipline of inviolable austerity, mantra or 
knowledge or the art of living, karma or action, loka or 
world regions of the universe, and nama or individuality 
and identity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXII 921 


In Atharva-veda, 13, 4, 47-54, the divine virtues 
are described as: Shachipati or omnipotent, vibhu or 
infinite, prabhu or lord of all, ambha or cool as water, 
ama or energiser, mahasaha or constant, aruna rajata 
raja or brilliant, lovely and glorious, uru prithu or vast, 
subhu or grand, bhuva or omniscient, pratho vara or 
highest and best, vyacho loka or omnipresent, bhavad- 
vasu or lord of universal honour, idadvasu or lord of 
universal wealth, samyatvasu or perefectly self- 
controlled, and ayat-vasu or ever lustrous and 
honourable. 


Reference may be made to Satyarth Prakash, 
chapter I, in which Swami Dayanand has listed 108 
attributive names of Ishvara. ‘Sixteen’ refers to an ideal 
conceptual model. 


6.  (Paramatma Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi) 


aa dren dirt at get aa ta: eae We ATH: | 
Asaa «wet ferra: wet Gerd gft 
fem ngu 


Yena dyaurugra prthivi ca drdha yena svah 
stabhitam yena nakah. Yo’antarikse rajaso 
vimanah kasmai devaya havisa vidhema. 


By Him the heavens blaze, by Him the earth is 
firm, by Him the heaven of bliss is sustained, by Him 
the ecstasy of Moksha is constant, and He is the creator 
of the worlds in space. Let us worship that lord of glory 
and eternal bliss, and let us sing in honour of Him with 
the fragrance of yajna. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


922 YAJURVEDA 


7. (Paramatma Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi) 
a cn dissredur aerrissrerglat wur war | 
amfa mssi facta wet cart feret fam 1 
smal z aa dedeifvaard: mou 


Yam krandasi' avasa tastabhane’abhyaiksetam 
manasa rejamane. Yatradhi sura' udito vibhati 
kasmai devaya havisa vidhema. 


To Him the heaven and earth, both constant and 
moving in ecstasy at heart, do homage with awe and 
reverence. Under His eye does the sun rise and blaze 
with light. To that Lord of awe and glorious bliss let us 
offer our homage of praise and worship with love and 
faith. Whatever the vast oceans of water, and whatever 
the expansive spaces, all exist in Him. 


8.  (Paramatma Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi) 


amada Wa daa feme serus i 
aie: Goa fa cdf ad assita: wrest 
few: wsmd uu 


Venastatpasyannihitam guha sadyatra visvam 
bhavatyekanidam. Tasminnidam sam ca vi caiti 
sarvain sa 'otah prota$ca vibhuh prajasu. 


The man of vision and wisdom sees that eternal 
spirit hidden in mystery where the universe lies nestled 
in His presence. Therein all this comes into being 
together, and therein it falls asunder. Infinite is He, 
immanent and omnipresent in the created beings. 


9.  (Vidvan Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi) 


u agai q fae eret ara fede Wer a | 
Aa vara fea eher vent aq a fü: 
Trarsda neu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXII 923 


Pra tadvocedamrtam nu vidvan gandharvo 
dhama vibhrtam guha sat. Trini padani nihita 
guhasya yastani veda sa pituh pita'sat. 


The man of knowledge gifted with the divine 
voice may speak of this immortal haven and eternal spirit 
covered in mystery yet shining in the soul. Three parts 
of it are hidden in the cave. He who knows them is the 
man of super-wisdom, father of the paternal wise. 


10. (Paramatma Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi) 


"Hob ospebsiferar a felemar anim xa spur 
fat | at xerssrqdurasmeareqdra o smd-r- 
£r ert? ol 


Sa no bandhurjanita sa vidhata dhamani veda 
bhuvanani vi$va. Yatra deva'amrtamana- 
Sanastrttye dhamannadhyairayanta. 

He is our father and our brother. He is our 
sustainer and controller. He knows all the worlds of 
existence which are home to the created beings. There 
in His supreme presence, third haven of being (the other 
two are Prakriti and jiva), the divine souls tasting of the 
immortal joy of heaven roam around at will. 


11. (Paramatma Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi) 


Wired srt urat creer ates edi: ufasir fester 
suem VASAT ATTA SAAT ue eu 


Paritya bhutani paritya lokan paritya sarvah 
pradiso disasca. Upasthaya prathamaja- 
mrtasyatmana’tmanamabhi sam vivesa. 
Having known and crossed over the material 
forms of existence, having gone over the regions of the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


924 YAJURVEDA 


world, having crossed through directions and sub- 
directions all, and reaching the original voice of eternal 
truth in the Veda by the soul, the man of knowledge 
and vision attains to the supreme soul of the universe 
and, one with it in union, abides. 


12. (Paramatma Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi) 


uk matyi Gasset ufi cient ufz fast: aR 
il cadet wed fadd aaa adusa vad 
«idi ue3u 


Pari dyavaprthivi sadya’itva pari lokan pari 
disah pari svah. Rtasya tantum vitatam vicrtya 
tadapasyattadabhavattadasit. 

Having known and crossed over earth and heaven 
simultaneously, having gone over the regions of the 
universe, having crossed through the directions and 
subdirections, and having transcended even the visions 
of paradise, and having over-seen the network of reality 
constituting the structure of the universe, the 
transcendent soul sees that Supreme Soul and finally 
grows one with That. 


13. (Indra Devata, Medhakama Rshi) 


Tepid tates arty | 

aft redai carat 12311 
Sadasaspatimadbhutam priyamindrasya 
kamyam. Sanim medhamayasisam svaha. 


In truth of word and deed with all sincerity of 
mind and spirit I invoke the Lord of the universe, 
wondrous great, loved and worshipped by the human 
soul, and, pray for a gift of that intelligence which 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXII 925 
distinguishes between the temporary and the permanent. 


14. (Paramatma Devata, Medhakama Rshi) 


at Wem senum: faaisernda i 
wur ure Rear Aef ene caret ueuwu 


Yam medham devaganah pitarascopasate. Taya 
mamadya medhaya'gne medhavinam kuru 
svaha. 

Agni, lord of light and knowledge, I pray, 
enlighten me here and now with that discriminative 
intelligence which the noblest people of piety and senior 
guardians of humanity value and pray for. 


This is the voice of the heart in truth of word and 
deed. 


15. (Paramatma & Vidvan Devate, Medhakama Rshi) 
iem A ago ear Bera: wordfa: | 
ARa aree uen area dara À xem usu 


Medham me varuno dadatu medhamagnih 
prajapatih. Medhamindrasca vayusca medham 
dhata dadatu me svaha. 


May Varuna, supreme lord of the universe, and 
the scholar of highest knowledge, bless me with supreme 
intelligence. 


May Agni, lord of universal light, and the eminent 
scholar and teacher, bless me with discriminative 
intelligence. 


May Prajapati, guardian sustainer of creation, and 
the generous scholar, bless me with generous and life- 
sustaining intelligence. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


926 YAJURVEDA 


May Indra, lord of universal grandeur, and the 
leader of honour and power, bless me with honourable 
intelligence. 


May Vayu, lord of universal energy and power, 
and the scholar of science and technology, bless me with 
intellectual and vitalizing intelligence. 


May Dhata, lord preserver of the universe, and 
scholar of life-sciences, bless me with life-preserving 
intelligence. 


This is the divine voice from the heart. 


16. (Vidvan & Raja Devate, Shrikama Rshi) 


zd À oe a api e ferduwqum| d 
"wf gar dag ferenpdur qe a caret esi 


Idam me brahma ca ksatram cobhe $riyam- 
asnutam. Mayi deva dadhatu sriyamuttamam 
tasyai te svaha. 


May this knowledge of mine and the Brahmana 
fellowship, and this power and honour of mine and the 
Kshatra organisation, both grow to excellence and grace. 
May the noblest people bless me with the best of 
excellence and grace. 


All the best for you in truth of word and deed. 
This is the divine voice of the soul. 


sta giysem: n 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 927 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 


1.  (Agnayah Devata, Vatsapri Rshi) 
sreuremiut eurafiatssreianrmtssrem: ureenr: | 
Padre: vararal sqruzrat erdal erae rt: ue u 


Asyajaraso damamaritra’arcaddhumaso’ 
agnayah pavakah. Sviticayah $vatraso 
bhuranyavo vanarsado vayavo na somah. 


The fires (such as heat, light, electricity, lightning 
and yajna fire) of this lord of the universe are unaged 
and unaging, homely, protective and promotive, bearing 
sacred and fragrant flames of brilliance, purifying, holy 
white, invigorating bringers of wealth, dynamic energy, 
riding the sun-beams, cooling and exhilarating like the 
breeze and a drink of soma. 


2.  (Agnayah Devata, Vishvarupa Rshi) 


etal gaaat emdwpgrssu edi 
ada gehe: usu 


Harayo dhumaketavo vatajuta'upa dyavi. 
Yatante vrthagagnayah. 


Fast as sunbeams, with banners of flame flown 
by the winds, the fires arise, each in its own way, upto 
the heights of heaven. 

3.  (AgniDevata, Gotama Rshi) 


ast a aaor ast sare ussed Ted | 
sri afat ta «du usd 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


928 YAJURVEDA 


Yaja no mitravaruna yaja devan’rtam brhat. 
Agne yaksi svam damam. 


Sagely scholar brilliant as Agni, perform yajna 
for us, for the sake of our friends and the best people, 
for the divine powers of nature, in honour of the 
universal law, and for your own home. (Kindle the fire, 
develop the light, let the flames arise for all.) 


4.  (AgniDevata, Vishvarupa Rshi) 


"ger fe dagda nsari nsr TARE à 
fr Aa get: da: wx 


Yuksva hi devahutaman’asvan’agne rathiriva. 
Ni hota purvyah sadah. 


Sagely scholar, brilliant as Agni, veteran high- 
priest of the science of fire, taught by eminent masters, 
rise like a heroic warrior of the chariot, yoke the fastest 
horses consecrated by the divinities and carry on the 
pursuit of yajna relentlessly. 


5.  (AgniDevata, Kutsa Rshi) 
& aa ura: wasasa eed aaa 
wfiremeb wda aaas ags 
gaci: uu 
Dve virupe caratah svarthe’anya’nya vatsamupa 


dhapayete. Hariranyasyam bhavati svadha- 
vanchukro’ anyasyam dadrse suvarcah. 


Two powers of nature (the night and day), both 
different in form and colour, are busy doing good work. 
Both (like two women) separately nurse each other's 
child. In one develops and arises the moon, soothing 
and brilliant, bearing its own bliss and beauty. In the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 929 


other develops and arises the sun, a blazing radiant 
power which illuminates and purifies everything. 


6.  (AgniDevata, Kutsa Rshi) 
state waar enfer emqfsreiar erfstesrssreenredtrest: | 
«poterit sprteir aera far fare faf a u 


Ayamiha prathamo dhayi dhatrbhirhota 
yajistho'adhvaresvidyah. Yamapnavano 
bhrgavo virurucurvanesu citram vibhvam vise 
vise. 

This agni (in the form of heat, light and 
electricity), wonderful and omnipresent energy of prime 
importance in this world and first kindled in the vedi 
by the pioneers of yajna, is the high-priest of the 
dynamics of existence, worthiest of develoment by joint 
effort and adorable in the creative projects of life. 
Generous and intelligent fore-fathers of humanity and 
dedicated sages of yajna kept it safe in the woods and 
burning in the light of sun-beams for all classes of their 
children. 


7. (Vidvans Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 
At grat at agavaa Beyra «em vet A- 
wat 1 sitet gerequr afétensantaatat set 
aa-T gel 
Trini Sata tri sahasranyagnim triinsacca deva 
nava casaparyan. Auksan ghrtairastrnan 
barhirasma ’adiddhotaram nyasadayanta. 


Three hundred, three thousand and thirty three 
divinities of nature and nine serve this universal energy 
of agni, feed it with holy fuels of ghrita and waters, 
spread the holy grass for its seat on earth and in the sky 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


930 YAJURVEDA 


and kindle this high-priest of universal yajna to move 
all round across the spaces. 


8.  (Vidvans Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 


ya faase dfereur dyemegassm sma- 
aR i fe: aR saaa ort Ssa 
EXTAT 


Murddhanam divo’ aratim prthivya vaisvanara- 
mrta'a jatamagnim. Kaviin samrajamatithim 
jananamasanna patram janayanta devah. 
Noble scholars of the science of fire energy 
generate this power present everywhere from the top of 
heaven to the surface and body of the earth, friend of 
humanity, created for the sake of the universal yajna of 
existential dynamics, creative, illuminated, loved as an 
honourable guest, and close at hand for the nourishment 
and protection of the people. 


9.  (AgniDevata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 


aada wg sare aat à 

akg: RSET: NN 

Agnirvrtrani janghanad dravinasyurvipanyaya. 
Samiddhah sukra’ ahutah. 


Just as the pure and brilliant fire, the sun, breaks 
the clouds, so should the yajaka desirous of wealth burn 
off sins with joyful oblations in the fire kindled and raised 
in the vedi of yajna. 


10. (Agni Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


fageta: Bret neasg art od 
frat fire emdfür uon 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 931 


Visvebhih somyam madhvagna 'indrena vayuna. 
Piba mitrasya dhamabhih. 


Agni, brilliant scholar and yajaka, just as the sun, 
by the currents of energy and the wind, drinks up the 
honey-sweets of soma from the world of nature, so should 
you, along with the sun and the green sunny haunts of 
nature and your friends and seats of sacred fire drink the 
honey-sweets of yajna-soma. 


11. (Agni Devata, Parashara Rshi) 
sm ufa uf qurssmere vrfer tat fufuei e- 
tater | sth: weg dade Gals venen Saag- 
ze ue 
A yadise nrpatim teja'ünat suci reto nisiktam 
dyaurabhike. Agnih $ardhamanavadyam 
yuvanain svadhyam janayat sudayacca. 


When the brilliant fragrance, pure and sanctified 
in yajna for the sake of nourishment and energy, reaches 
the sun, luminous ruler of the world, then the living 
energy of the sun creates pure, energising, praiseworthy, 
youthful, lovable, fertilizing waters close to the light of 
heaven and showers them as the seed of life on earth. 


12. (Agni Devata, Vishvavara Rshi) 


aT vee HE debra ad Garant wp 1a 
Theresa GIT supa srqpaaraísr fiar netes- 
fa gen 

Agne Sardha mahate saubhagaya tava 
dyumnanyuttamani santu. Sam jaspatyain 
suyamama krnusva $atruyatamabhi tistha 
mahamsi. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


932 YAJURVEDA 


Agni, scholar, ruler, rise and assert yourself for 
honour and prosperity. May your power and fame rise 
to the heights. Make the home and family happy and 
disciplined full of conjugal felicity. Face the enermys’ 
powers and fix them all round. 


13. (Vishvedeva Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 


chests wadanchetcrd qug fé: side: i og 
" ca order seat are dora ureter dur: ues 


Tvam hi mandratamamarkasokairvavrmahe 
mahi nah $rosyagne. Indram na tva $avasa 
devata vayum prnanti radhasa nrtamah. 


Agni, joyous and great, we approach you with 
songs of praise and flames of fire. You alone listen to 
our pious words of solemnity. Brilliant as the sun, 
powerful as the wind, the noblest of humanity serve 
you whole-heartedly with their power and potential, love 
and reverence. 


14. (Vidvans Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 
As vared fare: Gad Gea: | 
"rant 3p yeahh atada minu ues 


Tve’agne svahuta priyasah santu surayah. 
Yantaro ye maghavano jananamurvan dayanta 
gonam. 


Agni, honoured with praise and served with 
flames of fragrant fire, may all the heroes and scholars 
be dear to you, all those self-controlled leaders of people 
blessed with power and prosperity who suppress the 
destroyers of cows and support the development of 
animal wealth. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 933 


15. (Agni Devata, Praskanva Rshi) 


afa sicnut afafidat wurdfu: i 

sided aféft firirssisur ulautetuitssrem eg i 
Srudhi $rutkarna vahnibhirdevairagne saya- 
vabhih. A sidantu barhisi mitro'aryama 
prataryavano 'adhvaram. 

Agni, brilliant ruler, man of good ear, keen to 
listen, listen to our prayer alongwith your noble 
companions of the administrative yajna who carry the 
holy fire and oblations with you. 

May Mitra, friend of all the people, and Aryama, 
chief of justice for the citizens, come and grace their 
seats of honour in the morning and join the yajnic 
business of governance. 


16. (Agni Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


fessdurafafrifaai- fesdurmfdferui-durum i 
sarda Hdssmqum: duéreer daq SA- 
dar: UREN 

Vi$vesamaditiryajhiyanam vi$vesamatithir- 
manusanam. Agnirdevanamava' avrnanah 
sumrdiko bhavatu jatavedah. 

Inviolable among all the devotees of yajna, guest- 
like honoured by all the humans, protective cover for 
the noblest divines, may Agni, brilliant ruler and master- 
mind of world knowledge, be kind and gracious to all. 


17. (Savita Devata, Lushodhanaka Rshi) 
uA: fien yio f cup ver 
eral | srs wem ufeag: uwelufr agaaa saren 
duis ngon 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


934 YAJURVEDA 


Maho'agneh samidhanasya $armanyanaga 
mitre varune svastaye. Sresthe syama savituh 
savimani taddevanamavo 'adya vrnimahe. 


Under the shelter and protection of great and 
glorious Agni, lord of light, may we live pure and sinless 
toward our friends and chosen people of virtue. 


May we, under the care of Mitra, divine friend of 
life, and Varuna, lord of chosen virtue, enjoy the highest 
state of goodness and well-being. 

And may we, in obedience to the will of Savita, 


lord giver of life, have the divine gifts of food, energy 
and protection in this life. 


18. (Indra Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


ardanta eal met aigu wifranxaszu | 
alte a fant atsetest wax fe ifrferdeher fer 


Eu uel 


Apascitpipyu staryo na gāvo naksannrtam 
jaritarasta’indra. Yahi vayurna niyuto no'accha 
tvam hi dhibhirdayase vi vajan. 

Indra, ruling lord of light and glory, the saving 
waters of grace abound like waves of light exuberant. 
Your worshippers and admirers attain the light of truth 
and law. 


Kind and gracious, come like the wind on the 
wings of light and bless us. You alone, with the gifts of 
intelligence, bless us with food, energy and victory. 


19. (Indra & Vayu Devata, Purumidha Ajamidha Rshis) 


massuladtad Het oat TAAT | 
ur enuit fexrvaat usu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 935 


Gava upavatavatam mahi yajnasya rapsuda. 
Ubha karna hiranyaya. 


The rays of the sun and the cows both sustain 
and preserve the earth, and heaven and earth give form 
to the yajna and guard it closely. So may Indra and Vayu, 
both of good and golden ear, listen to our prayer and 
protect and promote yajna. 


20. (Savita Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 
"au uwurssfadsabur faarsstanr i 
yart ferar wt: dol 
Yadadya sura’ udite'naga mitro'aryama. Suvati 
savita bhagah. 
To-day when the sun has arisen, then the 
immaculate Mitra, friend of all, Aryama, lord of justice, 


Savita, lord of life, and Bhaga, lord of glory and 
prosperity, inspire, energise and bless the world. 


21. (Vena Devata, Suniti Rshi) 


att aa fdsaa ferae Teer i 
xur dita quem id weet 1 ste Aa: Re 


A sute sificata Sriyain rodasyorabhisriyam. Rasa 
dadhita vrsabham. Tam pratnatha’ yam venah. 


In this holy yajnic world of the Lord, consecrate 
the light and glory of the sun which shines over the 
beauty of heaven and earth. May all the essences of 
nature and the best of humanity hold on to this flood of 
light and life. The wisest of the ancients consecrated 
and worshipped it, this light and wisdom of the world. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


936 YAJURVEDA 


22. (Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 
amfered-d ufz favessrqufsgdr aasan verifar:i 


mma qosa mur faradtsagot 
WÙ RRN 


Atisthantam pari visve'abhusafichriyo vasa- 
nascarati svarocih. Mahattadvrsno’asurasya 
nama visvarupo’amrtani tasthau. 

Let one and all adore and consecrate that energy 
which abides firm and unshaken. Self-refulgent, wearing 
the wealth and beauty of the world, it rolls around. Great 
is the name and fame of this generous and bountiful 
lord giver of showers and prosperity. It is of universal 
character and abides in all permanent forms of life and 
nature. 


23. (Indra Devata, Suchika Rshi) 


u st ug uurararemtset asarna favarsye à 
ze ue ga: A nè wat yur a weet 
udd: ues 


Pra vo mahe mandamnayandhaso’rca vi$va- 
naraya visvabhuve. Indrasya yasya sumakhain 
saho mahi $ravo nrmnam ca rodasi saparyatah. 


All of you offer worship and homage in honour 
of Indra, supreme, beatific, support, energy and spirit 
of the universe whose creative yajna, omnipotence, 
eternal glory and universal wealth, the earth and heaven 
serve and celebrate. 


24. (Indra Devata, Trishoka Rshi) 
wefafasrsuwi at wed Way: wem 
Shea gar eat esis 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 937 


Brhannididhma’esam bhuri $astam prthuh 
svaruh. Yesamindro yuva sakha. 


Great is the fame and excellence of those whose 
friend is Indra, boundless, blazing, expansive, glorious 
and unaging lord. 


25. (Indra Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi) 


sote nerd faves: Maad: | 
Tete usstfarfecirshar ure 


Indrehi matsyandhaso visvebhih somaparva- 
bhih. Mahan’ abhistirojasa. 


Indra, lord of might and knowledge, great, 
honoured and worshipped by virtue of your own 
splendour and glory, come and join all our soma 
offerings and enjoy the delicacies of our yajna to your 
heart’s content. 


26. (Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 


wl qadquiresas diia: wu arated cite: i 
STE SATS ea age SaTenUTTTESTUTÉR. URE 


Indro vrtramavrnocchardhanitih pra mayinama- 
minad varpanitih Ahan vyamsamuSadha- 
gvanesvavirdhena'akrnodramyanam. 


Indra, ruling lord of light and power, challenges 
the dark clouds of evil and crime. Strong of policy and 
versatile of working ways and forms, he frustrates the 
designs of the cunning. Scourge of thieves and grabbers 
hiding in the forests, he breaks their arms and burns 
them to dust. And he gives full expression to the voice 
and actions of those who contribute to delightful peace 
and prosperity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


938 YAJURVEDA 


27. (Indra Devata, Agastya Rshi) 


qarag urea: aAA urfu aad fes dsge i 
" desea ami: ataa ear ads- 
aA | amsa asi | Heres Ge | 
hal UT wabesfu Roll 


Kutastvamindra mahinah sanneko yasi satpate 
kim ta'ittha. Sam prcchase samaranah 
Subhanairvocestanno harivo yatte'asme. 
Mahan'indro ya'ojasa. Kada cana starirasi. 
Kada cana prayucchasi. 


Whence, where, do you, Indra, praised and 
powerful, go alone all by yourself? Lord of truth, shelter 
and support of the wise and good, why thus? What is 
the cause? Gliding past by horses on the wing, tell us 
that in confidence, we ask you in so many words of 
sincerity, since we are your own. Indra, by your own 
power and splendour you are great, rarely relenting, 
rarely remiss. 


28. (Indra Devata, Gauriviti Rshi) 
an wise: Ua asad cure fader | 
upa a deua eres we elem sedi «dant ure 


A tatta’indrayavah panantabhi ya'urvam 
gomantam titrtsan. Sakrtsvam ye puruputram 
mahı sahasradharam brhatim duduksan. 


Indra, enlightened and powerful ruler, the people 
who are good and true, who wish to punish those who 
are cruel to the cow and the self-disciplined man of the 
wealth of cows, and who cultivate the vast, generous 
mother earth, sustainer of her many children and flowing 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 939 


with her gifts in a thousand streams — all these admire 
and advance your governance and administration. 


29. (Indra Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 
gui a fer wat wet ué nen xdü fimum ards- 
Tt 1 queda cb waa cd arafefs wer: 
vreduras4 uu 


Imam te dhiyam pra bhare maho mahimasya 
stotre dhisana yatta'anaje. Tamutsave ca 
prasave ca sasahimindram devasah $avasa- 
madannanu. 


Indra, lord of power and enlightenment, I 
acknowledge, admire and stand by this great word, 
wisdom and policy of yours which, powerful as it is, 
emerges clearly in this eulogy of yours. 


That same great Indra of courage and conquest 
by virtue of his valour, the noblest poets and leaders 
glorify with great enthusiasm in festivals and 
celebrations of growth and development. 


30. (Surya Devata, Vibhrat Rshi) 


Ams geftaq ure wsargdihenrdarefsgu i 
ada urssiferreifa sat ust: dare geen fe 
Wafa non 


Vibhrad brhat pibatu somyam madhvayur- 
dadhad yajnapatavavihrutam. Vatajuto yo’ 
abhiraksati tmana prajah puposa purudha vi 
rajati. 
Brilliant and boundless, may the sun drink the 
honey-sweet nectars of soma, and bless the yajnapati 
with life full and inviolate. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


940 YAJURVEDA 


Going at the speed of energy, he sustains and 
nourishes the living beings with his own might and 
shines on in wondrous ways. 


31. (Surya Devata, Praskanva Rshi) 
3q a madad Xe deta chad: | 
qsr favara Gay use 
Udu tyam jatavedasam devam vahanti ketavah. 
DrSe visvaya suryam. 


Surely the rays of light convey and reveal the 
glory of the Sun, lord of light, omniscient, omnipresent 
and all-illuminant, so that the world may see the eternal 
light and glory of the lord of the universe. 


32. (Surya Devata, Praskanva Rshi) 


at uaa cater woe SAR ST | 

wa deur uyd use 

Yena pavaka caksasa bhuranyantam janan’anu. 
Tvam varuna pasyasi. 


Varuna, lord of universal justice, purifier and 
sanctifier, with the eye with which you watch the blazing 
lord of nourishment and protection, with the same 
benigh eye watch the whole humanity. 


33. (Vidvan Devata, Praskanva Rshi) 
Seulaserjssmdge tha yiee | 
"peer Gas GAs acd uere d 
ata aa: fat emat us 31 


Daivyavadhvaryu'a gatam rathena suryatvaca. 
Madhva yajnain samanjathe. Tam pratnatha. 
Ayam venah. Citram devanam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 941 


Divine high-priests of love and compassion, come 
by the wondrous chariot of sunbeams, take up and 
conduct the yajna with honeyed materials of piety and 
purity. 


Like the yajna of ancient time, this yajna too is 
brilliant and beautiful, wonderful and darling of the 
divinities. 

34. (Savita Devata, Agastya Rshi) 


sm asssifufaedt usta favere: afaat gas- 
Ud iat uer «erar weder at fave mtair 
"Wr nx 


A na 'idabhirvidathe susasti visvanarah savita 
deva’etu. Api yatha yuvano matsatha no visvam 
jagadabhipitve manisa. 

Generous and brilliant Savita, celebrated life of 
the world, and Vaishvanara, vital heat of life, may be 
gracious to come to our yajna with holy materials and 
voices of Divinity. Divinities ever young and young 
scholars too may come to us rejoicing on way to yajna 
so that they may sanctify our mind and all our life of 
the world. 


35. (Surya Devata, Shrutakaksha & Sukaksha Rshis) 
Waa Hed cpeueantssmfer Pa a 
"d ae a ast sen 


Yadadya kacca vrtrahannudaga’ abhi surya. 
Sarvam tadindra te vaSe. 


Indra, lord of might and glory, Sun, blazing power 
of light, destroyer of the clouds of darkness, wherever 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


942 YAJURVEDA 


you rise and shine today, all that is under your power 
and control. 


36. (Surya Devata, Praskanva Rshi) 
wfulfasesidt vrfeenafu ws i 
fasam atte rernm uasa 


Taranirvisvadarsato jyotiskrdasi surya. 
Visvamabhasi rocanam. 


Sun, benevolent energy of the world, universal 


eye, you are the light, creator of light and knowledge. 
And you illuminate the beautiful world of existence. 


37. (Surya Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 
aes tad attest usur enifedas wesumi 
ade eh: uenemarerit andere fait us 
Tatsuryasya devatvam tanmahitvam madhya 


kartorvitatam sam jabhara. Yadedayukta haritah 
sadhasthadadratri vasastanute simasmai. 


That divine light of the Sun, eternal creator, and 
that grandeur of His, is positively extended in the midst 
of the universe as His power and will to create. The 
same He withdraws (and the structure goes off). When 
the power is thus disconnected and withdrawn from 
space back into the centre, then from the centre itself, 
the Night, the Lord's power of negation, weaves the 
cover of darkness for all. 


38. (Surya Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 
aiea horer ra Yat xu shuld areas | 
amag urs: epum: wedifauaeu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 943 


Tanmitrasya varunasyabhicakse suryo rupam 
krnute dyorupasthe. Anantamanyadrusadasya 
pajah krsnamanyaddharitah sambharanti. 


In the midst of the heaven of existence, the Sun, 
eternal creator, creates the form of Mitra, divinity of 
the day, and of Varuna, spirit of the night, to watch (the 
work of His own creation) for all. One power of His is 
light, brilliant and boundless. The other is dark which 
the eternal spaces hold. 


39. (Vishvedeva Devata, Jamadagni Rshi) 


augeriussifa gi astiaa ngi usata i 
Teed Gat Hise dams de Were ussffa sen 


Ban mahan'asi surya badaditya mahan’ asi. 
Mahaste sato mahima panasyate'ddha deva 
mahan’ asi. 


Truly, great is the Sun, eternal creator. Surely, 
infinite is the light of omniscience of the Lord 
indestructible. The glory, Lord Divine, great and true, 
is universally sung and celebrated. Lord of Light 
sublime, you are all time great. 


40. (Surya Devata, Jamadagni Rshi) 
we da srdur mets seta gar da vate ussifa i 
"gr Gera: wüfedr fay varfaratsary wot 


Bat surya $ravasa mahan’asi satra deva mahan’ 
asi. Mahna devanamasuryah purohito vibhu 
jyotiradabhyam. 

O Sun, lord of light and generosity, in all truth, 
you are great. By virtue of your own glory, you are the 
ever living highpriest of the divinities and humanity, 
infinite and omnipresent, eternal light of existence, sole 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


944 YAJURVEDA 
and unchallengeable. 


41. (Surya Devata, Nrimedha Rshi) 


miasa uz fesefa-er vera | 
aa sme sarase ufd «ri STE wes 


Srayanta’iva suryam visvedindrasya bhaksata. 
Vasuni jate janamana 'ojasa prati bhagam na 
didhima. 

Only in the shelter and protection of the Sun, light 
and lord of existence, do you partake of the gifts of 
Indra, lord of the world's wealth, exactly as we, in the 
world created and yet to be created by the lord's might, 
receive and gratefully enjoy just our share. 


42. (Surya Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 
stan darssfdar qiea Pea: fuuar freu i 
wal frat ator urneemdíafa: fune: ufereissq 
wit: qne 
Adya deva’udita suryasya nirainhasah piprta 
niravadyat. Tanno mitro varuno mamahanta- 
maditih sindhuh prthivi'uta dyauh. 


Today on the rise of the sun, the noblest sages 
and divinities, we pray, may save us from sin and 
despicable action. Similarly may Mitra, light of the day, 
Varuna, spirit of the night, the sky, the sea, the earth 
and heaven exalt us with honour. 


43. (Surya Devata, Hiranyastupa Rshi) 


aT pup we mi fasdagqd eb 
a a ferred nam war mem alfa spera 
Usd west 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 945 


A krsnena rajasa varttamano nive$ayannamrtam 
martyam ca. Hiranyayena savita rathena devo 
yati bhuvanani pasyan. 


Savita, the sun, with his force of gravity and 
sphere of light revolves (in space), sustaining all its 
mortal and immortal family in place. By the golden 
chariot of splendour, the lord of light travels on, 
watching the various worlds of space. 


44. (Vayu Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


vatas qua aféturn fesudla diftesgara od 
Amme: uegdr arg: gat vend Ara- 
aT inei 


Pra vavrje supraya barhiresama vispativa birita’ 
iyate. Visamaktorusasah purvahutau vayuh pusa 
svastaye niyutvan. 


Vayu, the wind, and Pusha, the sun, both as a 
team of divinity, invoked early at the meeting of the 
night and day, move through the sky like two parental 
rulers of the world and energise the waters of life for 
the good of all these people of the earth. 


45. (Indra & Vayu Devate, Medhatithi Rshi) 


saad geet fears veut ah d 
smfecmemed WOT sui 


Indravayu brhaspatim mitragnim pusanam 
bhagam. Adityan marutam ganam. 


For the good of all the people of the earth, invoke 
Indra, universal electric energy, Vayu, the wind, 
Brihaspati, light of the universe, Mitra, pranic energy, 
Agni, fire energy, Pusha, the spirit of health and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


946 YAJURVEDA 


nourishment, Bhaga, the wealth vested in nature, 
Adityas, the various phases of the solar movements of 
the earth, and Maruts, various forms of air and modes 
of the wind. Invoke these divinities of nature working 
in unison as a united group of powers. 


46. (Varuna Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 
eur: urferar starsat ferser farssferfsl: à 
vidi A: ATA: (negl 
Varunah pravita bhuvanmitro vi$vabhirutibhih. 
Karatam nah suradhasah. 

May Varuna, lord of kindness and justice, and 
Mitra, lord of love and friendship, be good and gracious 
with all kinds of favour and protection and make us 
prosperous with blissful wealth. 

47. (Vishvedeva Devata, Kutsidi Rshi) 


aft asscur fast remcarara (gar ahasa 
ad umasa Aart A gaas sm as zerfufeasafu: 
"diri WESTHTHS er UN Ta: Ut 1 


Adhi na'indraisam visno sajatyanam. Ita 
maruto' a$vina. Tam pratnatha. Ayam venah. 
Ye devasah. A na’idabhir visvebhih somyam 
madhu. Omasascarsanidhrtah. 

Come Indra, lord giver of prosperity, Vishnu, 
omnipresent lord of the universe, Maruts, lords of energy 
and power, Ashvins, givers of health for body and mind, 
come and with your presence grace us all and all these 
fellow humans. 


Like the ancients we invoke Him, the one self- 
refulgent Divinity and all the divine powers of heaven 
and earth and the sky. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 947 


Protectors and sustainers of life and humanity, 
come you all with voices divine and all the blessed 
honey wealth of the world and rejoice. 


48. (Vishvedeva Devata, Pratikshatra Rshi) 
s3mTsz- eur faa dar sung: wast urnedid 
felit 1 Sut ATM pAs TAT: WAT WT: RAH 
WERT SEN 


Agna’indra varuna mitra devah $ardhah pra 
yanta marutota visno. Ubha nasatya rudro’adha 
gnah pusa bhagah sarasvati jusanta. 


May Agni, lord of light, Indra, lord of power, 
Mitra, universal friend, and all divines bless us with 
strength of body, mind and soul. May Vishnu, lord 
omnipresent, the Maruts, powers of energy, kind and 
favourable Ashvinis, teacher and preacher, Rudra, lord 
of justice and punishment, the divine voices, Pusha, 
giver of health and nourishment, Bhaga, lord of honour 
and prosperity, and Sarasvati, mother of knowledge, 
come and bless us and enjoy our hospitality. 


49. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vatsara Rshi) 

samt aaeoa ta: uferdi wm aed: 
qda usam: gA frat quot agurentt wt 4 
SSRS E GIES; GE (és 

Indragni mitrāvarunāditiń svah prthivim dyam 
marutah parvatan’apah. Huve visnum pusanam 
brahmanaspatim bhagam nu Samsam 
savitaramutaye. 


I invoke Indragni, fire and energy, Mitra and 
Varuna, pranic energies, Aditi, riches of the sky, Sva, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


948 YAJURVEDA 


peace and joy, Prithivi, riches of the earth, Dyau, the 
sun in heaven, Maruts, fastest human powers, wealth 
of the mountains and clouds, the energy of waters and 
rain, and I pray to Vishnu, omnipresent spirit of the 
universe, Pusha, nature's spirit of health and 
refreshment, Brahmanaspati, guardian Spirit of the 
universe and knowledge, Bhaga, lord giver of wealth 
and honour, and the celebrated Savita, creator, sustainer 
and light-giver of the world, for protection and well- 
being. 


50. (Mahendra Devata, Pragatha Rshi) 


ate Get Heer utara quer wtadt m: | 
a: sda Had aft gases =rsrssra¢e usstarq 
aT: ngon 


Asme rudra mehana parvataso vrtrahatye 
bharahutau sajosah. Yah $arnsate stuvate dhayi 
pajra indrajyestha' asman'avantu devah. 

For him who prays, sings hymns of praise, and is 
strong and rich with oblations for the divinities : for 
him and for us all, the Rudras, powers of justice and 
punishment, rich and generous people, clouds and 
mountains, heroes who rise with us on the call to battle 
for elimination of the enemy, followers of the powerful 
leader Indra, and the noblest powers of nature and 
humanity, we pray, protect us. 


51. (Vishvedeva Devata, Kurma Rshi) 
sTefecssrer daar asset at ef wear 
aaa atest At Sar Frat gehen aredt ratda 


INAT: WK 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 949 


Arvanco’adya bhavata yajatra’a vo hardi 
bhayamano vyayeyam. Tradhvam no deva nijuro 
vrkasya tradhvam kartadavapado yajatrah. 


Protective divinities of the yajakas, come to bless 
us to-day so that I may benefit from the strength innate 
in your heart. Come lest I feel afraid. Save us from the 
damage the thief or the tiger might cause. 


Devotees of yajna, worshippers of Divinity and 
admirers of the sages, save us from falling into the pit 
of sin. 


52. (Vishvedeva Devata, Lusha Rshi) 
fasdssra med fasdsadt fasd recu: 


afta: | faye At darsstaartad asda gfaut 
ansa uR 


Visve’adya maruto visva’uti vi$ve bhav- 
antvgnayah samiddhah. Visve no deva'avasa 
gamantu vi$vamastu dravinam vajo’asme. 


May the Maruts, fastest powers of the world, 
come to-day and bring us all the wealth and favours. 
May all the fires of yajna light for us. May all the 
divinities come to us with protection. May the food, 
energy and wealth of the world be for us all. 


53. (Vishvedeva Devata, Suhotra Rshi) 
fast Ger qor ed A oAssrafisr assu ula 
© 1 assifafretssa at atasoma aféta 
"TUER GBI 


Visve devah srnutemam havamı me ye’antarikse 
ya’upa dyavi stha. Ye agnijihva uta va yajatra’ 
asadyasmin barhisi madayadhvam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


950 YAJURVEDA 


All the divinities of the world listen to this prayer 
of mine, all those existent in the sky and in heaven, and 
all those who have knowledge of the sky and heaven 
watch this yajna of science and education. May the 
divinities of fire and participants of yajna hear, come 
and join us on this vedi and rejoice. 


54. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 
were fe dan aesae Gare smi 
amfezrart« ASAT OTIS TAT sitferar ATTA: ue 


Devebhyo hi prathamam yajniyebhyo’mrtatvam 
suvasi bhagamuttamam. Adiddamana jn 
savitarvyurnuse 'nucina jwita manusebhyah. 


Savita, lord of light and universal yajna of 
creation, you alone create the first and highest part of 
the joy of existence, Moksha, for the sagely nobilities 
of yajna. And then you alone weave the warp and woof 
of the means of light and knowledge and appropriate 
means of life and living for humanity. 


55. (Vayu Devata, Rijishva Rshi) 
Wares gedt dite gests fayaaits Taare | 
aarm faa: udu: pfa:  cnfafuaaru 
Ware NGI 
Pra vayumaccha brhati manisa brhadrayim 


vi$vavarain rathapram. Dyutadyama niyutah 
patyamanah kavih kavimiyaksasi prayajyo. 


Yajamana dedicated to yajna, poet and sagely 
scholar of broad vision and deep universal reflection, 
having obtained the right men and materials try to join 
the imaginative man of vision and knowledge and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 951 


relentlessly pursue the scientific yajna for the 
development of wind energy, source of universal wealth, 
universal presence and protection, motive power for 
vehicles, and energy leading to heat and light. 


56. (Indravayu Devate, Madhucchanda Rshi) 


vxarqsga yass wafer i 
gaat aaria fe usu 


Indravayu'ime suta'upa prayobhiragatam. 
Indavo vamusanti hi. 


Indra and Vayu, scholars of energy and wind, 
distilled are the essences and ready these materials. 
Come with all preparations and pleasure. The drops of 
nectar juices wait for you. 


57. (Mitra & Varuna Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi) 


fax ga Gadel abot at fender | 
fart warefreà wer uoti 


Mitrain huve putadaksam varunam ca ri$a- 
dasam. Dhiyam ghrtacim sadhanta. 


I invoke Mitra, spirit of universal friendship, pure 
and versatile like the day, and I invoke Varuna, silencer 
of violence and enmity into peace like the night, both 
of which develop intelligence abounding in the creation 
of waters and energy. 


58. (Ashvinau Devate, Madhucchanda Rshi) 


aet qarta: Yat ardent qenmeféu: i 
stata: egadi l a Wetat 1 ata uuu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


952 YAJURVEDA 


Dasra yuvakavah suta nasatya vrktabarhisah. 
A yatain rudravarttant. Tam pratnatha. Ayam 
venah. 


Come scholars, both of you like the Ashvins, of 
extraordinary knowledge, sincere and truthful, behaving 
justly like Rudra. Ready are the disciples waiting for 
you both, having gathered and spread the holy grass for 
seats on the vedi. 


59. (Indra Devata, Kushika Rshi) 
Raad uut monga urel: geeks Usa: | 
att maqa omre ve Were SAA eq ins t 
Vidadyadi sarama rugnamadrermahi pathah 
purvyain sadhryakkah. Agram nayatsupadya- 
ksaranamaccha ravam prathama janati gat. 
If the blessed and blissful first Voice, well- 
structured in human speech, were to reveal the breach 
of the cloud, then, one with the ancient path of Divinity, 


proclaiming the original thunder of the Immortal and 
advancing, it would take humanity forward. 


60. (Vaishvanara Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 


aie eagrfelasmemiseredrsudnum: |i 
umaana erm meme xm: uso 


Nahi spas$amavidannanyamasmad vai$vanarat 
pura'etaramagneh. Emenamavrdhannamrta’ 
amartyam vaisvanaram ksaitrajityaya devah. 


The immortal ancient sages saw no other 
messenger coming, felt no other presence arising in their 
mind than this omnipresent Agni, none before this 
Divine Light. And they developed and ever develop the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 953 


knowledge and awareness of this immortal light and 
power for their victory over the universal battlefield of 
existence. 


61. (Indragni Devate, Bharadvaja Rshi) 


su feather gessarit dan i 

at at yers nggu 

Ugra vighanina mrdha' 'indragni havamahe. Ta 
no mrdata’tdrse. 

We invoke Indra, lord of rule and power, and 
Agni, lord of light and leadership, both compelling in 
advancement and destroyers of enemies in the battles 
of life. May they be kind and gracious and make us 
happy and successful in such battles of living. 


62. (Soma Devata, Devala Rshi) 
ubl ma m: Gada i 
aft gat uszder 16211 
Upasmai gayata narah pavamanayendave. Abhi 
devan’ iyaksate. 


Leaders and teachers, teach and train this brilliant 
and blessed young man of innocent and purifying nature, 
keen to meet and reverence the nobilities of honour and 
learning. 


63. (Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 


a ated wee: sur eat à nfa | 
a wt pehia fam: fuus dre adit 
Tes: nes 

Ye tva’ hihatye maghavannavardhan ye $ambare 


harivo ye gavisthau. Ye tva nunamanumadanti 
viprah pibendra somam sagano marudbhih. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


954 YAJURVEDA 


Indra, lord of honour and power, commanding 
homage and obedience, riding horses of lightning speed, 
those noble scholars and pious people who invoke you 
and exalt you with the call to battle against the clouds 
of drought and darkness, those who call you to battle 
against the enemies of goodness, and those who exhort 
you to battle for light along with the sun-beams, and 
those who join you rejoicing with you in celebrations, 
with all these, with your troops and commandos, and 
with your tempestuous friends and forces drink the soma 
of honour and glory of success. 


64. (Indra Devata, Gauriviti Rshi) 


afters: Gee que wessitster enenfsiura:i 
agat nedad urar Usk aaa tT us 


Janistha'ugrah sahase turaya mandra'ojistho 
bahulabhimanah. Avardhannindram marutasci- 
datra mata yadviram dadhanad dhanistha. 


Indra, mighty ruling power, awfully strong, whom 
the noblest mother bore and shaped as a great hero, 
highly adorable for instant action and splendid victories, 
most lustrous and pride of many whom the most 
dynamic leaders and scholars admire and exalt here in 
the land, rise and create joy and prosperity all round. 


65. (Indra Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


3T q dss gaeuuurehusgur f | 
neadh: usu 


A tū na'indra vrtrahannasmakamardhama gahi. 
Mahan mahibhiriutibhih. 


Indra, glorious leader and ruler, destroyer of the 
demon of darkness, come soon and bring all round 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 955 


prosperity for us. Great as you are, advance us with the 
best ways of protection and progress. 


66. (Indra Devata, Nrimedha Rshi) 


watts udia favatsstf wet: 
sider Site fava wat det aac: tis t 


Tvamindra praturtisvabhi vi$va'asi sprdhah. 
A$astiha janita vi$vaturasi tvam turyya 
tarusyatah. 

Indra, mighty ruler, over all your rivals in the 
fierce battles of life you are supreme. Creator of joy 
and prosperity, destroyer of detractors, subduer of 
opponents, eliminate those who damage and destroy life 
and nature. 


67. (Indra Devata, Nrimedha Rshi) 


art d vr quiere: Moi fret a Ted |d 
fers ect wet: yaad wae eni ufa qei fara o 


Anu te $usmam turayantamiyatuh ksoni sisum 
na matara. Visvaste sprdhah $nathayanta 
manyave vrtram yadindra turvasi. 


Indra, lord of might and rectitude, just as mother 
and father love and admire their child, so may the earth 
and heaven admire and exhort you for your power to 
sap the strength of the enemy. When you break and 
destroy the cloud of darkness, all the fighting forces of 
the rivals lay down arms before your power and passion. 


68. (Aditya Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 


Gat cart uefa eperarfacanat welat Tres: aT 
asat xmas acra «ifs dfzerferavrdaus ez u 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


956 YAJURVEDA 


Yajno devanam pratyeti sumnamadityaso 
bhavatà mrdayantah. A vo'rváci sumatirva- 
vrtyadamhoscidya varivovittarasat. 

Powers of knowledge and brilliance, may the 
yajna and gatherings of noble sages bring us peace and 
prosperity. May the Adityas, eminent scholars, sages 
and blazing warriors be kind and gracious to us. The 
vision and wisdom of yours which abides with us right 
here may, we pray, be the harbinger of wealth and virtue 
more and ever more, and do good even to the sinner 
and save him. 


69. (Savita Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 
sah: fera: urgfsrezar- forafetrer afore ir 


Tay | Ruaa: afaara eda xam urfehdis- 
STHSlSHSZ9Id NARI 


Adabdhebhih savitah payubhistvam Sive- 
bhiradya pari pahi no gayam. Hiranyajihvah 
suvitaya navyase raksa makirno’aghasamsa’ 
1$ata. 

Savita, blazing lord of light and life, protect our 
hearth and home to-day with free and fearless, 
promotive and auspicious means of protection. Lord of 
the Golden Voice, protect and direct us for the latest 
joy and prosperity of life. We pray, let no thief rule 
over us, let no sinner boss over us. 


70. (Vayu Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 
wu din srelair afa amera: gard: 
ae area feret aera frat eyrearestar Aataiiso i 


Pra viraya $ucayo dadrire vamadhvaryu- 
bhirmadhumantah sutasah. Vaha vayo niyuto 
yahyaccha piba sutasyandhaso madaya. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 957 


Vayu, powerful ruler, and people, your brilliant 
forces, trained through discipline like distilled soma, 
decent men of honeyed culture, have beaten the enemy 
with courage and yajnic actions. 


Come Vayu, with them rejoicing, bear the soma 
and the gifts of yajna and drink with joy the distilled 
nectar of active life. 


71. (Mitra & Varuna Devate, Vasishtha Rshi) 


massuladtad Het sat ruga | 
sur cuit Raat ee it 


Gava’upavatavatam mahi yajnasya rapsuda. 
Ubha karna hiranyaya. 


May the cows and rays of the sun rays protect 
and promote yajna. May the great earth and heaven, 
both active and golden generous, makers of beautiful 
forms, protect and promote the form and function of 
yajna. 


72. (Vidvan Devata, Daksha Rshi) 


AAAI sem uae FUT | 


RITA HERISSIT IORN 


Kavyayorajanesu kratva daksasya durone. 
Risadasa sadhastha’a. 


Scholars, teachers and preachers, dispellers of the 
darkness of ignorance, come to the assembly home of 
this versatile genius and grace the seats of the creation 
of great literature with your knowledge and wisdom of 
truth and noble action. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


958 YAJURVEDA 
73. (Adhvaryu Devate, Daksha Rshi) 


atassar rhe tt Gace | 
nat re wHesmer iat werd ism gas) 


Daivyavadhvaryu'a gatam rathena suryatvaca. 
Madhva yajnain samafijathe. Tam pratnatha. 
Ayam venah. 


Brilliant highpriests of the yajna of love and 
development, come by the car shining as sunlight and 


create the honey-sweets of the yajna of science and 
technology, the new one brilliant as of old. 


74. (Surya Devata, Prajapati Rshi) 


fawn fada vforturasr: fedardraaufi faat- 
iraq Ratensstteareart saree sataecarcaatta: 
TEMA iex 


Tirascino vitato rasmiresamadhah svidasidupari 
svidasit. Retodha’asan mahimana ’asantsvadha’ 
avastat prayatih parastat. 


The light of the stars moves in waves, downward 
as well as upward, centripetal as well as centrifugal. 
Theycarry seeds of life, replete with grandeur, divine 
energy itself in motion far and near, nature below, a 
gift from above. 


Know and be masters of vitality, fertility, 
grandeur and greatness, all your own, all round. 


75  (Vidvan Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 


ən Xraédirssrqurar waders 13 -THWHI s 
asstzanra ufi vita enfenedt 4 ersturaa aat- 
fa: Meu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 959 


A rodast'aprnadà svarmahajjatam yadenama- 
paso 'adharayan. So'adhvaraya pari niyate 
kaviratyo na vajasataye canohitah. 


This light energy fills the earth and sky and 
heaven, born of the Great Mahat mode of Prakriti. When 
the veteran performers place, light and develop it in 
yajna, it is radiated all round. It is kavi too, carrier of 
the Word and sound constantly on the move, immensely 
valuable for food, energy and victory. 


76. (Indragni Devate, Vasishtha Rshi) 


eerie dur «mr Hart fear fin gd 
ameTüufeended: nes 


Ukthebhirvrtrahantama ya mandana cida gira. 
Angisairavivasatah. 

Indra and Agni, energy and light of the world, 
shining and exhilarating, dispellers of darkness and 
destroyers of sin, when they are constantly invoked, 
served and developed with holy formulaic words, 
hymns, and songs of celebration, they illuminate life 
and make it pleasant and fragrant. 


77. (Vishvedeva Devata, Suhotra Rshi) 


sd a: qa FR: yuaxaudes u ag 
uet stag o: TOIT 


Upa nah sunavo girah $rnvantvamrtasya ye. 
Sumrdika bhavantu nah. 


Our children who closely hear the voice of 
Immortality, may they be good and create peace and 
comfort for us all. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


960 YAJURVEDA 


78. (Indra and Marut Devate, Agastya Rshi) 


srerifur À ada: Baa: vredsgara wat Asaf: 
STU ST Eae Wht CATIA SU ASAT ASST 9S t 


Brahmani me matayah sam sutasah Susma’ iyarti 
prabhrto me'adrih. A $asate prati haryant- 
yukthema hari vahatasta no accha. 


The sacred songs of adoration which the seasoned 
scholars love and teach us, the peace and comfort which 
the children create for us, the riches which the fire and 
wind and cloud fed by yajna shower on us: may the 
teacher and learner carry on all these as tradition and 
bring up well for us. 


79. (Indra Devata, Agastya Rshi) 


aram st maafa 4 verres ussite daar faat: 
"T Wear aia c3 cwm curb ater pots 
wea wes 
Anuttama te maghavannakirnu na tvavan’asti 
devata vidanah. Na jayamano na$ate na jato 
yani karisya krnuhi pravrddha. 
Indra, Unmoved existence, inexhaustible, there 
is nothing un-initiated by you. There is no god existent 
or omniscient as you. Exalted and most high, unborn, 


constant and non-evolving, whatever you do or shall 
ever do, no one can comprehend. 


80. (Mahendra Devata, Brihaddiva Rshi) 
Wage qha Fs uel ASSAN OT: |d 
we Sart ferfturfe saad ei fava were: teo i 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 961 


Tadidasa bhuvanesu jyestham yato jajna’ 
ugrastvesanrmnah. Sadyo jajnano ni rinati 
Satrunanu yam vi$ve madantyumah. 


That alone is the highest and most exalted in the 
world of existence whence the awful sunlike hero of 
blazing power is born. Upon the rise, he instantly 
destroys the enemies such as darkness. All protective 
powers of the world rejoice with him. 


81. (Vishvedeva Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


gust ver ye fib ada a ud ad 
"ursensur: spear feast eater cen 


Ima'u tva puruvaso giro vardhantu ya mama. 
Pavakavarnah sucayo vipascito’bhi stomai- 
ranusata. 


Lord omnipresent, all inspiring, these addresses 
of mine which celebrate and exalt you may inspire the 
wise divines who, brilliant and pure like sacred fire, do 
homage to you with hymns of praise. 


82. (Vishvedeva Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


wera fasassiat ard: refinar: 
favfselasi Sere uditta quicdrssteae TRS Bu 


Yasyayam visva’aryo dasah $evadhipa 'arih. 
Tira$cidarye ru$ame paviravi tubhyetso'ajyate 
rayih. 


The noble people of the world are obedient 
supporters of yours. The treasurer is pious and faithful. 
And whatever is treasured or hoarded or hidden with 
the trader, the violent man or the armed guard, all that 
is wealth preserved for you ultimately. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


962 YAJURVEDA 


83. (Vishvedeva Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


stax Usenet: weepd: MAASSA UU | 
ae: Aseka nèm «ur grat aad ferre 11231 


Ayam sahasramrsibhih sahaskrtah samudra’iva 
paprathe. Satyah so’asya mahima grne $avo 
yajnesu viprardjye. 

This ruler, taught, trained, strengthened and 
fortified by seers and sages shines and rises a thousand 
ways like the sea. Great and true is his power and glory 
which I celebrate in the priest-like projects of his reign 
of piety. 

84. (Savita Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi) 
saa: fera: urgfsrezer- ferafiza ufi urf& 
ar eh a fidtueafsrg: afaara eda xem arfebats— 
STAMLASSRA NEI 


Adabdhebhih savitah payubhistvam Sive- 
bhiradya pari pahi no gayam. Hiranyajihvah 
suvitaya navyase raksa makirno’ aghasainsa’ 
1$ata. 

Savita, ruler of the golden flame, today protect 
our hearth and home and our people with bold and 
benevolent methods of all round defence and progress. 
Protect and promote us for the latest comfort and 
prosperity. Let no sinner ever boss over us as ruler. 


85. (Vayu Devata, Jamadagni Rshi) 
au at ad féfacgst arat rfe qu: | 
sra:ufedssuft siora vpreersaterfa Fuca 
A no yajnam divisprsam vayo yahi sumanm- 
abhih. Antah pavitra’upari $rinano’yam sukro’ 
ayami te. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 963 


Vayu, ruler of the winds and power, come and 
grace our yajna with precious gifts of knowledge and 
science so that the flames of fire may rise and reach the 
heights of heaven, and I, this devotee of the holy fire, 
inward purified, upward expansive with the flames, 
mentally shining and spiritually crystallized may come 
to you. 


86. (Indra-Vayu Devate, Tapasa Rshi) 


zaag duy Yeas ése | 
aat a: uesgvsrilsqHte: ust umanssndq cau 


Indravayu susandrsa suhaveha havamahe. 
Yatha nah sarva’ijjano’namivah sangame 
sumana 'asat. 


Unto this yajna of life and progress, we invoke 
and invite Indra, sovereign ruler of the world, and Vayu, 
universal power and energy, both of benign and blissful 
eye and eager to come and bless, so that, we pray, this 
entire human family of ours live free from want and 
suffering and, happy at heart, unite to act in joint 
ventures of universal well-being. 


87. (Mitra & Varuna Devate, Jamadagni Rshi) 


maha a Wet: VITA sei | 
at ri firerurefireassmerh goma uci 


Rdhagittha sa martyah $a$ame devatataye. Yo 
nunam mitravarunavabhistaya'acakre havya- 
dataye. 


Blessed is the man, for sure, who thus for the 
sake of peace and service of the wise and for positive 
values invokes and invites Mitra, lord of universal love 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


964 YAJURVEDA 


and friendship, and Varuna, lord of justice and favourite 
of universal choice, to his yajna for the creation and 
gift of life's fragrance for happiness and fulfilment of 
humanity. 


88. (Ashvins Devate, Vasishtha Rshi) 


sm alaga sped usd: aaay d 
qa Wat quum rre Wr at AeA vien teet 


A yatamupa bhüsatam madhvah pibatamasvina. 
Dugdham payo vrsana jenyavasu ma no 
mardhistama gatam. 


Ashvins, powers of health and joy, come and join 
us (ruler and people both), beatify our yajna and drink 
of the honey-sweets of fragrance. Virile and generous 
lords and pillars of wealth and victory, come with a 
shower of milk and waters, neglect us never. 


89. (Vishvedeva Devata, Kanva Rshi) 
ùa aerate: w deta ue | 
stat at wet ufsttera sem dat dum Aes 


Praitu brahmanaspatih pra devyetu sunrta. 
Accha viram naryam panktiradhasam deva 
yajnam nayantu nah. 


May Brahmanaspati, lord of wealth and 
knowledge, come and bless us. May the divine voice of 
truth and rectitude enlighten us and bless our speech. 
May the sagely scholars conduct our yajna for the 
attainment of common good and rise of the good, and 
brave and noble people of the community. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 965 
90. (Indra Devata, Trita Rshi) 
mansa duum ener fate | 
tf fasts agai decgex effe wma uso 
Candrama 'apsvantara suparno dhavate divi. 
Rayim pisangam bahulam purusprham harireti 
kanikradat. 
The moon of celestial hue rushes on through 
space in the light of heaven as a roaring horse on the 


wing, attaining the tremendous glory of ruddy gold, 
darling love of many people. 


91. (Vishvedeva Devata, Manu Rshi) 


xe da asda ea daufues3 i 
aq dax gan arehureaa qurdi gear ferar ueen 


Devam devam vo’vase devam devamabhistaye. 
Devam devam huvema vajasataye grnanto devya 
dhiya. 

Childern of mother earth, with pious intentions, 
brilliant intelligence and noble actions, singing and 
celebrating, we call upon every princely hero for 
protection and security. We invoke every divine power 
for happiness and well-being. We invite every scholar 
and leader of eminence for victory in the battles of life. 


92. (Vaishvanara Devata, Medha Rshi) 
fafa wetsalirerarfid serm se | 
erat aasar rift artetar emer qu: us 3 u 


Divi prsto'arocatagnirvai$vanaro brhan. 
Ksmaya vrdhana 'ojasa canohito jyotisa badhate 
tamah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


966 YAJURVEDA 


The great universal Agni sanctified in heavenly 
light grows with the earth and, raised and exalted with 
holy food, kind and favourable to humanity, dispels the 
darkness with its light and glory. 


93. (Indragni Devate, Suhotra Rshi) 


ulritssrarfasi Gatrteagetss: i 
fact forct Set errelereertferegrerar Seat t8 3 


Indragni’ apadiyam purvagat padvatibhyah. 
Hitvi siro jihvaya vavadaccharat trimsatpada 
nyakramit. 


Indra and Agni, powers of light and fire, this 
dawn, radiating, not walking, from the heights of 
heaven, descends (to the earth), first in the morning, 
for the moving humanity. It speaks with the tongue of 
birds and humans, walks on for thirty steps of the thirty- 
muhurta (twenty four hour) day, and then re-turns in 
the diurnal course. 


94. (Vishvedeva Devata, Manu Rshi) 


e fe cur ada arse fesd ares arte: 
a sare asstat get gq AW ved afatfad: esi 


Devaso hi sma manave samanyavo vi$ve sakarn 
saratayah. Te no'adya te'aparam tuce tu no 
bhavantu varivovidah. 


May all the noble saints and scholars and men of 
wealth and power, zealous and generous, together be 
liberal and kind to the entire humanity. May they be 
givers of freedom and prosperity to us to-day, and 
comfort and advancement to our children to morrow. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIII 967 


95. (Indra Devata, Nrimedha Rshi) 


antenaren wpeurebenr | 
wemedsg-u Cert furem uesmr usu 


Apadhamadabhis$astira$astihathendro 
dyumnyabhavat. Devasta 'indra sakhyaya yemire 
brhadbhano marudgana. 


May Indra, lord of power and ruler of the world, 
destroyer of cursers and evil-wishers, be the liberal giver 
of prosperity and splendour, and may he eliminate all 
fear, violence and terror. 

Indra, lord of light and glory like the sun, may all 
the nobilities of humanity, divinities of nature and 
powers of the winds be friends with you with all their 
support. 


96. (Indra Devata, Nrimedha Rshi) 


u aseta sed med sme | 
an Gala Gael akado yada gA N 
Pra va'indraya brhate maruto brahmarcata. 


Vrtram hanati vrtraha $atakraturvajrena 
Sataparvana. 


Maruts, leaders and commanders of humanity, 
sing hymns of praise in honour of Indra, great ruler of 
the world. Lord of a hundred yajnic acts, destroyer of 
darkness and want with his thunderbolt of a hundred- 
fold power, and saviour of humanity with a hundred 
safeguards, he eliminates evil and terror. 


97. (Mahendra Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 
sete aaa quas weal wd Ered falfa | 
aren «ries afeaMnaaisteata een 1 gat ss 
Tal | SETA, | ata USA | HedsH F ubl 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


968 YAJURVEDA 


Asyedindro vavrdhe vrsnyam $avo made sutasya 
visnavi. Adya tamasya mahimanamayavo' 
nustuvanti purvatha. Ima u tva. Yasyayam. Ayain 
sahasram. urdhva'u su nah. 


In the rapture of soma distilled in this world of 
Lord Vishnu's yajna of creation, Indra, lord of power 
and grandeur, strengthens the vitality and virility of this 
devotee. 


And that generosity of this Indra all the devotees 
celebrate to-day as the ancients did of old. 


These celebrations exalt you only. Yours is the 
glory. The lord promotes a hundred yajnas. He is up on 
high over us all. 


gta waféasitseara: d 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIV 969 


CHAPTER-XXXIV 


1. (Mana Devata, Shivasankalpa Rshi) 


ami aaa ea dd unu aerated bru 
wafer Sather we ow: fered scored ue 


Yajjagrato duramudaiti daivam tadu suptasya 
tathaivaiti. Durangamam jyotisam jyotirekam 
tanme manah Ssivasankalpamastu. 


The ‘Daiva mind’, perceptive faculty of the 
intelligent soul, which in the waking state goes far and 
shines, which in the dream state also roams around the 
same way and takes us far, that one unique light of lights, 
that mind of mine, I pray, be full of noble thoughts, 
intentions and resolutions. 


2. (Mana Devata, Shivasankalpa Rshi) 
Aa wdivaral mR da Huard aada eft: 
rud agaa: WT Ta ud: Padge ue 


Yena karmanyapaso manisino yajne krnvanti 
vidathesu dhirah. Yadapurvam yaksamantah 
prajanam tanme manah Sivasankalpamastu. 


The ‘Yaksha mind’, volitional faculty, by which 
men of action, thought and constancy organise and 
perform all acts in yajnic programmes of life, the 
matchless faculty, present in all people, may that mind 
of mine, I pray, be full of noble thoughts, intentions 
and resolutions. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


970 YAJURVEDA 


3. (Mana Devata, Shivasankalpa Rshi) 
warming ad fis arated usmd | 
amA fer n at feeaa aa aa: fra- 
gemma N 


Yatprajnanamuta ceto dhrti$ca yajjyotirantar- 
amrtam prajasu. Yasmanna’rte kim cana karma 
kriyate tanme manah Sivasankalpamastu. 


The 'Prajnana, Chitta and Dhriti mind', 
instrument of awareness, memory and deeper retention, 
which is the internal light immortal of living beings, 
without which no action whatsoever is possible, may 
that mind of mine, I pray, be full of noble thoughts, 
intentions and resolutions. 


4. (Mana Devata, Shivasankalpa Rshi) 


ae yd yee sfeneeufigéraunqda wed | 
dd agere rert udi oed. read geared ic 


Yenedam bhutam bhuvanam bhavisyat pari- 
grhitamamrtena sarvam. Yena yajnastayate 
saptahota tanme manah Sivasankalpamastu. 


The mind, immortal faculty by which all this that 
was, and is, and shall be is perceived and retained, and 
by which the seven-priest (five senses, feeling-will and 
understanding) yajna is planned and performed, may 
that mind of mine, I pray, be full of noble thoughts, 
intentions and resolutions. 


5. (Mana Devata, Shivasankalpa Rshi) 


aka: are astesfa afer ufdfssdr Tama- 
fam: ativan dart wart ast cA: ra- 
Hg gl 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIV 971 


Yasminnrcah sama yajumsi yasmin pratisthita 
rathanabhavivarah. Yasminscittam sarvamotam 
prajanam tanme manah Sivasankalpamastu. 


The mind in which are woven Riks, hymns of 
knowledge, Yajus, hymns of application, and Samans, 
hymns of celebration and devotion (and the hymns of 
divinity), in which they are inter-fixed like spokes in 
the nave of a wheel, in which the Chitta, memory and 
unconscious of all the people, is inter-woven, may that 
mind of mine, I pray, be full of noble thoughts, intentions 
and resolutions. 


6. (Mana Devata, Shivasankalpa Rshi) 


wurrfercsertferer ayers gras ssa i 

guts Rn wets du wt: radgan- 

"END US 

Susarathira$vaniva yanmanusyanneniyate’ 

bhisubhirvajina iva. Hrtpratistham yadajiram 

javistham tanme manah $ivasankalpamastu. 

The mind which leads people by stimulation of 

the senses like a good driver controlling fast moving 
horses with bridle strings, which abides in the heart, 
which is unageing and fastest in motion, may that mind 
of mine, I pray, be full of noble thoughts, intentions 
and resolutions. 


7. (Anna Devata, Agastya Rshi) 


fad 4 ete wer smi afe ad 
wed frat a qni faddadadd non 


Pitum nu stosam maho dharmanarm tavisim. 
Yasya trito vyojasa vrtram viparvamardayat. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


972 YAJURVEDA 


In truth I celebrate food and energy, might and 
majesty, justice and piety, and power and splendour, 
by the force of which Indra, saviour in all three phases 
of time, destroys the otherwise invulnerable Vritra, 
demon of darkness, want and sin. 


8.  (Anumati Devata, Agastya Rshi) 


sihaeqna wt wend ot ot xm a 
wed ware At fea ow urssmdeife ATA ue u 


Anvidanumate tvam manyasai sam ca naskrdhi. 


Anumati, spirit and power of agreeability, 
common consent and assent, whatever you approve, and 
whatever you agree is good, give us that, do that for us. 


Help us grow in intelligence and expertise for good 
action. Help us all cross the seas of life with success. 


9. (Anumati Devata, Agastya Rshi) 


eri Asaan xem wem | 

sifted geraré4dt weet erem Wa: eV 

Anu no’dyanumatiryajnam devesu manyatam. 

Agnisca havyavahano bhavatam dasuse mayah. 

May Anumati, spirit of consent and common will, 

have our yajna of positive action accepted among the 
noblest people, and may both the common will and Agni, 
brilliant leader and carrier of oblations and investments 
to the heights of success, be good and generous to the 
contributive participant in the corporate yajna of life. 


10. (Sinivali Devata, Gritsamada Rshi) 


furiterfer yde at amaA erat | 
werd goed wsn Afa fafafz a: ngon 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIV 973 


Sinivali prthustuke ya devanamasi svasa. 
Jusasva havyamahutam prajam devi dididdhi 
nah. 


Lady of love and loyalty, virgin beauty of fertility, 
brilliant and pious, sister of the learned, accept the holy 
offer of marriage, take the hand of the noble groom 
invited, enjoy life, and give us the gift of lovely children. 


11. (Sarasvati Devata, Gritsamada Rshi) 
usd ep uwüeedtnfu ur wera: | 
mad q deem A staa een 


Panca nadyah sarasvatimapi yanti sasrotasah. 
Sarasvati tu pancadha so dese’ bhavatsarit. 


Five streams of sense experience with their perceptions 
flow into the one Sarasvati of the mind, and then the 
mind, converting the experience into language, flows 
out in five streams of expression. 


(This is the Vedic triangle of Shabda, Artha and 
Pratyaya, that is, the semantic triangle of language, 
reality and meaning, which is the mental association of 
word and object in an integrated mental picture. The 
mantra also draws the full circle of experience, 
interpretation and expression for communication of the 
experience. The central interpretive role is played by 
the soul through its consciousness, chetana, which is 
its essential property, senses and mind being its 
instruments.) 


12. (Agni Devata, Hiranyastupa Angirasa Rshi) 


verde vsa sad gaminva: yea: 
msi 1 wd aa pat feermuurssüsu edt 
MATS: t9 9 0 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


974 YAJURVEDA 


Tvamagne prathamo’angira’ rsirdevo deva- 
namabhavah sivah sakha. Tava vrate kavayo 
vidmanapaso 'jayanta maruto bhrajadristayah. 


Agni, first vibration and spirit of life, visionary 
light of lights, you arise ahead, blessed and blissful, 
leader and friend of the learned and the wise. Within 
your code of life and living, knowledge, action and piety, 
arise great souls, masters of knowledge and action, 
visionary heroes of arms, poets and men of tempestuous 
speed headed towards great achievements. 


13. (Agni Devata, Hiranyastupa Angirasa Rshi) 
ve Aisa web ca aR HAAA tat Gave aT d 
am diet wa maA vafururegd 
wd ues 


Tvam no'agne tava deva payubhirmaghono 
raksa tanvasca vandya. Trata tokasya tanaye 
gavamasyanimesain raksamanastava vrate. 


Agni, brilliant power and divine celebrity, living 
within your laws of life and system, we pray, with your 
methods of protection, preserve and promote our body- 
system and the generous leader of our social yajna. You 
are the saviour and vigilant protector of our children 
and grand children, our health of body and mind, and 
our cows and forms of culture. 


14. (Agni Devata, Devashrava Devavata Bharata Rshis) 
urdrareenr ferfencr«ue: weftar eui aa | 
STEHT CMA USSSA AGASSI tg 


Uttanayamava bhara cikitvantsadyah pravita 
vrsanam jajana. Arusastupo rusSadasya paja' 
idayasputro vayune 'janista. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIV 975 


The scholar of the science of yajna, fire and water, 
inspired to do good, generates rain and fills the extended 
sky and earth. 


The child of theVoice divine, seer of the secrets 
of nature, brilliant and keen to raise men of peace, breaks 
new grounds in science and creates new modes of energy 
and power. 


Agni, lord of light and power, inspire and fill this 
child of the Voice with light and knowledge to the full. 


15. (Agni Devata, Devashrava Devavata Bharata Rshis) 


salam ud emi mut ufsremssrfil i 
wrdeer fu Aar ga rdg uud 


Idayastva pade vayam nabha prthivya 'adhi. 
Jatavedo nidhimahyagne havyaya vodhave. 


Holy fire and omniscient power of light, in the 
sanctity of the Divine Word, on the centre-vedi of the 
earth, we instal you and light you in faith for the creation 
and diffusion of the fragrant materials and means of 
life in the state of yajna. 


16. (Indra Devata, Nodha Rshi) 


Uda vaca spi freluretssifsrerc | 
marat: qerassisfisrarareiTaren Ay fersfarer us u 
Pra manmahe $avasanaya Susamangusam 


girvanase 'angirasvat. Suvrktibhih stuvata’ 
rgmiyayarcamarkam nare vi$rutaya. 


We study and meditate on nature's energy and 
the hymns in praise of divine energy, we study the sun, 
lightning and the roaring winds, and we honour the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


976 YAJURVEDA 


venerable learned and the wise, dear as the breath of 
life for the sake of scientific knowledge and power, and, 
with cleansing words and deeds, we pray for the noble 
leader, a man of holy speech, who studies the Riks for 
knowledge, hears the learned for wisdom, and worships 
the hymns of divine praise. 


17. (Indra Devata, Nodha Rshi) 


Ww at We ufz wal acess STOPHTUTSDHTH |d 
b a: ge fret: amser As mS- 
sifera ngon 


Pra vo mahe mahi namo bharadhvamangusyain 
Savasanaya sama. Yena nah purve pitarah 
padajiüia'arcanto'angiraso ga'avindan. 

Offer great hospitality and high reverence to 
Indra, lord of power and majesty, and in his honour, 
sing hymns of Sama by which our ancient forefathers, 
scholars of the Veda in possession of the knowledge of 
creation, singing songs of worship, realized the holy 
speech for you and for us all. 


18. (Indra Devata, Devashrava & Devavata Bharata Rshis) 
peor vr Aem: wala: qata un ada 
ates fan fafdarassrfsrslfia ralarfir «rr ey 
fe dena: gen 
Icchanti tva somyasah sakhayah sunvanti somam 


dadhati prayamsi. Titiksante’abhisastim 
jananamindra tvada kascana hi praketah. 


Indra, lord of knowledge and majesty, friends 
love you, lovers of soma wait on you, they distil the 
soma and offer delightful oblations to you, they even 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIV 977 


forbear the imprecations of people, because there is 
hardly anyone more knowledgeable than you, since all 
knowledge flows from you. 


19. (Indra Devata, Devashrava & Devavata Bharata Rshis) 


ad qx dom fagsneset ¢ ou ufa eat esa 
Raa «uut waar enda «per mator: ufirsris- 
amr usu 


Na te dure parama cidrajainsya tu pra yahi 
harivo haribhyam. Sthiraya vrsne savana krtema 
yukta gravanah samidhane 'agnau. 


Indra, lord of power and majesty, ruler of the 
world, even the farthest regions are not too far for you. 
Lord of the fastest carriers, come post-haste by the steeds 
at your command. These offerings of yajna have been 
made for the constant lord of showers. The clouds are 
full and ready. The fire is lit and blazing. 


20. (Soma Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


até «peu adn ites veniunt qure Tirant 
nydd reist ATATASA ATT Uso 


Asadham yutsu prtanasu paprim svarsamapsam 
vrjanasya gopam. Bharesujam suksitim 
susravasam jayantam tvamanu madema soma. 


Soma, lord of power and joyous prosperity, 
formidable hero in battles, defender of the force of 
armies, winner of light, giver of cool waters, preserver 
of strength, guardian of fortifications, victor of wars, 
ruler of the beautiful earth, spirit of fame and honour, 
and all round victorious, let us rejoice with you and 
celebrate with soma. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


978 YAJURVEDA 


21. (Soma Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
dri Amasa areal ait hoa atten 
Wad fracas fugsrdui at aatra eeu 


Somo dhenum somo’arvantamasum somo viram 
karmanyam dadati. Sadanyam vidathyam 
sabheyam pitr$ravanam yo dadasadasmai. 


Whoever offers honour and oblations to Soma, 
ruler of life and yajna, Soma blesses him with the gift 
of cows and cultured speech, Soma gives him the fastest 
carrier ‘horse’, Soma blesses him with a brave son or 
daughter heroic in action, gracious in gatherings, pious 
in yajna, worthy of high office in assemblies, and 
obedient follower of parental tradition. 


22. (Soma Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


verfirarsairesit: area fasaad siaa TT: | 
rade cat wenfdur ferui eei nN 


Tyamima'osadhih soma visvastvamapo’ 
ajanayastvam gah. Tvamatatanthorvantariksam 
tvam jyotisa vi tamo vavartha. 


Soma, creative power of nature and the world, 
you create all these herbs of the world, you create the 
waters and yajnic actions, you create the earth, cows 
and holy speech. You create and expand the wide skies, 
and you dispel and replace the darkness with light and 
remove ignorance and sin with knowledge and Dharma. 


23. (Soma Devata, Gotama Rshi) 
San at ater aa aia wet snredeureafur dear 
m vwassdadiita erede: ui fulfeneur 
nfet R30 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIV 979 


Devena no manasa deva soma rayo bhagain 
sahasavannabhi yudhya. Ma tva” tanadiSise 
viryasyobhayebhyah pra cikitsa gavistau. 


Soma, lord ruler of honour and prosperity, mighty 
and brilliant power, defend and grant our share of wealth 
with a noble and generous mind. No one can stop or 
restrict you since you rule the power and valour as 
master. And when there is desire for the supreme bliss, 
help us as physician to achieve both earth and heaven. 


24. (Savita Devata, Angirasa Hiranyastupa Rshi) 
sr ohare: uferegnedt aa anh aa 


fare | Roag: ferm messmureemed urn 
erdtfer uw 


Astau vyakhyat kakubhah prthivyastri dhanva 
yojana sapta sindhun. Hiranyaksah savita deva’ 
agad dadhadratna dasuse varyani. 


Savita, self-effulgent lord of golden eye, comes 
bearing choice gifts of jewels for the giver of charity 
through yajna, he comes filling and illuminating the 
eight directions and sub-directions of the earth, crossing 
the three regions, namely, the heavenly sphere, the 
middle sphere and the earth, through the seven seas of 
space, viz., Bhu, Bhuva, Sva, Maha, Jana, Tapa and 
Satyam. 


25. (Savita Devata, Angirasa Hiranyastupa Rshi) 
f&xXusrarfür: ferar fercidfuresr eretuferdtssra- 
tad | stardiat area afa aaah aw Viu 
mum Rei 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


980 YAJURVEDA 


Hiranyapanih savita vicarsanirubhe dyava- 
prthivi’antariyate. Apamivam badhate veti 
suryamabhi krsnena rajasa dyamrnoti. 
Savita, lord of golden arms, all illuminator, 
moves the sun over both heaven and earth, dispels the 
dark and wards off disease. And when it retires it 


withdraws the sun and, with the centripetal force of its 
energy, sucks in the world of light to zero in the dark. 


26. (Savita Devata, Angirasa Hiranyastupa Rshi) 


faXusgzdtssrds: ota: dure: erat araat]e i 
anA arqemraeerzer: ufears vum: ust 


Hiranyahasto’asurah sunithah sumrdikah 
svavan yatvarvan. Apasedhan raksaso 
yatudhananasthaddevah pratidosam grnanah. 


Come Savita, self-refulgent lord of golden beams, 
rise and shine forth, energizing, lighting the path of 
guidance, gracious and blissful, throwing off the wicked, 
the unjust and the evil doers, and exposing every sin 
and crime. 


27. (Savita Devata, Angirasa Hiranyastupa Rshi) 
ad weal: faa: geatatstura: wpeharssreTREr od 
afatsstar uferfl: art tat at atserfet a ate 
Sq uen 
Ye te panthah savitah purvyaso’renavah sukrta’- 


antarikse. Tebhirno’adya pathibhih sugebhi 
raksa ca no’adhi ca bruhi deva. 


Savita, lord of light and knowledge, ancient and 
eternal are your paths, free from dust, well laid out 
between heaven and earth. By those paths, straight and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIV 981 


simple, come to us to-day, brilliant lord, protect us, and 
speak to us from above. 


28. (Ashvinau Devate, Praskanva Rshi) 


sur fama a: snb aera gd 
atfatearhtatfart: nec 


Ubha pibatamasvinobha nah sarma yacchatam. 
Avidriyabhirutibhih. 

Ashvins, harbingers of light and peace like the 
sun and moon, givers of knowledge and wisdom like 
teacher and preacher, come both of you, drink to your 
pleasure the juice of soma and give us safety and comfort 
with inviolable means of defence and protection. 


29. (Ashvins Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 
aehadaban ada ad al eer quo 


wie | smgersdir fag at qa ot at wad 
arstardl een 


Apnasvatimasvina vacamasme krtam no dasra 
vrsana manisam. Adyutye'vase ni hvaye vam 
vrdhe ca no bhavatam vajasatau. 

Ashvins, auspicious powers of wonderful acts, 
generous lords, render our mind and speech worthy of 
noble action and achievement I invoke you for sure 
defence and protection without a gamble. Be with us 
for victory and advancement in the battle of life. 


30. (Ashvinau Devate, Kutsa Rshi) 
aie: ufturauerafisfavfsear aretha: à 
wu frat ator urnmeenmdíafa: fund: uferetssa 
HH non 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


982 YAJURVEDA 


Dyubhiraktubhih pari patamasmanaristebhi- 
rasvina saubhagebhih. Tanno mitro varuno 
mamahantamaditih sindhuh prthivi’ uta dyauh. 


Ashvins, powers of piety and prosperity, protect 
us by days and by nights and by the noblest forms of 
sinless prosperity. May Mitra, universal friend, and 
Varuna, lord of justice, safeguard that, and may the 
earth, heaven, sea and sky promote that prosperity. 


31. (Surya Devata, Hiranyastupa Rshi) 


ar Pod wea ata fee deg Heb a | 
Rua ferar tat eat athe yeti uye 


A krsnena rajasa vartamano nive$ayannamrtam 
martyam ca. Hiranyayena savita rathena devo 
yati bhuvanani pasyan. 


Revolving with its own force of gravity, moved 
round and round by the force of cosmic dynamics, 
lighting the constant and the changing forms of nature, 
Savita, the brilliant sun, goes on and on by his golden 
chariot, watching the worlds of the universe. 


32. (Ratri Devata, Kutsa Rshi) 


sm wa urffle ws: aama adi: a fea: 
"aleifu agd ferfdusussm cm dda ad: use 
A ratri parthivam rajah pituraprayi dhamabhih. 
Divah sadamsi brhati vi tisthasa’a tvesam 
vartate tamah. 


The great night comes and covers the regions of 
the earth alongwith the regions of the skies. Away from 
the regions of the sun it stays and eclipses the areas of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIV 983 


light, and the darkness remains until the light comes 
again. 


33. (Usha Devata, Gotama Rshi) 


syn aame erfsrfrefa i 
at der a ata a ard? an 


Usastaccitramabharasmabhyam vajinivati. 
Yena tokam ca tanayam ca dhamahe. 


Usha, lady of the light at dawn, mistress of beauty 
and excitement, come bearing that food and wondrous 
energy for us by which we may beget, support and 
rejoice with our children and the children of our 
children. 


34. (Agni, etc., Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


wR ora werd Urafarasor urrfyerdti 
mat yaoi sehra Wid: SAAT wg ESI 


Prataragnim pratarindram havamahe pratar- 
mitravaruna pratarasvina. Pratarbhagam 
pusanam brahmanaspatim pratah somamuta 
rudram huvema. 


Early morning we invoke Agni, lord of light, light 
the fire and pray for the light of life. Early morning we 
invoke Indra and pray for power and honour. Early 
morning we invoke Mitra and Varuna, and pray for the 
energy of prana and udana. Early morning we invoke 
the Ashvins and pray for learning and wisdom. Early 
morning we invoke Bhaga, and pray for strength and 
prosperity. We invoke Pusha and pray for health and 
nourishment. We invoke Brahmanaspati, lord 
omniscient, and pray for knowledge and vision. Early 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


984 YAJURVEDA 


morning we invoke Soma, and pray for peace and joy. 
Early morning we invoke Rudra and pray for spiritual 
strength. 


35. (Bhaga Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


mana mim gaa ad yan fea? d 
staaa meie Raat fer wt ag- 
ae nn 


Pratarjitam bhagamugrain huvema vayam 
putramaditeryo vidharta. Adhrascidyam 
manyamanasturascidraja cidyam bhagam 
bhaksityaha. 


Early morning we invoke Bhaga, and pray for 
honour and prosperity, Bhaga, all victorious, lustrous 
child of immortality and sustainer of the social system, 
which everybody — whether poor and helpless, or fast 
and impetuous, or a ruling king — loves and honours, 
and of which the Lord of Life says: Acquire honour 
and glory won by effort and endeavour and enjoy. 


36. (Bhagavan Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 
wm gules Geka sun freada d: 
aay at sra ARRIT wu gR: varus i 
Bhaga pranetarbhaga satyaradho bhagemam 


dhiyamudava dadannah. Bhaga pra no janaya 
gobhirasvairbhaga pra nrbhirnrvantah syama. 


Lord of glory, lord of inspiration for 
advancement, lord of truth and beneficence, lord of light 
and knowledge, blessed us as you have with intelligence, 
we pray, save this intelligence of ours from sin and lead 
us to the vision of divinity. Lord of power and prosperity, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIV 985 


help us grow with cows and horses, let us advance with 
manpower, bless us with men of vision and leaders of 
quality. 


37. (Bhaga Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


sardi mtaa: wur ufucrssa RASTE 
sitar aan aa cartes qual utu sient 


Utedanim bhagavantah syamota prapitva’uta 
madhye'ahnam. Utodita maghavantsuryasya 
vayam devanain sumatau syama. 


Maghavan, magnanimous lord of honour and 
prosperity, we pray, we may be prosperous at the present 
time. And may we be prosperous at the rise of the sun. 
Let us prosper at the middle of the day. And let us be 
prosperous in the evening. Let us always abide in the 
wisdom and guiding vision of the noble and brilliant 
saints and sages for the achievement of wealth and other 
wherewithal of life 


38. (Bhagavan Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 
anisqa ware sated emp aa errem: TAT | 
d wat am adsgsitedtfa a at at ucsudr 
dag use 
Bhaga’eva bhagavan’astu devastena vayam 


bhagavantah syama. Tam tva bhaga sarva’ 
ijjohaviti sa no bhaga pura eta bhaveha. 


Masters of wisdom and brilliance, the Lord 
creator of the glorious universe alone is the Lord 
Supreme of honour and prosperity. May we be 
prosperous by virtue of His generosity. 


Lord of honour and glory, the entire humanity 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


986 YAJURVEDA 
invokes, adores and worships you only. 


Lord giver of honour and prosperity, may you be 
our guide, inspire us and lead us to prosperity. 


39. (Bhaga Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


Pherae Ad aerial rele ward | statis 
daaa sut at velfirarsad arfsrissmde-t use 


Samadhvarayosaso namanta dadhikraveva 
Sucaye padaya. Arvacinam vasuvidam bhagam 
no rathamivasva vajina’a vahantu. 


The lights of the dawn, inspired and inspiring to 
silence and prayer, advancing like the golden chariot 
of the sun for the achievement of yajnic acts of love 
and creation may, we pray, bring us the newest treasures 
of honour and prosperity, just like the fastest horses 
flying chariot-loads of a hero’s trophies of victory. 


40. (Usha Devata, Vasishtha Rshi) 


spatadintddissarat eredi: aed WET: | 
"d gett Ayaa: witar ga ula cata: cat 


q: xoll 


A$vavatirgomatirna! usaso viravatih sada- 
mucchantu bhadrah. Ghrtam duhana visvatah 
prapita yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


The holy dawns, replete with vapours, blest with 
sunbeams, pregnant with energy and generous with bliss 
may, we pray, sanctify our home and, bringing showers 
of ghrta and water, may fill our life with all round 
prosperity. And may you, brilliant ladies, protect and 
promote us always with good fortune like the dawn. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIV 987 
41. (Pusha Devata, Suhotra Rshi) 


yada ad aad a Rela weed ae | 
diae se ufa ise 


Pusan tava vrate vayam na risyema kada cana. 
Stotarasta tha smasi. 


Pushan, lord of health and joy, living within the 
rules of your discipline, we pray, we may never suffer 


harm or loss and, singing songs of thanks for you here, 
live long and happily. 


42. (Pusha Devata, Rijishva Rshi) 


uda: Ruai Caen Ha PASA AASR | 
a ut mada fend frax Men u 
YET SRI 

Pathaspathah paripatim vacasya kamena krto’ 


abhyanadarkam. Sa no rasacchurudhas- 
candragra dhiyam dhiyam sisadhati pra pusa. 


Let the devotee seasoned by honest words and 
desire come and surrender to adorable Pusha, lord of 
health and growth, protector of every way of life. And 
Pusha grants the most protective and brilliant means of 
advancement and helps realise every thought and 
intention of the devotee for us. 


43. (Vishnu Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


At war fade feruirturssraisz: | 
stat erdlfor ence wes 


Trini pada vi cakrame visnurgopa’ adabhyah. 
Ato dharmani dharayan. 


Vishnu, omnipresent lord of the universe, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


988 YAJURVEDA 


inviolable and intrepidable protector, sustaining the laws 
of existence and maintaining the sustainers of life such 
as earth and sun, takes the three steps of creation through 
the causal Prakriti, subtle materials, and the concrete 
forms of life and matter. Hence He alone is the lord 
adorable. 


44. (Vishnu Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


aaa ferre wmTereiu: wen d 
fawn uaW wed 


Tadvipraso vipanyavo jagrvainsah samindhate. 
Visnoryatparamam padam. 


That which is the highest stage of human 
attainability is Vishnu's divinity. That is what the sages, 
celebrants, ever wakeful among humanity, meditate, 
light up, realise and live. 


45. (Dyava-prithivi Devate, Bharadvaja Rshi) 


yad spearmafurferdrt geet ta «usur d 
wmeluf2ret eure smium fenehfWrdsarsm yR- 
THAT qwe 


Ghrtavati bhuvananam abhisriyorvi prthvi 
madhudughe supesasa. Dyavaprthivi varunasya 
dharmana viskabhite'ajare bhuriretasa. 


By the eternal power and existential law of 
Varuna, Lord Supreme, are sustained firmly the sun and 
the earth together, both unageing, mighty prolific, 
abundant in living waters, glory of the worlds, wide, 
expansive, full of honey sweets and wondrous beautiful. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIV 989 
46. (Prithivi & others Devata, Vihavya Rshi) 


aod: qms do taragan 
ar | ada earssnfacmsdufrarst uri «ratvufir 
INARA ISK 

Ye nah sapatna’apa te bhavantvindragni- 


bhyamava badhamahe tan. Vasavo rudra'aditya' 
uparispr$am mogram cettaramadhi rajamakran. 


Whoever are our enemies, we keep off. We throw 
them off with arms of fire and electric energy. May the 
Vasus, Rudras and Adityas raise me sky-high, mighty 
strong and wide-awake to preside over the rulers of the 
world. 


47. (Ashvinau Devate, Hiranyastupa Rshi) 


att steer farfsrtenrasifig satiated nA am 

urgeri A cutest genres Geld gar das 
erp sail 

A nasatya tribhirekadasairiha devebhiryatam 

madhupeyamasvina. Prayustaristam ni rapamsi 

mrksatam sedhatam dveso bhavatam sacabhuva. 

Ashvins, powers true and incorruptible, come 

here with thirty three divinities to drink the honey- 

sweets of nectar, promote our health and age, wash off 


our sins and evil, ward off jealousy and enmity, and be 
close friends with us in truth. 


48. (Maruts Devata, Agastya Rshi) 


WW a xdrHbcedsge Tf Aree ANT: | 
wur adhe ge enu fenem qsrt siata ise i 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


990 YAJURVEDA 


Esa va stomo maruta’ iyam girmandaryasya 
manyasya karoh. Esa yasista tanve vayam 
vidyamesam vrjanam jiradanum. 


Maruts, dynamic citizens of the land, this valuable 
work of the venerable artist of eminence and this treatise 
is for you. Come with food and energy for the growth 
and protection of the health of the people of all ages. 
And we shall find the food, energy and knowledge for 
a general tonic and panacea for all disease. 


49. (Rishis Devata, Prajapatya Yajna Rshi) 


Weed: wg wausstad: ueuurssedu: wur 
Xem: geet wataqagea tsaar fat realy, 4 
WH sei 


Sahastomah saha cchandasa’avrtah sahaprama’ 
rsayah sapta daivyah. Purvesam pantha- 
manudrsya dhira’anvalebhire rathyo na rasmin. 


Sages and scholars collaborating on projects of 
common interest, working together on learned subjects, 
graduates equally competent in reason and science, 
visionaries of divinity with penetrating senses, mind and 
intellect, courageous and resolute of will, having studied 
and realised the paths traversed by the predecessors, 
extend the bounds of knowledge and hold the reins of 
the human community on the march to progress. 


50. (Hiranyanteja Devata, Daksha Rshi) 


amq ehem mAN d 
gasfedus ercieerssrararfélyrara APT uso t 


Ayusyam varcasyain raàyasposamaudbhidam. 
Idain hiranyam varcasvajjaitrayavisatadu mam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIV 991 


This golden glow of life and health which bursts 
forth from within is the gift of mother earth. It is the 
giver of health and long age and physical and intellectual 
brilliance. It is the guardian giver of wealth and 
insurance against suffering and disease. May this golden 
treasure of lustrous victory, I pray, come in to bless me 
with success in life. 


51. (Hiranyanteja Devata, Daksha Rshi) 


q agatsa a fisrearektFa eeramst: werastes 
Am | at fasfd ataraur: fetvuas a day qua 
Ada: uw A pure dpi: ye 


Na tadraksamsi na pisacastaranti devanamojah 
prathamajam hyetat. Yo bibharti daksayanain 
hiranyain sa devesu krnute dirghamayuh sa 
manusyesu krnute dirghamayuh. 


That golden glow of celibate life the demons and 
ogres cannot violate, nor can they cross over and attain 
it. It is the splendour of the divines, first born of Mother 
Nature. One who commands this golden essence of the 
art of life and living lives a long age of activity among 
the divines, lives a long age of activity among humanity. 


52. (Hiranyanteja Devata, Daksha Rshi) 


garter aaron fatuax seater umani: 
qasr GATT MASSA ISAS SSA i2 


Yadabadhnan daksayana hiranyam $atanikaya 
sumanasyamanah. Tanma'a badhnami 
Satasaradayayusmanjaradastiryathasam. 


That golden glowing science and discipline of 
life which the sages of noble mind and expertise of living 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


992 YAJURVEDA 


hold and prescribe for a man desirous of a hundred fold 
lustre, I hold and observe so that I may live a full 
abundant age of hundred years. 


53. (Prithivi etc. Devata, Rijishva Rshi) 


sd Asi: yuikast s ushurq uferdt dag: od 
fase ganska wer: Kat uet: enfenres- 


ST UGB 


Uta no’ hirbudhnyah $rnotvaja'ekapat prthivi 
samudrah. Vi$ve deva’rtavrdho huvanah stuta 
mantrah kavisasta’avantu. 


Just as our voice reaches the clouds floating in 
the sky, the earth and the sea, so may it reach the eternal 
Lord of omniscience, and may the Lord listen to our 
prayer. 


Also, may the pursuers and promoters of truth and 
eternal law, the noblest minds of the world, and the 
mantras and formulas of divine celebration created and 
sung by the poets of imagination, protect and promote 
us. 


54. (Adityas Devata, Kurma gartsamada Rshi) 


gur Ansarat gaet: wergrstsst Get wert 
guid finvssidur seb aeqfasndt aeo aas- 
asy: NASH 

Ima gira’adityebhyo ghrtasnuh sanadrajabhyo 
juhva juhomi. Srnotu mitro’aryama bhago 
nastuvijato varuno dakso 'ainsah. 


These words of prayer sanctified by holy waters 
and ghrta I always take and offer in yajna with the ladle 
of faith and love to the Adityas for the brilliant rulers. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIV 993 


May Mitra, universal friend, Aryama, lord of 
justice, Bhaga, lord of honour and prosperity, Tuvijata, 
manifesting for all, Varuna, best power and highest, 
Daksha, master of the art of creation, and Ansha, the 
brilliant Sun, hear my prayers for all. 


55. (Adhyatma & Pranas Devata, Kanva Rshi) 


qasata: ufdízar: sry aa tata wandureui 
wana: vendat eirenrlsud mse erret 
* xt iss 


Sapta’rsayah pratihitah $arire sapta raksanti 
sadamapramadam. Saptapah | svapato 
lokamiyustatra jagrto 'asvapnajau satrasadau ca 
devau. 


Seven sages, i.e., five faculties of perception, one 
mana (mind), and one buddhi (intellect), vested in the 
body, the seven together serve and protect the body 
without let up and negligence. Of the sleeping person, 
the seven, still there, retire with the soul into the heart. 
But two other sages, i.e., prana and apana, keep awake 
in the body and do not go to sleep. 


56. (Brahmanaspati Devata, Kanva Rshi) 


sits sup GXemnedrcrW | 

su Ww dq wed: qariesz- umpier wet uai 
Uttistha brahmanaspate devayantastvemahe. 
Upa pra yantu marutah sudanava'indra 
prasurbhava saca. 

Arise, lord of universal Vedic knowledge, we 
have come to you in search of divinity in pursuit of 
knowledge. The most charitable, generous and dynamic 
people of the speed of the winds come to you. Indra, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


994 YAJURVEDA 


lord of knowledge and power, be friends, be smart with 
instant action. 


57. (Brahmanaspati Devata, Kanva Rshi) 


WT serfs acre | ufefeezr enu 
faatsation Imset fa erfenY neon 


Pra nunam brahmanaspatirmantram vadat- 
yukthyam. Yasminnindro varuno mitro'aryama 
deva’okamsi cakrire. 


Brahmanaspati, lord of universal knowledge, 
speaks to us, for sure, of the wonder mantra of celebrated 
knowledge in which divinities such as Mitra, Varuna, 
Aryama and Indra abide in mystery with their power 
and secret of prana, water, spirit and light. 


58. (Brahmanaspati Devata, Gritsamada Rshi) 


mehed caue aa gated alfer ada a 
fra | fasad agd uada dar qagan faal 
qit: as gat fagat i fagackat 1 a H: f | 
sr-uds-Ter AT SS uz 


Brahmanaspate tvamasya yanta suktasya bodhi 
tanayam ca jinva. Visvam tadbhadram yadavanti 
deva brhadvadema vidathe suvirah. Ya’ ima 
vi$va. Vi$vakarma. Yo nah pita. Anna- 
pate 'nnasya no dehi. 


Brahmanaspati, lord of the universe and universal 
knowledge, you are the leading light and controller of 
this world. 


Listen, and acknowledge our praise and prayer. 
Love, protect and promote our children. The universal 
good which the divinities protect and extend may come 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIV 995 


and bless us. Brave with heroic children, we sing great 
songs of praise in honour of the Lord. 


Vishvakarma who is our father has created all 
these worlds of existence. 


Lord of food and energy, bless us with food, 
energy and the power to grow and rise. 


sta agase: d 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


996 YAJURVEDA 


CHAPTER-XXXV 


1.  (Pitara Devata, Adityas or Devas Rshis) 
samt dq wues aadiad: | ster cien: 


Gada: | ghnethradhtaded at darererarta- 
*N ngu 


Apeto yantu panayo’ sumna devaptyavah. Asya 
lokah sutavatah. Dyubhirahobhiraktu- 
bhirvyaktam yamo dadatvavasanamasmai. 


Go off from here the niggards, the malevolent 
and the revilers of Divinity. This is the beauteous place 
of the generous and inspired yajamana. May Yama, the 
leading light and controller of the world, grant him a 
place of rest and freedom blest by the lights of heaven 
and by days and nights. 


2.  (Savita Devata, Adityas or Devas Rshis) 
"fer a yR: gfe edrenfuüwsq | 
wet gagat: usu 


Savita te $arirebhyah prthivyamllokamicchatu. 
Tasmai yujyantamusriyah. 


Human soul, may Savita, Lord of life and Law, 
will and determine a suitable place of residence for your 
bodies on the earth or in the skies, and may the rays of 
the sun be instrumental to that placement for you. 


3. (Savita Devata, Adityas or Devas Rshis) 


aa: tag fee cdarenmrufster wien endum | 
ferdtbesrargierart: us 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXV 99'7 


Vayuh punatu savita punatvagnerbhrajasa 
suryasya varcasa vimucyantamusriyah. 

May the wind purify you. May Savita, lord of 
light, purify you with the blazing heat of agni and the 
light of the sun. And may the rays of light deliver you 
from bondage. 


4.  (Vayu & Savita Devate, Adityas or Devas Rshis) 
arad at Frat uu at qatar | 
"ipurenszfenenser aada GS sil 


A$vatthe vo nisadanam parne vo vasatiskrta. 
Gobhaja itkilasatha yatsanavatha purusam. 


Short is your stay in a temporary world. Your nest 
is built but on a leaf. Live here as co-sharers of existence 
with the earth, the senses, the sun-beams and the divine 
Word, and abide in worship close to the eternal Spirit 
of the universe. 


5.  (Vayu & Savita Devate, Adityas or Devas Rshis) 


"ferar à skier urqeuserssmeuq | 
wet uferfa erste ii 


Savita te Sartrani maturupastha'a vapatu. 
Tasmai prthivi Sambhava. 


May Savita, lord of creation and generation, plant 
your bodies in the womb of the mother and seat you on 
her lap of love. 


Mother, mother earth, Mother Nature, be kind 
and gracious to this soul. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


998 


YAJURVEDA 


(Prajapati Devata, Adityas Devas Rshis) 
wma car eaatarqutech ein fr emer d 
ard a: wisberau us 


Prajapatau tva devatayamupodake loke ni 
dadhamyasau. Apa nah $o$ucadagham. 


O soul, I place you securely in the beautiful world 


close to the sacred waters within the divine Prajapati, 
father of his children. 


May He wash off our sins and shine us to 


brilliance. 


ve 


(Yama Devata, Sankasuka Rshi) 

ui Feiss te Wat uwdssresgdi saat i 
"weis spuerd d adit ar d: usnesitthar ura 
eir wel 

Param mrtyo’anu parehi pantham yaste’anya’ 


itaro devayanat. Caksusmate $rnvate te bravimi 
ma nah prajam ririso mota viran. 


Yama, lord of death and reckoning, keep off the 


path that is other than the divine. Come following the 
path that is supreme. 


Lord of vision, lord of the ear, I speak to you in 


prayer: Do not hurt our children, do not strike the brave. 


8. 


(Vishvedeva Devata, Adityas or Devas Rshis) 

wt ama: mÈ a uf: ot d vata: | 
yi d aama: ufstarar ur carsferstererz en 
Sam vatah sam hi te ghrnih sam te bhavant- 
vistakah. Sam te bhavantvagnayah parthivaso 
ma tva'bhi susucan. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXV 999 


May the winds be good and kind to you, cool 
and refreshing. May the sun be good and kind, warm 
and soothing. May the vedi and the home be happy and 
blissful. May the fires of the hearth and yajna be good 
and fragrant. May nothing on earth cause you sorrow 
and suffering. 


9.  (Vishvedeva Devata, Aditya Deva Rshis) 
weder d fasnqsaurd: Pada wag 
Reda: | ardent quu adai a fas 
"dl: nen 
Kalpantam te di$astubhyamapah  $iva- 
tamastubhyam bhavantu sindhavah. Antariksarn 
Sivam tubhyam kalpantam te di$ah sarvah. 


May the spaces be harmonious and good to you. 
May the waters be soothing and blissful to you. May 
the rivers and the seas be kind and favourable to you. 
May the skies be kind and generous. And may all the 
directions feed, nourish, strengthen and season you with 
love and kindness (for life and death). 


10. (Vishvedeva Devata, Suchika Rshi) 
stadt tad atveanhditsa wu did aaa: | 
aat èë smsa ssrdfesarernnpdiurfs 
am o! 


Asmanvati riyate sain rabhadhvamuttisthata pra 
tarata sakhayah. Atra jahimo 'Siva ye’asanchi- 
vanvayamuttaremabhi vajan. 


Friends, brothers and comrades, the river of rocks 
and boulders rushes on. Gird up your loins all, arise 
and cross over. Whatever be the hurdles against us, we 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1000 


YAJURVEDA 


crush, and let us win the battles of life to victory. 


11. 


(Apah Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi) 
storey fenfeciumd perd vd:i 
animi ammat qaqa Wer ogg 


Apaghamapa kilbisamapa krtyamapo rapah. 
Apamaraga tvamasmadapa duhsvapnyam suva. 


Sage physician of mind and soul, great as 


apamarga, universal cure, wash out sin, cleanse 
impurity, eliminate evil action, rectify sensual frailties, 
and root out dirty dreams. 


12. 


(Apah Devata, Adityas Devas Rshis) 


hirer asarassideaa: od aAa uu 
"seu eft wow aad fuu ug 

Sumitriya na’ apa’ osadhayah santu durmitriya- 
stasmai santu yo'smandvesti yam ca vayam 
dvismah. 


May the waters and pranic energies, and herbs 


such as somalata be good friends to us, and may they 
be antidotes to those negativities which harm us and 
which we hate to suffer. 


13. 


COW, 


(Krishivalah Devata, Aditya Devah Rshis) 


srTgsTéu-ernurdg anda xemdd | 
a assdssa gA afa: anu wae esi 
Anadvahamanvarabhamahe saurabheyam 


svastaye. Sa na’indra’iva devebhyo vahnih 
santarano bhava. 


Just as we employ the bullock, off-spring of the 
as carrier power for the service of noble people in 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXV 1001 


farming, so may the fire energy like electricity be our 
carrier over long distances. 


14. (Surya Devata, Aditya Devah Rshis) 
sga questi cg: ugd«rssdu d 
xe dam oue wfdegu uw 


Udvayam tamasaspari svah pa$yanta uttaram. 
Devam devatra suryamaganma jyotiruttamam. 


Let us rise beyond the dark to the regions of light 
and bliss, watching higher and higher, and reach to the 
self-refulgent Sun, the highest light among the 
brilliancies of the universe. 


15. (Ishvara Devata, Sankasuka Rshi) 
gu franz: offer darts Det 4 masar Aa | 
Wd seg sm: yeei seta wee gu 
Imam jivebhyah paridhim dadhami maisam nu 
gadaparo' arthametam. Satam jivantu $aradah 
purucirantarmrtyum dadhatam parvatena. 

I fix and raise this limit and boundary wall for 
the safety and discipline of the living souls so that 
nothing alien may encroach upon their freedom and 
property. May these abundant souls live for a hundred 
years and by their law and discipline resist death from 
within. 


16. (Agni Devata, Aditya Devah Rshis) 


arTSamdeifü vaasan Yarsifad at A: | 
amt ated Gast ues 


Agna 'ayuinsi pavasa'a suvorjamisam ca nah. 
Are badhasva ducchunam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1002 YAJURVEDA 


Agni, lord giver of life, you purify and sanctify 
the long years of our life. We pray, create and promote 
food, energy and the light of knowledge for us, and 
throw off all evil and violence far from us. 


17. (Agni Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi) 


aama gfast get upeudreer pem a 
"prd dient ay are wet fuere woaufunterarfaur«- 
wat ngen 


Ayusmanagne havisa vrdhāno ghrtapratiko 
ghrtayoniredhi. Ghrtam pitva madhu caru 
gavyam piteva putramabhi raksatadimantsvaha. 


Agni, long-lived ruler of power and light, 
growing by fragrant offerings, manifesting in the rising 
flames of ghrta, abiding in ghrta, come and, having 
drunk of ghee and the honey-sweet delicious products 
of the cow, protect and promote these dedicated souls 
as father protects the children. 


This is the voice of the heart in truth of word and 
deed. 


18. (Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Shirambitha Rshi) 


uir umbra udfierzws | 
aaa sta: ensgHis ssim dirdfea uec 


Parime gamanesata paryagnimahrsata. 
Devesvakrata $ravah ka'iman'a dadharsati. 


All these, you all, protect and promote the cow, 
raise the holy voice of knowledge, preserve and 
replenish the earth, expand the fire of yajna, and feed 
the divinities of nature and the environment, and who 
can dare to challenge you ? None! 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXV 1003 


19. (Agni Devata, Damana Rshi) 
maaa uA qr dud esq fuere: | 
Bema Madar easel Gear ded USAT ug 


Kravyadamagnim pra hinomi duram yama- 
rajyam gacchatu ripravahah. Ihaivayamitaro 
jataveda devebhyo havyam vahatu prajanan. 


Knowing well (what is right and what is wrong), 
I reject and cast away the flesh-eating fire. The carrier 
of sin must go to Yama, lord of justice and reckoning. 

And I pray: may this other fire of yajna, symbol 
of knowledge and power of light and heat of life, come 
bringing auspicious food and fragrance for the divinities 
of nature and the best of humanity. 


20. (Jataveda Devata, Aditya Devah Rshis) 
as wur wada: faqs atarera fifa 
UW Hee: CpeuTSSU asad wemsdursm: 
"oues Carat Rott 
Vaha vapam jatavedah pitrbhyo yatrainan vettha 


nihitan parake. Medasah kulya’upa tantsravantu 
satya’ esamasisah sam namantam svaha. 


Man of knowledge brilliant as Agni, for the 
parents and forefathers, manage the land where, far off, 
you know the hidden treasures therein, so that streams 
of delicacies flow for them and their dreams and wishes 
come true in holy word and deed. 


21. (Prithivi Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 
warn dísrdt at variant fast 1 dest a: ort 
aant: | std a: Bebra di 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1004 YAJURVEDA 


Syona prthivi no bhavanrksara nivesani. Yaccha 
nah $arma saprathah. Apa nah $o$ucadagham. 


Earth, sweet mother, be good and kind to us, 
thornless and smooth, generous and hospitable. Wide 
and expansive, give us a happy home. Wash off our 
sins and make us shine. 


22. (Agni Devata, Aditya Devah Rshis) 


ammen A aaa Staal wd: | 
ardt veris eirenra caveat uu 


Asmattvamadhi jato'si tvadayam jayatam punah. 
Asau svargaya lokaya svaha. 


Agni, lord of brilliance and master of a happy 
home, far higher above have you risen from this world. 
May this homely world be reborn of you as a new 
paradise. Our homage to that paradisal world of bliss. 


sia usafigtseara: N 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXVI 1005 


CHAPTER-XXXVI 


1. (Agni Devata, Dadhyang-atharvana Rshi) 
wa ara Ww der Wt aa: Uu der ard uri u der erar: 
sta wdsr am: gest aft uremuardr ue u 


Rcam vacam pra padye mano yajuh pra padye 
sama pranam pra padye caksuh $rotram pra 
padye. Vagojah sahaujo mayi pranapanau. 


I arise and come to Rigveda, voice of Divinity. I 
come to Yajurveda, mind and resolution divine. I come 
to Samaveda, energy and ecstasy divine. I come to 
Atharva-veda, vision and vibration of Divinity. That 
speech is my light and glory. That light and mind is my 
strength and spirit of courage and fortitude. By virtue 
of the divine, the prana and apana energy is my real 
might. 


2. (Brihaspati Devata, Dadhyang-atharvana Rshi) 


aÀ fog aaa deren ata erfdquui aga 
qed Ie Al wad ge seat: URI 


Yanme chidram caksuso hrdayasya manaso 
vatitrnnam brhaspatirme taddadhatu. Sam no 
bhavatu bhuvansya yaspatih. 


Whatever the weakness of my eye, of my heart, 
and of my mind, whatever the loop-holes anywhere, may 
the Lord of Infinity make up and re-fill. May the lord 
who is father and guardian of the universe, we pray, be 
good and gracious to us. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1006 YAJURVEDA 


3. (Savita Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi) 


qafa: ta: | acdfaaqeRoad waft geet ciate d 
ferar ar 4: weet 3 


Bhurbhuvah svah. Tat saviturvarenyam bhargo 
devasya dhimahi. Dhiyo yo nah pracodayat. 
With the knowledge of Being, Becoming, and 
Spirit, with knowledge, karma and prayer, we meditate 
upon the blazing glory of self-effulgent lord Savita, Lord 
of existence, intelligence and bliss, the only worthy 
choice of ours, and we pray that He may inspire and 
guide our vision and intelligence to the right path. 


4. (Indra Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


wat Apaassidagd wards wu | 

wur tsa Fat isi 

Kaya nascitra’a bhuvaduti sadavrdhah sakha. 
Kaya Sacisthaya vrta. 


By what modes and acts of protection, by which 
might and brilliant, current and recurrent power and 
intelligence, does the wondrous lord of the universe, 
great and ever greater, abide by us as our universal friend 
and inspire our noble thoughts and actions? 


(By divine acts, blissful intelligence, and 
inspiration.) 


5. (Indra Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 


me uc Hatt mS nAaR: | 
«er feres ad uud 


Kastva satyo madanam mainhistho matsa- 
dandhasah. Drdha cidaruje vasu. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXVI 1007 


Who is it, true and constant, strong and inviolable, 
most abundant treasure and most liberal giver of the 
joyous gifts of food and soma, who gives you and sends 
you to the ecstasy of living, O dear soul, in search of 
brilliance and bliss? (The Lord Beatific.) 


6. (Indra Devata, Vamadeva Rshi) 
an wur: endi-araferar sifiquim à 
ya sfemegfeafu: usu 


Abhi su nah sakhinam avita jaritrnam. Satam 
bhavasyutibhih. 


Lord Supreme, be all-round saviour of ours, of 
friends and admirers, in a hundred ways of your divine 
protection. 


7. (Indra Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 
wa cb dsm ow cde ae | 
wat xdiquussmed en 


Kaya tvam na’utyabhi pra mandase vrsan. Kaya 
stotrbhya’a bhara. 


Lord of abundant showers, let us know by which 
ways of protection you save and bless your worshippers 
with joy, and by which forms of generosity you raise 
your devotees. 


8. (Indra Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 


sr feme waf | 
yA fuus vicende ud 


Indro visvasya rajati. Sam no'astu dvipade Sam 
catuspade. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1008 YAJURVEDA 


Indra, lord of light, power and glory, rules the 
world. By His grace, may all be peace and joy with the 
humans and with the animals. 


9. (Mitra & Others Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 
IA fim et ASU: yr sre a 
wreisz- Geeata: sat AEEA: ust 


Sam no mitrah $am varunah $am no 

— 2 DE . : i . » . 
bhavatvaryama. Sam’na indro brhaspatih sam 
no visnururukramah. 


May Mitra, lord and friend of the world, be good 
and kind to us. May Varuna, giver of cool and bliss be 
good and kind to us. May Aryama, lord of universal 
justice, be good and kind. May Indra, lord of power 
and glory be good and gracious. May Brihaspati, lord 
infinite and omniscient, be good and generous. May 
Vishnu, lord infinite and omnipresent of grand action 
be good and generous with gifts of peace and joy for us 
all. 


10. (Vatah & Others Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 


wet ard: uenme$ stead wd 
IA: @tinaea: miats Ngon 


Sam no vatah pavatain sam nastapatu suryah. 
Sam nah kanikradaddevah parjanyo’abhi 
varsatu. 


May the winds blow cool and calm for us. May 
the sun shine warm and clear for us all. May lightning, 
thunderous brilliant, bring peace for us all. And may 
the generous cloud shower rains of soothing joy and 
prosperity for us all over the world. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXVI 1009 


11. (Aharadaya Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 


Stel vi uda a: Sra: wfdiirearg I ysgar 
daama: PASSAT Wasa | Sr-152-5 T0 NUIT 
arstardt srfirgrdrat «ferma vis ded 


Ahani sam bhavantu nah sam ratrih prati 
dhiyatam. Sam na’indragni bhavatamavobbih 
$am na’indravaruna radtahavya. Sam na’ 
indrapusana vajasatau $amindrasoma suvitaya 
Sam yoh. 

May the days be good and useful for us. May the 
nights hold peace and comfort for us. May Indra and 
Agni, energy and heat, be good and productive with 
safety and protection. May Indra and Varuna, power 
and water, be good and generous with food and wealth. 
May Indra and Pusha, power and good health, bring 
peace and freedom. May Indra and Soma, power and 
peace, bring inspiration for the joy of living. 


12. (Apah Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 
veil dedtrfueassmul sarq dtd i 
siR A: gN 


Sam no devirabhistaya’apo bhavantu pitaye. 
Sam yorabhi sravantu nah. 


May the heavenly waters be full of soothing 
sweetness and give us the pleasure of desired bliss. May 
they bring us generous showers of profound peace and 


Joy. 
13. (Prithivi Devata, Medhatithi Rshi) 


water dfaa st sarger Braet a 
wes a: vnb amet: ues 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1010 YAJURVEDA 


Syona prthivi no bhavanrksara nivesani. Yaccha 
nah $arma saprathah. 


May this dear green earth be free from vexations 
and full of wealth in abundance. Generous and 
expansive, may it provide a happy and comfortable 
home for all of us to live in peace and joy. 


14. (Apah Devata, Sindhudvipa Rshi) 


amar fe wer tya ASF dere | 
ae uta aAA esi 


Apo hi stha mayobhuvasta na'urje dadhatana. 
Mahe ranaya caksase. 


Surely the waters, full of peace and well-being, 
abide by us holding energy, greatness, victory and vision 
for all of us. 


15. (Apah Devata, Sindhudvipa Rshi) 


at d: Rad waet màs d: 1 
ssrdifie ras: nea 


Yo vah Sivatamo rasastasya bhajayateha nah. 
USatiriva matarah. 


Like generous mothers overflowing with love for 
their children, blessed women, give us here in life our 
full share of the most blissful nectar that you hold for 
us as the essence of nature's gift of vitality. 


16. (Apah Devata, Sindhudvipa Rshi) 


WEHISSTÉ "THTH at ae e enu fra a 
stat wader at A: ee 


Tasma aram gamama vo yasya ksayaya jinvatha. 
Apo janayatha ca nah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXVI 1011 


Women, cool and blessed like heavenly waters, 
as you arise for the peace and bliss of the home of the 
man you love, we would provide for the joy and comfort 
of him and for you too. And you too create and generate 
joy and bliss for us. 


17. (Ishvara Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 


vit: smf-dz-afisrs ord: oft suf: gira 
qaa: suf: aed: sibafage «er: sag 
maa: Gas VIA: Vda suf: cur AT wmfd- 
Tt ungon 


Dyauh $antirantariksain santih prthivi Santi- 
rapah santirosadhayah santih. Vanaspatayah 
Santirvisve devah santirbrahma $antih sarvain 
santih $antireva santih sa ma santiredhi. 

May the heavens bring us peace. May peace be 
with the skies, and may the skies shower us with peace. 
May there be peace on earth, and may the earth mother 
bring us peace. May there be peace with the waters, 
and may the waters bring us peace. May there be peace 
in the herbs, and may the herbs bring us peace. May 
peace be with the trees and may the trees bring us peace. 
Peace be with the divinities of the world, and may they 
bless us with peace. May the Great Lord of the universe 
bless us with peace, and may the Veda inspire us with 
peace. May all existence be at peace and may peace 
come from all existence to all. May there be peace only, 
universal peace for all. May that heavenly peace come 
and bless me. May It bless all. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1012 
18. 


YAJURVEDA 


(Ishvara Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 

ad axe m ford a aga wdifur spare aei- 
amm | Raer aga adir yar adler d 
fup uate aè een 

Drte drinha ma mitrasya ma caksusa sarvani 
bhutani samiksantam. Mitrasyaham caksusa 
sarvani bhutani samikse. Mitrasya caksusa 
samiksamahe. 


Lord of light and power, strengthen us for a place 


of honour and respect. May all the living beings view 
me with the eye of a friend. May I look at all the living 
beings with the eye of a friend. May we all view all 
with friendly eyes of love and understanding. 


19. 


(Ishvara Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 


qd 4x8 AT | Sad Gat sieara vated waht 
TTA ues 


Drte drinha ma. Jyokte sandrsi jivyasam jyokte 
sandrsi jivyasam. 


Lord of light, remove the veil of darkness and 


illusion, strengthen me, so that I may live for ever in 
the light of reality under your benign eye, live for ever 
in the holy light of your benign presence. 


20. 


(Agni Devata, Lopamudra Rshi) 


wha eta owing adeassreafed 1 arais- 
steadted fda: ureenrsarerezisfyret AT UR 
Namaste harase $ocise namaste ’astvarcise. 


Anyanste’asmattapantu hetayah pavako’ 
asmabhyain $ivo bhava. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXVI 1013 


Salutations to the Lord extinguisher of the passion 
and smoke of evil, to the blazing holy fire of 
sanctification! Homage be to the Lord of light adorable. 

May your flames burn up the evils other than our 
real selves. May the light and holy fire be good and 
kind to us. 


21. (Ishvara Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 


TASA ferr ded xaafaen i 
TA soared] Ua: Ta: TASS ue 
Namaste’astu vidyute namaste stanayitnave. 
Namaste bhagavannastu yatah svah samihase. 
Homage to the lord of lightning! Homage to the 
lord of thunder! Salutation to you, lord of omnipotence, 


since you alone love, inspire and gather us into light 
and bliss! 


22. (Ishvara Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 

ada: Gea dat Assists ene | 

wi: epe masi a: UVTI: URN 

Yato yatah samihase tato no’abhayam kuru. Sar 

nah kuru prajabhyo 'bhayam nah pasubhyah. 

Here, there, anywhere, wherever you initiate and 

inspire us, from there itself render us free and fearless. 
Create peace, freedom and prosperity for our people. 
Create peace, freedom and fearlessness for our animals. 


Create freedom and fearlessness for us from people and 
from animals. 


23. (Soma Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 


ata asstassidera: od afr ue | 
giseart site a ot aa fü uz 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1014 YAJURVEDA 


Sumitriya na'apa'osadhayah santu durmi- 
triyastasmai santu. Yo'sman dvesti yam ca 
vayam dvismah. 


May the waters, pranic energies and herbs be 
friendly tonics for us, and may they be antidotes to 
whatsoever hates and injures us and what we hate and 
disapprove. (Prayer for health against negativities.) 


24. (Surya Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 


wedgideféd meatanga (usu sme: vr 
wird" ym: wax Bula sm: rd W siam ma: 
wanda: cur vnd: wet suse smd: yum 


Taccaksurdevahitam purastacchukram-uccarat. 
Pasyema Saradah satam jivema $aradah śatań 
Srnuyama saradah satam pra bravama $aradah 
Satamadinah syama $aradah satam bhuyasca 
Saradah śatāt. 


That light divine, blissful to the divinities, pure 
and wide awake since eternity, may we continue to see 
for a full hundred years, live under its benign eye for a 
hundred years, hear for a hundred years, speak and 
celebrate for a hundred years, and be fit and fine in a 
state of freedom and independence for a hundred years, 
and even more than a hundred years! 


sia wefastiseara: u 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXVII 1015 


CHAPTER-XXXVII 


1.  (Savita Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 


aot car afa: was atag t ger evatszmri 
amas ATR ngu 


Devasya tva savituh prasave '$vinorbahubhyam 
pusno hastabhyam. A dade narirasi. 

In the yajnic creation of Savita, I invoke and 
welcome you with the arms of Ashvins, currents of 
energy, and the hands of Pushan, Mother Nature's power 
of nourishment. You are the leader of the world and 
indestructible light of life. 


2.  (Savita Devata, Shyavashva Rshi) 


ped missa dead feat femur fader edt 
faufvead: fa rat aà agquifadassuel deed 
"feng: Re: Ri 

Yunjate mana uta yunjate dhiyo vipra viprasya 
brhato vipascitah. Vi hotra dadhe vayunavideka’ 
inmahi devasya savituh paristutih. 

Saints and scholars join their mind and intellect 
with the great, omniscient and omnipresent lord of the 
universe, in meditation. The One Lord alone knows the 
ways and laws of the universe, He alone holds the worlds 
together. This universe is the great song and celebration 
of the self-manifestive lord Savita, the Creator. 


3. (Dyava-prithivi Devate, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 


ed! aearnufadt mat ama frit tear east 
qre: ware war une car vini usd 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1016 YAJURVEDA 


Devi dyavaprthivi makhasya vamadya Siro 
radhyasam devayajane prthivyah. Makhaya tva 
makhasya tva Sirsne. 
Brilliant heaven and generous earth, brilliant 
teacher and preacher, in this divine yajna of the holy 
earth to-day I worship and honour you both at the head 


of the ritual. I welcome you to the yajna, and pray take 
it to the top of success. 


4. (Yajna Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 


aan ert speed yest Wand aise fort teare 
aos ufereur:i ware car ure vem viri wen 


Devyo vamryo bhutasya prathamaja makhasya 
vo'dya Siro radhyasam devayajane prthivyah 
Makhaya tva makhasya tva Sirsne. 
Young and brilliant first graduate learned ladies, 
I welcome you to-day to the top position of this divine 
assembly of yajna in honour of the earth for the living 
beings. 
Highpriest of yajna, I welcome you for the 
organisation of the yajna. I honour you for the top 
success of the yajna. 


5. (Yajna Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 


zats asa AR wear o Gens 
qre: mat vem une car sitet gi 
lyatyagra'asinmakhasya te’dya Siro radhyasam 
devayajane prthivyah. Makhaya tva makhasya 
tva Sirsne. 


Young scholar, so much in advance of the yajna 
is this offer and invitation to you today to the top position 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXVII 1017 


of the ritual in the divine yajna of the earth. I honour 
you for the conduct of the yajna and wish you bring it 
to the top of success. 


6. (Yajna Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 


sent: ca wae atsa fort cea Gens 
yem: tart wat mart vem sitet | care vem 
maci car sitet | mart car maet car virgi ei 
Indrasyaujah stha makhasya vo’dya Siro 
radhyasam devayajane prthivyah. Makhaya tva 
makhasya tva $irsne. Makhaya tva makhasya tva 
sirsne. Makhaya tva makhasya tva Sirsne. 


Sages and scholars, I exhort you to shine in the 
glory of Indra. I pray for Indra's blessings of honour 
and power in yajna. I invite and welcome you to be the 
head of yajna in honour of the divines and children of 
mother earth. 


I invite you to the yajna of knowledge and pray 
you bring it to the top of success. 


I invite you to the yajna of karma and pray you 
bring it to the top of success. 


I welcome you to the yajna of worship and 
meditation and pray you bring it to the top of success. 


7. (Ishvara Devata, Kanva Rshi) 


ug ehea: w deta wem od 

stot at ae ufsrtera dem dat dum A: 
wart var mart car sire d 

Tart car mart car sire d 

Tare wart mat car viteof mon 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1018 YAJURVEDA 


Praitu brahmanaspatih pra devyetu sunrta. 
Accha viram naryam panktiradhasam deva 
yajnam nayantu nah. Makhaya tva makhasya tva 
Sirsne. Makhaya tva makhasya tva Sirsne. 
Makhaya tva makhasya tva Sirsne. 


May the sagely scholar of the Veda come and 
advance the yajna. May the noble ladies, scholars of 
the Law of Truth and the Divine Voice, come and take 
on the yajna for conduct. May the noble sages guide 
our yajna and take it forward, yajna which is good and 
gracious, maker of the brave, creator of great men and 
women, and inspirer of the leaders of the communities. 


Sage and scholar of the Veda, we welcome you 
to the yajna and request you to take it to the top of 
success in knowledge. 


Ladies of the Law, we welcome you to the yajna 
and we request you take it to the top of success in 
Dharmic values. 


Noble saints and scholars, we welcome you to 
the yajna for meticulous conduct of it and pray you take 
it to the top of success in the advancement of culture, 
good conduct and civilized manners. 


8. (Yajna Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 


"meu Anisa 1 mart verom car vitu 1 
"reu forista 1 ware wat wae car vírw | 
"meu Anisa 1 mart wot wae car vitu d 
ma cat une vem yit d 

rare cat une car yit | 

rare cat treat car sif nici 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXVII 1019 


Makhasya Siro’si. Makhaya tva makhasya tva 
Sursne. Makhasya Siro’si. Makhaya tva makhasya 
tva sirsne. Makhasya Siro’si. Makhaya tva 
makhasya tva Sirsne. 


Makhaya tva makhasya tva sirsne. Makhaya tva 
makhasya tva Sirsne. Makhaya tva makhasya tva 
Sirsne. 

You are at the head of yajna, dedicated to the yajna 


of Brahmacharya. We exort you to take it to the top of 
success. 

You are at the helm of the household, we commit 
you to the yajna of intelligent, creative and cooperative 
social action, and and wish and pray for you that you 
take it to the top of success. 

You are at the head of the yajna of thinking and 
meditation, we elect you to the yajnic task of research, 
discovery and invention, and we hope and pray that you 
take it to the heights of achievement. 

You are of the yajna, for the yajna, destined to be 
on top. 

You are of the yajna, for the yajna, destined to 
take it to the top of success. 

You are born of yajna, trained for yajna, 
committed to yajna, and destined to reach the top and 
take it to the top of success. 


9.  (Vidvan Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 
ayder var «eut: srt dua Gers gfe: | 
"pere cer une vem yit 1 
ayder ver «uui: srt dua Gers gfe: | 
"pere cat une car yit d 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1020 YAJURVEDA 


ander ver «eut: srt dua Gers yfr: 
Tara cat naet vem vipeg] | mart ver maet car 
wirst | werd vem unge vem sitet à werd cr 
mari car sitet usu 


A$vasya tva vrsnah $akna dhupayami 
devayajane prthivyah. Makhaya tva makhasya 
tva Sirsne. A$vasya tva vrsnah Sakna dhupayami 
devayajane prthivyah. Makhaya tva makhasya 
tva Sirsne. A$vasya tva vrsnah $akna dhupayami 
devayajane prthivyah. Makhaya tva makhasya 
tva sirsne. Makhaya tva makhasya tva Sirsne. 
Makhaya tva makhasya tva sirsne. Makhaya tva 
makhasya tva Sirsne. 


With the speed of the Ashvins and the generosity 
of Pusha, I season you for the yajna of the divinities of 
the earth. We want you for the yajna, we select you for 
the conduct of the yajna to the top of success for us. 


With the energy and generosity of Indra, I temper 
you for the yajna of the divine powers of the skies. We 
select you for the yajna, we elect you for the yajna to 
take it to the top of success for us. 


With the light and generosity of Savita, lord of 
sun-beams, I enlighten you for the yajna of the divinities 
of heaven. We elect you for the yajna, we consecrate 
you for the yajna to lead the yajna to the top of success 
for us 


Of the yajna, for the yajna, we want you, we select 
you for the top of success. 


You are of the yajna, you are for the yajna. We 
select you, we elect you for the top of success. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXVII 1021 


Of the yajna you are, for the yajna you are. We 
elect and consecrate you for the top of success for 
yourself, for us and for the yajna itself. 


10. (Vidvan Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 


esa cat urere var afared cat 1 tart cat owned 
car yit | ware war rarest car sfrsf à caret car 
Tat car sib ngon 


Rjave tva sadhave tva suksityai tva. Makhaya 
tvna makhasya tva sirsne. Makhaya tva 
makhasya tva $irsne. Makhaya tva makhasya tva 
Sirsne. 

Sagely scholar, for the simple and natural people, 
we want you. For the virtuous and the excellent, and 
for social good we elect you. For the sake of happy 
homes, we consecrate you. We want you for the yajna, 
and select you for the top success of yajna. 


We select you for yajna. We elect you for yajna, 
for the top success of it. 


We elect you for the yajna. We consecrate you 
for the top success of the yajna. 


11. (Savita Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 
aaa vem wart vr ge vem ada 1 ene 
"ferar nea uf?rem: a: ugelwurfíz 1 stfatfa 
sift quisfa ngeu 


Yamaya tva makhaya tva suryasya tva tapase. 
Devastva savita madhvanaktu prthivyah 
samsprsaspahi. Arcirasi Socirasi tapo’ si. 


For law and social justice, for yajna and social 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1022 YAJURVEDA 


cooperation, and for the discipline of piety in the service 
of the Sun, light of the universe, may the self-effulgent 
Savita, creator and generator of life, bless you with the 
honey-sweets of the earth. Protect yourself and us from 
the pollution of sin. You are the light of brilliance. You 
are the light of purity. You are the tempering fire of the 
austerity of Dharma. 


12. (Prithivi Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 


aater yetar nufiuerssmeH wr; qadi 

«fürurasg-geurfétucr ws Hur gaat uanga 
aaah aati at: areren emqurfetucr 
Teed Fat: | aR en sg eaenifétuerssirsit 
Tr ari ayata ur arersateorfe wámsetfa ee 


Anadhrstapurastadagneradhipatya 'ayurme dah. 
Putravatidaksinata 'indrasyadhipatye prajamme 
dah. Susada paScaddevasya savituradhipatye 
caksurme dah. A$rutiruttarato dhaturadhipatye 
rayasposam me dah. Vidhrtiruparistad 
brhaspateradhipatya ’ojo me dah. Visvabhyo ma 
nastrabhyaspahi manoras$vasi. 


Mother Earth, unassailable and unviolated, from 


the east, under the rule and laws of Agni, bless me with 
life and age. 


Mother of brave children, from the south, under 
the rule and supremacy of Indra, bless me with children. 


Blessed home for humanity, from the west, under 
the rule and supremacy of Savita, bless me with light of 
the eyes. 


Universal listener, praised and admired all round, 
from the north, under the rule and supremacy of the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXVII 1023 


lord sustainer of the world, bless me with health and 
wealth. 


Mother of constancy, from above, under the rule 
and supremacy of Brihaspati, bless me with the light 
and lustre of life. 


You are the Queen omnipresent in the heart and 
mind, protect me from the defilement and pollutions of 
the world. 


13. (Vidvans Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 
mt ete: Reina faa: ax easter d 
ag Ae wel ue 


Svaha marudbhih pari Sriyasva divah 
samsprsaspahi. Madhu madhu madhu. 


Man of knowledge, with truth of word and deed, 
shine as a flame with the children of the earth, mix with 
them and provide all round sustenance. Save the earth 
from the scorching blaze of the sun. May knowledge 
be holy sweet. May karma be honey-sweet. May worship 
be heavenly sweet. May life be honey-sweet. 


14. (Ishvara Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 
"mif seri faa dtm ufd: wsmalu à 
* dat xe ufenm cia as Gaur re ex 


Garbho devanam pita matinam patih prajanam. 
Sam devo devena savitra gata sain suryena 
rocate. 


The Origin of divinities, father of the wise, 
sustainer of His children, light of the universe, pervading 
the brilliant sun, giver of light and sustainer of life, the 
Lord shines all over, self-manifested. Know Him, be 
with Him, go with Him. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1024 YAJURVEDA 


15. (Agni Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 
wufirferd wa a eas ufearcueqgüumrdfeme id 
Tara ouufienmdgdarcua ou cela ufearoueqiumr- 
WETA NLN 


Samagniragnina gata sam daivena savitra sain 
suryenarocista. Svaha samgnistapasa gata sam 
daivyena savitra sam suryenarurucata. 


Agni, heat and vitality of fire, burns and shines 
in the world in unison with Agni, universal heat and 
light of Divinity, in unison with the Supreme Savita, 
creator of life (from whom the heat and vitality emanates 
to the fire), and in unison with the brilliant sun (who 
receives the emanation of light from Savita and radiates 
it to the fire). 


Agni, Supreme Creator of light and life, pervades 
the heat of fire, being one with it; inspires the divine 
creative and generative power of nature, being one with 
it, and blazes as one with the sun, and thus illuminates 
the universe with His self-effulgent glory. 


This is the voice of Divinity, in truth of word and 
deed. 


16. (Ishvara Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 


erat facer fer ater erderegf?ronri erat gat deram- 
defers: | aretha Frees fara eau 
Dharta divo vi bhati tapasasprthivyam dharta 


devo devanamamartyastapojah. Vacamasme ni 
yaccha devayuvam. 


The self-effulgent wielder of the heavens, 
controller of the heat and light of the universe, sustainer 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXVII 1025 


of the divinities of nature, and lord immortal manifesting 
through His passion for existence, shines on the earth, 
thunders in the skies and blazes in the stars. 


Saint and sagely scholar, give us that voice and 
vision which may lead us to the life divine. 


17. (Ishvara Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


adya 1irarafsiueraraur xr ust x ufafaseta i 
a añe: a fenmbeirdwnassmedrafu qÀ- 


WA: uel 


Apasyam gopamanipadyamanama ca para ca 
pathibhi$carantam. Sa sadhricih sa visu- 
cirvasana 'a varivarti bhuvanesvantah. 


O that I could see that protective power divine, 
unassailable and incomprehensible, which is constant 
and unmoved and yet by mysterious ways vibrates 
within and beyond the universe, which pervades all the 
centripetal and centrifugal forces of nature in all 
directions of space and whirls around in the worlds of 
the universe. 


18. (Ishvara Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi) 


fasatar vat ae fascker rre fayde eroe 
ade ada | espe de ud gat ear 
Wea Welt at dadiaa | ep oureeflven wey 
meei gen 

Visvasam bhuvam pate vi$vasya manasaspate 
vi$vasya vacasaspate sarvasya vacasaspate. 
Devasruttvam deva gharma devo devan 


pahyatra praviranu vam devavitaye. Madhu 
madhvibhyam madhu madhucibhyam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1026 YAJURVEDA 


Lord creator and sustainer of the worlds of the 
universe, lord of the dynamics of universal mind, lord 
of the universal voice of knowledge, lord protector of 
the speech of humanity, listener of the voice of 
nobilities, lord of light, self-effulgent, save the divinities 
of nature and blessed souls of humanity. 


Teacher and preacher, may the lord protect you 
both for the sake of divine gifts of knowledge and virtue. 


Give us the sweets of life with the months of 
spring. Give us the sweets of knowledge and science 
by the hands of Ashvinis. 


19. (Ishvara Devata, Atharvana Rshi) 
xS awa ao fa var oue vr a 
mea ssieat fafa aad afe ngen 


Hrde tva manase tva dive tva suryaya tva. 
Urdhvo'adhvaram divi devesu dhehi. 


Lord and Light of the universe, for the purity of 
heart, for the enlightenment of mind, for the bliss of 
heaven and gift of energy, and for the light of the sun 
and knowledge of the stars, we meditate on you and the 
divine knowledge. Lord highest of existence, advance 
our yajna of love and non-violence among the divinities 
of nature and humanity and bless it that it may rise to 
the heavens. 


20. (Ishvara Devata, Atharvana Rshi) 
Tar Asa für at ater zHedsared ur at fest: 
Tae TU War Us ae sz usmeennd 
aR eme We dem Fara Rott 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXVIII 1027 


Pita no'si pita no bodhi namaste’astu ma ma 
himsth. Tvastrmantastva sapema putran pasun 
mayi dhehi prajamasmasu dhehyarista' hain 
saha patya bhuyasam. 


You are our father. As father, enlighten us. 
Homage and worship to you. Pray injure me not. Lord 
maker of the world, we are your children blest with 
brilliant gifts, and we wish to be with you. Bless us 
with children and animal wealth. Bless us with a noble 
community, I pray, unhurt and untarnished, I may 
always abide by you, my lord and protector. 


21. (Ishvara Devata, Atharvana Rshi) 


até: eat a wpedrferedtfdur caret i 
we: Fat mms wpeirfeeitfdur carat ure 


Ahah ketuna jusatam sujyotirjyotisa svaha. 
Ratrih ketuna jusatam sujyotirjyotisa svaha. 


May the day, our wakeful state of the soul, join 
with knowledge, and may the light of our knowledge 
join with the light divine in truth of word and deed. 


May the night, our dream-and-sleep state of the 
mind, join with knowledge, and may the light of 
knowledge join with the light divine in truth of word 
and deed. 


sta mafisa: n 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1028 YAJURVEDA 


CHAPTER-XXXVIII 


1.  (Savita Devata, Atharvana Rshi) 


dena ver feng: uiuresfyeriieng seit Gon weary 
amasi mets ngu 


Devasya tva savituh prasave '$vinorbahubhyam 
pusno hastabhyam. A dade 'dityai rasna’ si. 

In the yajnic creation of Savita, universal creator 
and progenitor, I take you unto me with the procreative 
powers of the Ashvins, sun and moon, and the sustaining 
powers of Pusha, the wind. You are the generous and 
gracious power of Mother Nature's fertility for 
expansive growth and freedom. 


2.  (Sarasvati Devata, Atharvana Rshi) 


sesugiaasufe maA | 
amran WRU 


Ida’ ehyadita’ehi sarasvatyehi. Asavehyasave 
hyasavehi. 


Come Ida, voice divine. Come Aditi, mother of 
fertility. Come Sarasvati, mother of knowledge and spirit 
of life’s onward flow. 


And come he who seeks the voice divine, who 
seeks generation and sacred growth, and who seeks 
knowledge and progress. 


3. (Pusha Devata, Atharvana Rshi) 


aide meieoma: i 
yrs wate der uad 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXVIII 1029 


Adityai rasnasindranya'usnisah. Pusasi 
gharmaya disva. 


Pushan, like the protective head-gear and the 
graceful crown of life, you are the giver of noble policy 
for the progress of society. 


You are the mother spirit of nourishment and 
growth. Give us, we pray, give for the sake of yajna, 
sanctity, piety and humanity. 


4. (Sarasvati Devata, Atharvana Rshi) 
aant free wate furere forrest | 
mmea tarestad werde rst 


A$vibhyam pinvasva sarasvatyai pinvasve- 
ndraya pinvasva. Svahendravat svahendravat 
svahendravat. 


Grow for Sarasvati in dynamic knowledge and 
wisdom, for Indra in dignity and power, and for the 
Ashvins in beauty and glory of the nation. 


In truth of word and deed, be like Indra in 
knowledge. 


In truth of word and deed, be like Indra in power. 


In truth of word and deed, be like Indra in beauty 
and vitality. 


5. (Vak Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 
aed eat: TIT ar EDIE G] Tee daha: ya: 
A fasar yeta aritiit ateafa afte smdasen:i 
seafismreefu un 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1030 YAJURVEDA 


Yaste stanah $as$ayo yo mayobhuryo ratnadha 
vasuvidyah sudatrah. Yena vi$va pusyasi varyani 
sarasvati tamiha dhatave' kah. Urvanta- 
riksamanvemi. 


Sarasvati, like the mother's breast which 
overflows for the baby, which is blissful, and which is 
a generous jewel box of the choicest gifts of life, is your 
gift of the Word and Vision, which is supremely 
generous, and by which you feed the entire humanity. 


That stream of voice and vision, mother, let flow 
here on earth for the nourishment of your children so 
that I too may follow the voice and rise to the vast skies. 


6.  (Ashvins Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


mai satsa test wats matyt car 
uama Adara | gaa nda: art 
ad ula adat asta ere | a Geet isud 
wfecerta ngu 


Gayatram chando’si traistubham chando’si 
dyavaprthivibhyam tva pari grhnamya- 
ntariksenopayacchami. Indrasvina madhunah 
saraghasya gharmam pata vasavo yajata vat. 
Svaha suryasya ra$maye vrstivanaye. 


Happy bride, you are bright and joyous like the 
twenty-four syllable verse of the Gayatri metre. Happy 
groom, you are strong and free like the fortyfour syllable 
Trishtubh metre. For the sake of heaven and earth I 
accept you both as wedded couple, and I lead you home 
by the paths of the sky. Like Indra and the Ashvins, 
promote and advance the yajna fire of the sweets of 
honey in life. Inmates of the home, perform yajna in the 
home in honour of the Vasus and rays of the sun which 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXVIII 1031 


bring showers of rain for the earth. This is the voice of 
Divinity, follow it in truth of word and deed. 


7. (Vata Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


qaad cer atata caren aka vem enatis vemel i 
smeared ver eater aet | saga vem Arata 
vere | staat vem arate carat | rard car 
amta carat wen 


Samudraya tva vataya svaha. Sariraya tva 
vataya svaha. Anadhrsyaya tva vataya svaha. A 
pratidhrsyaya tva vataya svaha. Avasyave tva 
vataya svaha. ASimidaya tva vataya svaha. 
Wedded couple, in truth of word and deed we 
accept you for the sea and the sky and the winds. In 
truth of word and deed, we accept you for the flowing 
waters and floods and storms. In truth of word and deed, 
we accept you for courage and freedom and the social 
environment. In truth of word and deed, we accept you 
for irresistible power and creation of freedom from the 
winds of tension. We accept you for all round protection 
of body, mind and soul and the study of prana energy, 
in honesty of word and deed. Surely, we accept you for 
the science of food and nourishment and udana vayu, 
all sustaining energy. This is the divine voice. 


8. (Indra Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


sala war adua regda caste cearsfacreda 
verla cashier caret | afar eds pud 
fayna antad caret ageada ar fayadoaraad 
wrat en 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1032 YAJURVEDA 


Indraya tva vasumate rudravate svahendraya 
tva'dityavate svahendraya tva'bhimatighne 
svaha. Savitre tva'rbhumate vajavate svaha 
brhaspataye tva vi$vadevyavate svaha. 
Homage to you, Indra, ruler of power, prosperity 
and justice. Salutations to Indra, lord of blazing 
splendour. Exhortations to you, Indra, destroyer of 
enemies. All hail to you, blest with light and generosity, 
supported by the wise, universally admired, and 
wielding plenty of food, energy and power of defence. 
Homage to you, lord of wide knowledge and wisdom 
blest with divine qualities. 


9. (Vayu Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


ama esiga fugusa caret | 
wrt gata emet aa: fux neu 


Yamaya tva’ngirasvate pitrmate svaha. Svaha 
gharmaya svaha gharmah pitre. 


Hail to the lord of justice, master of law and 
divinity with faith and love for traditions and the seniors. 
Homage to the ruler, father and guardian of the people, 
dedicated to social yajna, and himself an image of yajna. 


10. (Ashvins Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


favarssien afarurafgserta amate i 
etapa wer usd: faaam uo! 
Visva’asa daksinasad vi$van devanayadiha. 
Svahakrtasya gharmasya madhoh pibatam- 
asvina. 
Ashvins, teachers and preachers, men and 
women, in this world, enjoy the honey sweets of the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXVIII 1033 


fragrant gifts of yajna from the holy materials offered 
into the sacred fire. 


So also the highpriest sitting south of the vedi 
should offer homage of yajna for all the directions of 
space and all the divinities of nature and humanity. 


11. (Yajna Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 
fafa asgi aae aa fafa erii 
verge nd cafaeia et cau: gen 
Divi dha' imam yajnamimam yajnam divi dhah. 
Svaha'gnaye yajniyaya sam yajurbhyah. 

Men and women, wedded couples, pursue this 
yajna of home life, society and sacrificial ritual 
wakefully in the light of the day and raise it to the regions 
of the sun. Offer oblations to Agni in truth of word and 
deed. Perform yajna with verses of Yajurveda for the 
lovers of Yajurveda and let it emanate peace and 
fragrance all round. 


12. (Ashvinau Devate, Dirghatama Rshi) 
amda ad utasergi-efserfiissfeafu: i 
vrarfaut dr eretuferetezru ue 30 


A$vina gharmam patain hardvanamahardiva- 
bhirutibhih. Tantrayine namo dyavaprthivi- 
bhyam. 


Ashvins, men and women, wedded couples, 
promote yajna with all kinds of protection and support 
day and nigh, and offer homage to the earth and heaven 
and to the sun, mover of the wheel of time. Yajna is so 
dear to the heart, so blissful to the soul. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1034 YAJURVEDA 


13. (Ashvinau Devate, Dirghatama Rshi) 
sTatarafyerat way maty farsa, | 
sea wad: Gq esi 


Apatamasvina gharmamanu dyavaprthivi' 
amamsatam. Ihaiva ratayah santu. 


May the Ashvins, winds and sun rays, men and 
women, wedded couples, protect and promote the fire 
of yajna and yajnic living. And may the earth and heaven 
approve and advance the yajna so that here itself we 
may experience all the joys and comforts of life. 


14. (Dyava-prithivi Devate, Dirghatama Rshi) 


A fiers fuere wealth iraa arare rara 
viret aferefrezit frac | edife gear pont 
ara wet aa aa ata fast are oux 


Ise pinvasvorje pinvasva brahmane pinvasva 
ksatraya pinvasva dyavaprthivibhyam pinvasva. 
Dharmasi sudharma'menyasme nrmnani 
dharaya brahma dharaya ksatram dharaya 
visam dharaya. 


Man of yajnic power, grow for the growth of food. 
Grow for the growth of energy. Grow for the growth 
and expansion of divine knowledge. Grow for the 
strength and protection of the social system. Grow for 
the growth and protection of the earth and the 
environment. You are Dharma, the sustainer. You are 
Sudharma, noble ruler and sustainer. You are the man 
of love and non-violence. Hold and bring the wealths 
of life for us. Sustain and support research, education 
and the Brahmana. Support and strengthen organisation, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXVIII 1035 


governance and the Kshatriya. Govern, support and 
promote the economic system and the Vaishya producer 
of wealth. 


15. (Pusha & Others Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


rgt Gar SH ver meha: cael ufdreue: l 
varel Agessa darha: cater mat- 
yfr caret fayde Fast: ngan 


Svaha pusne Sarase svaha gravabhyah svaha 
pratiravebhyah. Svaha pitrbhya' urdhva- 
barhirbhyo gharmapavabhyah svaha dyava- 
prthivibhyam svaha vi$vebhyo devebhyah. 


Homage to gentle Pusha, sweet mother Earth, 
giver of nourishment and growth. Homage to the clouds 
and mountains. Homage to the reverberating caves and 
skies. Homage to the forefathers and the seniors. 
Homage to the higher powers of intelligence and the 
sustainers of pure yajna fire. Homage to heaven and 
earth. Homage to all divinities. 


16. (Rudra & Others Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


wet esr See were wenfdur wed: 1 ste: 
cat speres Geetfasaticer caret 1 aft: angu 
mms wpedrfedifdur carat 1 et garais- 
amast d we ad adedsared ar at fex- 
Gt: ngan 


Svaha rudraya rudrahutaye svaha sam jyotisa 
Jyotih. Ahah ketuna jusatam sujyotirjyotisa 
svaha. Ratrih ketuna jusatam sujyotirjyotisa 
svaha. Madhu hutamindratame’ agnavasyama 
te deva gharma namaste’ astu ma ma hiinsih. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1036 YAJURVEDA 


Homage to Rudra who rallies and calls up the 
Rudra prana energy (for the destruction of evil). The 
light of the world joins with the light of the universe. 


May the day with its lustre, beautiful light, join 
with the light divine. Homage to this communion. 

May the night with its beauty, soothing grace, join 
with the grace divine. Salutations to this communion. 

Lord of the universe, cosmic yajna, grant us a taste 
of the celestial honey sweets offered into the mightiest 
fire of cosmic yajna. Salutations to you! 


Mighty Rudra, lord of pranic energy, lord of 
justice and reckoning, pray injure us not. 


17. (Agni Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 

aria dear fea fadt aya uusnd: 1 sa steer 
yfadiesardiaca wereussifa trea cadida:! 
fa qaamssted Hees ur yn agi ULI 
Abhimam mahima divam vipro babhuva 
saprathah. Uta $ravasa prthivim sam sidasva 
mahan’asi rocasva devavitamah. Vi dhuma- 
magne'arusam miyedhya srja prasasta 
darsatam. 

Agni, inspired and expansive, this grandeur of 


yours predominates the heaven and fills this earth with 
fame. 


Great you are indeed, most pleasing and blissful 
to the divinities. Pray be settled in the vedi and shine. 


Agni, lord admirable, pray create the red flames 
of divine beauty (and fragrance from the vedi). 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXVIII 1037 


18. (Yajna Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


"um d xd faem sre wees feas i a 
aserat hea cet a carat 1 ard aatatter 
wren Aaea iur asaret aeta acil 
a varet i) rod cud uferesre$ pem wene- 
wei a asmarae dal a 
marat ngen 


Ya te gharma divya $ugya gayatryam havir- 
dhane. Sa ta'a pyayatam nistyayatam tasyai te 
svaha. Ya te gharmantarikse $ugya tristu- 
bhyagnidhre. Sa ta'a pyayatam nistyayatam 
tasyai te svaha. Ya te gharma prthivyam $ugya 
jagatyain sadasya. Sa ta'apyayatam nistya- 
yatam tasyai te svaha. 

Light and spirit of yajna, the light of your bright 
flames that is in heaven, in the Gayatri verses and in the 
house of yajna, may that increase and may that grow 
higher and stronger. For that all hail to you and homage 
in worship in truth of word and deed. 

The energy of your bright flames that is in the 
sky, in the Trishtubh verses and in the fire, may that 
increase and grow faster and stronger. For that all hail 
to you and exhortation. 


The heat of your bright flames that is on the earth, 
in the jagati verses, and in the house of Assembly, may 
that increase and grow wider and stronger. For that all 
hail and exhortation to you. 


19. (Yajna Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


aed wat arena sdurede ure d 
fastear erum aandenrarm ferra Ate t8 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1038 YAJURVEDA 


Kstrasya tva paraspaya brahmanastanvam pahi. 
Visastva dharmana vayamanu kramama 
suvitaya navyase. 


Ruler of the land, for the protection of the people 
and advancement of the nation, protect and promote 
the Brahmana body of education and research. Protect 
and strengthen the Kshatra body of defence and 
administration. And all the people and we too support 
and follow you as a matter of discipline and Raja- 
Dharma for the achievement of new and newer forms 
of wealth and well-being. 


20. (Yajna Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


adeat aren: uw al feserd: aoe: 
aod: gate: amet: | 3TH gassed @Usadaet 
SAA Rott 


Catuhsraktirnabhirrtasya saprathah sa no 
visvayuh saprathah sa nah sarvayuh saprathah. 
Apa dveso’apa hvaro’nyavratasya sascima. 
Ruler, head of the national yajna of governance 
and administration, well-armed you are all round in the 
four directions. Centre-hold of the law and the body- 
politic, you are expansive (omnipresent, as if, through 
the system). Universally popular, may you attain to full 
age to protect and promote us. Celebrated head of 
universal development and friend of all, may you live a 
full age of dignity for us. We reject hate and hostility, 
crooked opposition and those committed to contrary 
values. 


21. (Yajna Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


mùr ate aa aga oT ot UNTEN | 
agi cr aga A maè usu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXVIII 1039 


Gharmaitatte purisam tena vardhasva ca ca 
pyayasva. Vardhisimahi ca vayama ca 
Pyasisimahi. 

Dharma, brilliant ruler and high-priest of this 
blazing yajna, this nation and this yajna is the measure 
of your power and potential. Grow by it and attain to 
your full stature. And may we too grow by it and rise to 
our full national honour and glory. 


22. (Yajna Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


afaa «qur eRder fat a agia: | 
maydo feqagafarifa: wR 


Acikradad vrsa harirmahan mitro na darsatah. 
Sain suryena didyutadudadhirnidhih. 


Agni, brilliant light of cosmic yajna, roaring with 
thunder, showering with the clouds, shooting as 
lightning, great and glorious, universal friend, bright 
and beautiful, and blazing with the sun is a jewel treasure 
of wealth deep as the oceans of space. 


23. (Apah Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


gift 4 sanasota: oq afütranacdl 
aq Qen sit wow ad fus urs 


Sumitriya na'apa'osadhayah santu durmi- 
triyastasmai santu yo'sman dvesti yam ca vayam 
dvismah. 


May the herbs and waters and the pranic energies 
they bear be efficacious as good friends to us, and may 
they carry strong antidotes for those negativities that 
injure us and which we hate to suffer. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1040 YAJURVEDA 


24. (Savita Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


Seay cq; usdessdi i 
aa dam usd Sifter usu 


Udvayam tamasaspari svah pa$yanta uttaram. 
Devam devatra suryamaganma jyotiruttamam. 


High and higher beyond the dark, looking up to 
the heavens, let us rise and reach to the sun, bright and 
blazing, light supreme among the stars of the universe. 


25. (Ishvara Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 
usiiscafritaf2 ada asiste ast at efe 


Edho’syedhisimahi samidasi tejo'si tejo mayi 
dhehi. 


Lord of the universe, you are the fire. You are the 
fuel. You are the furnace. You are the light and you are 
the radiation. 


Radiate that fire and splendour unto me. May we 
grow intense radiant by the blaze of that light and fire 
divine. 

26. (Indra Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 
"medi matga arte uw fa-etar ferríism od 
adata wd vege tamia aft arafa- 
TA MRN 


Yavati dyavaprthivi yavacca sapta sindhavo 
vitasthire. Tavantamindra te grahamurja 
grhnamyaksitam mayi grhnamyaksitam. 


Indra, lord of fire and splendour, as far as the 
heaven and earth abound, as far as the seven seas of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIX 1041 


space roll on, that far do I hold on to that immortal zone 
of power and splendour and receive it unto me intact 
and indestructible with all my strength and energy. 


27. (Yajna Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


fa cuffs gett usn ufn od: 1 afer 
Rata fast cewrfdur ae cendum aster 
"E neon 
Mayi tyadindriyam brhanmayi dakso mayi 
kratuh. Gharmastri$ugvirajati viraja jyotisa 
saha brahmana tejasa saha. 
That expansive power in me, that yajnic 
efficiency of action like threefold passion of fire, 


lightning and the sun shines in me with the immanence 
of light, omniscience and cosmic power of Infinity. 


28. (Yajna Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


aden asema aer arenes uiui 
fad: dana sete d gare oa umma: 
steer wsmdfauíaraer usudssdgdssdgdur 
WAIT ure 


Payaso reta’abhrtam tasya dohamasimahy- 
uttaramuttaram samam. Tvisah samvrk kratve 
daksasya te susumnasya te susumnagnihutah. 
Indrapitasya prajapatibhaksitasya madhumata’ 
upahuta 'upahutasya bhaksayami. 


From the milk of cosmic plenty, vitality is received. 
We receive the shower of that vitality rising in abudance 
year by year. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1042 YAJURVEDA 


Lord of infinite peace and joy, for the human 
observance and extension of your cosmic yajna I am 
one with your light and splendour, lord of omnipotence 
and bliss of life. And having invoked and fed the fire of 
yajna, inspired and sanctified by the holy fire, I taste 
the honey-sweets of yajna raised by the waves of Indra's 
energy, and consumed, revitalized and showered by the 
sun, father and guardian of the children of divinity. 


sta srerhisttseara: d 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIX 1043 


CHAPTER-XXXIX 


1.  (Prana & Others Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


vare! urge: miaa: 1 oft wergren 
verer«rftamer verat emere emet | fea emer write 
vez ue 


Svaha pranebhyah sadhipatikebhyah. Prthivyai 
svahagnaye svahantariksaya svaha vayave 
svaha. Dive svaha suryaya svaha. 

This oblation is for the pranas, companions of 
the soul, (at the end of life when the pranas merge with 
the universal prana). This oblation is for the earth. This 
is for the fire. This is for the sky. This is for the air. This 
is for the heaven. This is for the sun. 


This is the end of life in truth of word and deed. 
(The divinities of nature take their portion of the 
temporal existence of the human being when death 
overtakes life.) 


2.  (Digadayah Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


fava: wet pura taal AAAA: AISAT: 
Taal ao eel | aT et Yara vemel usi 


Digbhyah svaha candraya svaha naksatrebhyah 

svaha’dbhyah svaha varunaya svaha. Nabhyai 
svaha putaya svaha. 

This oblation is for the quarters of space, this is 

for the moon, this is for the nakshatra stars, this is for 

the waters, this is for the seas, this is for the navel, this 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1044 YAJURVEDA 
is for purification through the fire. 


3. (Vak etc. Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


art caret ursmer verel wore verme 1 adu 
ma VAY wemer strata wer strata carat uai 


Vace svaha pranaya svaha pranaya svaha. 
Caksuse svaha caksuse svaha $rotraya svaha 
Srotraya svaha. 


This oblation is for speech and its purity, this is 
for the breath of one nostril, this is for the breath of the 
other, this is for the sight of one eye, this is for the sight 
of the other, this is for the hearing by one ear, this is for 
the other. 


4.  (ShriDevata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


"rH: carat emer: geia | Uses SoA 
Tat ast: sit: staat aft carat irs 


Manasah kamamakutim vacah satyamaStya. 
Pasunain rupamannasya raso yasah $rih 
Srayatam mayi svaha. 
May I get the sanctified will and resolution of 
the mind. May I get the divine truth of speech. May I 
beget the beautiful forms of living beings. May I get 
the sweet vitality and taste of food. May all these and 
honour, beauty and grace be vested in me in life again 
and again. 


This is the voice of the soul in truth of word and 
deed. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIX 1045 


5. (Prajapati Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


werd: anto: dare anA yeso: due 
ad: wdeerernsisaelassmígas: uelerireaut: drerir 
faerenh urea: eere 1 da: eta uere 
aren fanse FAA arya: gui 


Prajapatih sambhriyamanah samrat sambhrto 
vaisvadevah samsanno gharmah pravrktasteja’ 
udyata’asvinah payasyanityamane pausno 
visyandamane marutah klathan. Maitrah $arasi 
santayyamane vayavyo hriyamana 'agneyo 
huyamano vagghutah. 


Jiva, the soul, nourishing and supporting life, is 
prajapati, guardian of life. Fully provided and 
prosperous, it is Samrat, brilliant and sovereign. Well- 
positioned in society, it is vaishhvadeva, a human 
divinity. High and distinguished it is gharma, yajnic fire. 
Risen to the heights, it is teja, splendour. Sanctified and 
initiated in water, it is ashvina, blessed with pranic 
energy. Abundant and generous, it is paushna, child of 
the sun. Destroyer of enemies, it is maruta, of the winds. 
Developing waters, it is maitra, generous and friendly. 
Moving tempestuously, it is of the air, flying and 
floating. Kindled and challenged, it is fiery. Invoked 
and invited, it is vak, voice of divinity. 


6. v4) & Others Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 
tsas aats 
EA TESA: T med: aaa aga 
faat tà mho asmssdsunast feme car 
gla3t ngu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1046 YAJURVEDA 


Savita prathame ' hann 'agnirdvittye vayustrtiya’ 
aditya$caturthe candramah pancama’rtuh 
sasthe marutah saptame brhaspatirastame. 
Mitro navame varuno dasama’indra’ ekadase 
vi$ve deva dvadase. 


When the soul leaves the body, on the first stage 
it goes to Savita, the sun, to Agni on the second, to 
Vayuon the third, to Aditya on the fourth, to Chandrama 
on the fifth, to Ritu on the sixth, to Maruts on the 
seventh, to Brihaspati on the eighth, to Mitra on the 
nineth, to Varuna on the tenth, to Indra on the eleventh, 
and to Vishvedevas on the twelfth. 


7.  (Marutah Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 
usd Aasa arasa afive | 
amaira «i fafaa: caret non 


Ugrasca bhimasca dhvantasca dhuniśca. 
Sasahvansca’bhiyugva ca viksipah svaha. 


According to its nature and action, the soul after 
death is violent or peaceful, fearful or fearless, dark or 
bright, roaring or quiet, patient or impatient, cooperative 
or non-cooperative, disruptive or concentrative, (and is 
reborn in an appropriate form). 


8. (Agni etc. Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 
aam | we ademas aaa werdende: 
wie We diet efusce-: frit aat- 
IMT Neu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXIX 1047 


Agnim hrdayenasanim hrdayagrena pasupatim 
krtsnahrdayena bhavam yaknà. Sarvam 
matasnabhyamisanam manyuna mahadeva- 
mantah parsavyenogram devamı vanisthuna 
vasisthahanuh singini kosabhyam. 

The soul comes to attain and hold Agni by the 
heart, electric energy by the front part of the heart, 
Pashupati Shiva by the whole heart, the kind Shiva by 
the liver, the fearsome Shiva by sides of the heart, ruling 
power by righteous anger, the great lord by ribs on both 
sides of the chest, heat and light of spirits by the 
intestines, manly excellence by the ventricles of the 
heart. 


9.  (Ugraetc. Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 
mdr aca MaA weal | wae quedseg- 
miam duree deeded eres: dyad: 
uf us 


Ugramllohitena mitram sauvratyena rudram 
daurvratyenendram prakridena maruto balena 
sadhyan pramuda. Bhavasya kanthyam 
rudrasyantahparsvyam mahadevasya yakr- 
ccharvasya vanisthuh pasupateh puritat. 

The soul comes to have hypertension by the 
blood, friendliness by noble thoughts and values, 
violence by negative thoughts and values, honour and 
power by good conduct, strong people by power, good 
people and success by love and cheerfulness. Sweetness 
of the throat is the seat of praise and social appreciation. 
Inside of the ribs is the seat of Rudra. The liver is the 
seat of Mahadeva. The intestines are the seat of strength. 
The arteries of the heart are the seat of Pashupati. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1048 
10. 


YAJURVEDA 


(Agni Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


qha: tater cites: caret cep aet cep Cae 
ARa talal eitféara vemgr Aha: Catal fele: 
marat | mA: t HIP$YTSxI: Taal Sarasa: 
Yael Sassy: GXeTETSTSISZI: Careleava: ATE 
mona: e vun: xeTel | Uta Laat wag 
xem o 

Lomabhyah svaha lomabhyah svaha tvace svaha 
tvace svaha lohitaya svaha lohitaya svaha 
medobhyah svaha medobhyah svaha. Maimse- 
bhyah svaha mamsebhyah svaha snavabhyah 
svaha snavabhyah svaha’sthabhyah svaha- 
*sthabhyah svaha majjabhyah svaha majjabhyah 
svaha. Retase svaha payave svaha. 


This oblation is for the hair in parts of the body, 


this is for the hair of the whole body. This is for the 
skin in parts, this for the whole. This is for blood in the 
parts, this for the whole. This is for the fat in the parts, 
this for the whole. This is for the flesh in parts, this for 
the whole. This is for the tendons, this for the nerves. 
This is for single bones, this for all. This is for the 
marrow in the parts, this is for the whole marrow in the 
body. This is for the semen. This is for the anus. 


11. 


(Agni Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


amma eet maaa xeTel area  vemel 
Rama wermelemure caret | per cael wilehd 
Talal VIPAT ver Villa venei nge 

Ayasaya svāhā praydsaya svaha samydasaya 
svaha viyasaya svahodyasaya svaha. Suce svaha 
Socate svaha $ocamanaya svaha sokaya svaha. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XXXX 1049 


In all truth of word and deed and in all 
commitment to faith: homage to the spirit of new 
attainment, to effort for the new attainment, to balance 
and peace in the effort and attainment, to success in 
various new attainments, to effort for rising higher and 
higher, to purify and purification of the body, mind 
and soul. 


Homage to the purifier, to the light of purification, 
and all hail to the body, mind and soul for the intake of 
purity from the process of purification. 


12. (Agni Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 
ada mg aaa carer duiHTHTG ez] aca 


waet gata caret | fedet tater urdíserer carat 
Wass Catat urge 


Tapase svaha tapyate svaha tapyamanaya svaha 
taptaya svaha gharmaya svaha. Niskrtyai svaha 
prayascityai svaha bhesajaya svaha. 

In all truth of word and deed and in all 
commitment to faith : homage to the fire of purification, 
to the soul in the crucibles of purification, to the soul 
receiving the light of purification, to the soul purified 
and redeemed, to the heat and light of the new day, to 
purity from pollution and evil, to disintegration of body 
and release of the soul, to penitence and self- 
introspection, and homage to new health and new 
happiness. 


13. (Agni Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 
"THIS teeta taret yaa caret | ae 
wt sale tater faves Saez: tater arat- 
"uferetrssmesverzt 2301 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1050 YAJURVEDA 


Yamaya svaha’ntakaya svaha mrtyave svaha. 
Brahmane svaha brahmahatyayai svaha 
visvebhyo devebhyah svaha dyavaprthivibhyain 
svaha. 

In truth of word and deed and faith, homage to 
Yama, lord of justice and reckoning. Homage to Antaka, 
transcendent time that ends up everything in existence. 
Homage to Death that consumes all that is born. Homage 
to Brahma, the Supreme. Homage to the migration of 
the soul. Homage to the divinities of existence. Homage 
to Heaven and to Mother Earth. 


screnrrerenfstssum: i 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XL 1051 


CHAPTER-XL 


1. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 
gm amea: we fenes wee HI og 
wt creer spesirem ur tte: aret für ie 
Isa vasyamidain sarvam yatkim ca jagatyam 
jagat. Tena tyaktena bhunjitha ma grdhah kasya 
sviddhanam. 


All this that is, moving in the moving universe, 
is pervaded by the Ruling Lord of Existence. Therefore, 
live it as given by Him, enjoy it objectively in a spirit of 
detachment. Covet not anyone’s wealth. It belongs to 
none (except to the Lord). 


2. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 
qias mi Reia eat: d 
Wei wate araaidister a end ferad aÈ RN 


Kurvanneveha karmani jijwisecchatain samah. 
Evam tvayi nanyatheto 'sti na karma lipyate nare. 


Only doing one's duty here should everyone wish 
to live for a full hundred years. Only this way—there is 
no other way—Karma does not smear the soul of man 
within. 


3. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


Tee TH a Asr aera: | 
area Wenfd teeta Gd a aag Sat: 113 11 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1052 YAJURVEDA 


Asurya nama te loka'andhena tamasavrtah. 
Tanste pretyapi gacchanti ye ke catmahano 
janah. 

Surely after death and even while living, 
demonical souls sunk in darkness who kill their 
conscience and live only a physical existence (void of 
virtue) go to those sunless regions of the world which 
are covered in the impenetrable darkness of sufferance. 


4. (Brahma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


srivee tte weet Adearsarteqay udud i 
vreldts-miclía arsaa utafzset eerferirs it 


Anejadekam manaso javiyo nainaddeva’ 
apnuvan purvamarsat. Taddhavato’nyanatyeti 
tisthattasminnapo matarisva dadhati. 


Brahma is constant, unmoving, One and only 
One, without a second, and faster than the mind. The 
mind and senses cannot attain to It, although It is present 
everywhere, already and always. Though still, It 
surpasses and transcends others who are at the fastest 
move in nature. Within It the wind holds the waters of 
the universe. Within the Divine Presence the soul 
performs its actions. (If somthing moves faster than the 
velocity of light, it becomes omnipresent. And what is 
omnipresent, is still too, because there is no space to 
move through.) 


5. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


adsfa asta wa at wf | 
aa UST wa PTT TEIG: N 
Tadejati tannaijati taddure tadvantike. 


Tadantarasya sarvasya tadu sarvasyasya 
bahyatah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XL 1053 


It moves, yet It does not move, (being 
omnipresent). It is at the farthest of space, even farther, 
and It is at the nearest. It is within this all, and surely It 
is outside of all this. 


6. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


ae welifur sparemer-rerpesdfW d 
qd aren edt «i ferfelfenearferis u 


Yastu sarvani bhutanyatmannevanupasyati. 
Sarvabhutesu catmanam tato na vi cikitsati. 


One who sees all the forms of existence existing 
within the Supreme Soul, and the Supreme Soul 
immanent in all the forms of being, suffers from no doubt 
or illusion (and holds on to faith). 


7. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


wfereedifer yarra aAA: i 
aa cal Ale: ch: ksur: nol 


Yasmintsarvani bhutanyatmaivabhudvijanatah. 
Tatra ko mohah kah Soka’ ekatvamanupasyatah. 


In the state of knowledge wherein the knower 
knows all the forms of being as pervaded by the same 
One Soul, how can there be any illusion or suffering 
for the person who sees the same Unity in existence 
everywhere. 


8. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 
u xg * 


enferi-fret dft: pL NU CUP ie 
wada: TAT: dedi 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1054 YAJURVEDA 


Sa paryagacchukramakayamavranam asnavi- 
ram $uddhamapapaviddham. Kavirmantist 
paribhuh svayambhuryathatathyato'arthan 
vyadadhacchasvatibhyah samabhyah 


The Supreme Soul is omnipresent, omnipotent, 
without body, without any flaw, without sinews, pure, 
sinless, visionary poetic creator and omniscient, existent 
in the heart and mind of all, transcendent, self-existent, 
who for the infinite ages of eternity creates, organises, 
reveals and sustains all the forms of existence as they 
are and ought to be. 


9.  (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


aema: Ww fasta asdeyfaqara | 
wdt yessa wd wur ss Pee TAT: el 


Andham tamah pra visanti ye'sambhutim- 
upasate. Tato bhuya iva te tamo ya’u 
sambhutyam ratah 
Down into the darkest dark do they fall who 
worship only the primordial prakriti. Still deeper and 
darker do they fall who worship only the existential 
forms and are lost therein. 


10. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 
amag: zem nem | 
sted erste sieur À aeaigerafart uou 
Anyadevahuh sambhavadanyadahurasam- 


bhavat. Iti $u$ruma dhiranam ye nastad- 
vicacaksire. 


Different is the result, they say, from primordial 
prakriti, and different is the result, they say, from the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XL 1055 


existential forms. This have we heard from the Wise 
who revealed it to us. 


11. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 
qejfi a farsi cr aaa: E d 
aam uei diei wnedemgdusqa ue 


Sambhutim ca vina$am ca yastadvedobhayain 

saha. Vinas$ena mrtyum tirtva sambhutya- 
mrtamasnute. 

One who knows the immortal/constant primordial 

and the mortal/mutable existential and knows that 

Supreme Spirit along with both, masters the facts of 


death by the mortal and realizes the immortal by the 
primordial. 


12. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


amema: Ww fasta asteerqatad 
wdt wassa d «ur ass faerat TaT: ug zn 


Andham tamah pra visanti ye'vidyamupasate. 
Tato bhuya iva te tamo ya'u vidyayam ratah. 
Down into the darkest dark do they fall who 
worship Avidya, i.e., illusion, or mere karma (action). 
Still deeper, and darker do they fall who are lost in 
Vidya, i.e., knowledge without reference to karma or 
the reality content of it. 


13. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


sradagfanratsstaateraaran: | 
sft wera eioi & aetigererfart uu 


Anyadevahurvidyaya ’anyadahuravidyayah. Iti 
susruma dhiranam ye nastadvicacaksire. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1056 YAJURVEDA 


Different is the result of Vidya, they say, and 
different is the result of Avidya, they say. This we have 
heard from the wise who revealed the difference of both 
to us. 


14. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 
ferar ma a eaESDUeewmE | 
steerer ya vitet fererargdug-pa. uei 


Vidyam cavidyam ca yastadvedobhayam saha. 
Avidyaya mrtyum tirtva vidyaya’ mrtamasnute. 


One who knows Vidya, i.e., the constant reality 
and the knowledge of it, and Avidya, i.e., illusion, for 
what it really is, and Karma including the order of 
change, and knows that Supreme Spirit along with both 
Vidya and Avidya, masters the reality and meaning of 
death by Avidya, and realises Immortality by Vidya. 


15. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


anem WETTER | 
SRA chal TAC | femp TAT | pE Ua 


Vayuranilamamrtamathedam bhasmanta in 
Sariram. Om krato smara. Klibe smara. Krtain 
smara. 


The end of the body is ash. The prana-vayu 
merges with the cosmic energy. And this soul is 
immortal. 


O soul, remember Om, Supreme Soul of 
Existence. Agent of Karma, remember your karma. 
Remember both these to realise your real form and 
potential. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XL 1057 


16. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 


ar va gaat dass fasat Ge agri 
feri | qategqerdgaoready fusi a sf 
faa ngan 


Agne naya supatha raye'asman visvani deva 
vayunani vidvan. Yuyodhyasmajjuhuranameno 
bhuyistham te nama uktim vidhema. 


Agni, brilliant lord omniscient of all the laws and 
ways of existence, lead us to the wealth of life by the 
right path of honesty and simplicity. Remove from us 
all sin and crookedness. We sing the most joyous songs 
of celebration in praise of you. Homage to you again 
and again. 


17. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi) 
fans want wernenfdfad vu | atseratfet 
Wee: dpsureeu | sian ud gaat uev 


Hiranmayena patrena satyasyapihitam mukham. 
Yo’ savaditye purusah so’ savaham. Om kham 
brahma. 


The face of truth is covered by a golden veil. The 
veil is removed by the Lord of golden glory. 


The life and light that shines in the sun is that 
Supreme Purusha. That is there, and that is here in me. 


Om is the saviour. Om is Brahma, Brahma is 
infinite, sublime. 


sta aeateitseara: ou 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1058 YAJURVEDA 


NOTE 


Swami Dayananda has accepted this version of 
Yajurveda chapter 40. There is another version, which 
is also accepted as Ishopanishad, and that has eighteen 
mantras. That version from mantra 15 to mantra 18 is 
given below: 


15. The face of truth is covered with a golden 
veil (the veil of Prakrti). That veil, O Lord preserver 
and promoter of life, unveil so that we may see the Truth 
and eternal Dharma. 


16. Lord giver of life and protection, universal 
guide, eternal light, lord of creation, Sole Lord, one and 
absolute, universal Eye, seer omniscient, gather up your 
light for me. The splendour that is yours is the most 
auspicious and sublime form I see. The light that shines 
in the sun is the Purusha. That is there, That is in me. 


17. The end of the body is ash. The breath of life 
goes to eternal energy. The soul is immortal. O soul, 
remember Om. Remember your karma. Lord of yajna, 
agent of karma, remember the actions performed. 


18. Agni, light of life, lead us on by the right path 
to the wealth of life. Brilliant lord omniscient of all laws 
and ways of existence, and all our thoughts and deeds, 
remove from us all sin and crookedness. We sing songs 
of celebration in praise of you. Homage to you again 
and again 


Note: In the Vaidic tradition of religious 
studies, thought and practice specially after Swami 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


CHAPTER-XL 1059 


Shankaracharya, three works have been prominent. They 
are: Vedanta Sutras, Upanishads, and the Gita. The three 
together are known as Prasthana-trayi, and summed up 
as ‘Vedanta’ in popular parlance. And Vedanta is 
sometimes understood to be an ‘End of the Vedas’, a 
‘take off? and even a substitute for the Vedas. For the 
information of the dedicated readers it is important to 
mention that: 


1. The Vedanta Sutras are an extensive 
commentary on the closing words of Yajurveda. The 
closing words of Yajurveda are: Om Kham Brahma. And 
the opening words of Vedanta Sutras are: Athato 
Brahma Jijnasa 


Which means: And now, an enquiry into the 
nature of Brahma. Clearly the Vedanta Sutras are an 
extensive act of meditation on the open-ended close of 
Yajurveda. Similarly Mandukyopanishad also is an 
expansive act of meditation on OM, the first of the 
closing words quoted above and Yajurveda (40, 15): Om 
Krato Smara. 


2. Chief among Upanishads for the common 
reader are Ishopanishad and Mandukyopanishad. 
Ishopanishad is a literal version of the closing chapter 
of Yajurveda, and Mandukya, an act of meditation on 
OM. 


3. The Gita is a call to action, an extensive 
commentary on the second mantra of the closing chapter 
of Yajurveda: 


Kurvanneveha karmani jijivisecchatam samah, 


Evam tvayi nanyatheto'sti na karma lipyate nare. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


1060 YAJURVEDA 


Prasthana-trayi thus is neither the *End of the 
Vedas’, nor a substitute, nor a take off. Each work is a 
continuation of Vedic studies in its own context of 
meditation, meditative teaching, and a rousing call to 
action in a situation of karmic crisis. 


The three are, thus, not a departure from the 
Vedas, they are a homage to the Vedas. 


num 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


