|| AUM |


2


[Names: Original, Sanskrit, Text, Transliteration]
Lucid English Translation in the Aarsh Tradition
of Maharshi Yaska and Swami Dayananda)


English translation by


[Names: Tulsi, London]
(Professor, Administrator, Researcher and Writer)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


Sanskrit Text as per publication of




[Names: Paropakarini, Sabha, Ajmer]
Your cooperation will help us bring more gems of Indian culture to
forefront and support the cause of humanity.




YAJURVEDA by Dr. Tulsi Ram M.A., Ph.D.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


[Names: Dedication]
The Mother’s Gift
For all her children
——— E2


Your path is up and onwards,


[Names: Never]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( vi )


Homage, Thanks and Acknowledgements


Homage to Jyeshtha Brahma, the Eternal Guru.
Homage to Immanent Brahma and Will Divine.


Homage to Mother Trinity of Ida, Saraswati, Mahi with


[Names: Bharati]
Homage to the Rshis from Brahma to Dayananda.
Homage to parents for inspiration and blessings.


Homage to the sacred memory of my wife Maya Jyoti
who waited until the last word of this project was written.


Thanks and best wishes to my son Gianendra Sharma for
his relentless and indispensable dedication to the management of
this project till the completion.


Thanks and best wishes to my daughter Indira Sharma
and son-in-law Gulab Sharma and my brother Ram Kishan
Sharma, wishing, waiting and assuring, with Gianendra Sharma,
the publication of this work.


Thanks to Sarvshri Amar Erry, Bhai Anand Roop Narain,
Aditya Kumar, Amar Uma Das, Ramesh Gupta, and the other
members of Arya Samaj Markham, Toronto and North America.


Thanks and homage of gratitude to the teachers, scholars
and translators of the Vedas from Swami Dayananda to the present
[Names: Shripad, Damodar, Satavalekara, Pandit, Jaya, Deva, Swami, Kshema, Karana, Trivedi, Prof, Vishwa, Nath, Vidyamartanda, Dharma, Acharya]
Vaidyanath Shastri, Swami Satya Prakash, Pt Devi Chand and a


Thanks to Shri Dharampal Arya, of Arsh Sahitya Prachar
Trust, for the publication of this work.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( vii )


[Names: Particulars, Page, Homage, Thanks, Acknowledgements]
l. About the Author ix
2. From the Publishers Desk xi
[Names: Foreword, Subhash, Vedalankar, About, Sharma]
English translation of the
[Names: Yajurveda, Krishan]
5. English Translation of Vedic
[Names: Hymns, Opinion, Bhawanilal, Bhartiya, Message, Balvir, Message, Mahavir, Appreciation, Baldev, Singh, Sadbhavana, Good, Umakant, Upadhyaya]
10. To the Reader —Dr. Tulsi Ram XX
[Names: Introduction]
12. Diacritical Marks of Transliteration XXXVI
S» cu amete 19-39
[Names: Ghapter]
cr. fe RE 87-114


[Names: Ehapter, Chapter, Chapter]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


Ce 237-260
[Names: Chaptep, Chapier, Meme, Wise]
ure. c I— 918-926
Chap tet a edil "— 927-968
giu. —————— 969-095


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( ix )


About the Author




[Names: English, Delhi]
researcher, and writer of long standing with prestigious assignments:


Lecturer in English, Hans Raj College, Delhi


Reader in the Department of English, Kurukshetra University,




[Names: Kurukshetra, Haryana, Principal, Shivaji, College, Principal, Shraddhanand, College]
Visiting Ford Foundation Scholar, University of Leeds, Leeds
(UK)

Professor of English, Department of Languages, B.I.T.S. Pilani


[Names: Rajasthan]
Professor Head of the Department of English, Maharshi


[Names: Dayanand, University, Rohtak]
Besides his professional studies of secular literature in English,
Hindi, Sanskrit and Urdu, Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma has devoted his life
and time to the study and discipline of Sacred literature, specially Vedas,
[Names: Upanishads, Darshan, Philosophy, Puranas, Ramayana, Mahabharata]
with concentration on the Bhagwad Gita, Greek, Roman, Sumerian
and English Epics, Gathas of Zarathustra, Bible, Quran, and the writings
of Swami Dayananda and Swami Vivekananda, in search of the essential
values of Sanatan Vedic Dharma with reference to their realisation in
life and literature through social attitudes, collective action, customs,
traditions, rituals and religious variations across the fluctuations of


Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma's research and publications include:


The Neo-Classical Epic: an Ethical Interpretation (Delhi, 1971)
Trading in Language: The Story of English in India 1781-1981


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


(x)
The Original Philosophy of Yoga: Commentary on the Yoga-
Sutras of Patanjali (Gurukul Jhajjar, Haryana, 1989)
[Names: Bharat, Main, Angrezi, Khoya, Paya]
Swami Dayananda’s Vision of Truth (Delhi, 2002)
Translation of Nine Upanishads (Delhi, 1992)
Translation of Swami Dayananda’s Sanskar Vidhi (Delhi, 1995)


Translation of Swami Dayananda's short writings in Dayananda


[Names: Granth, Mala]
Translation of Swami Satya Pati's God Realisation through


[Names: Simple, Yoga]
And a number of articles such as:
“Swami Vivekananda’s Vision of Man" (Prabuddha Bharat,
1979)


“G.D. Birla: Gandhi’s child”, in Birla Felicitation Volume (BITS,

[Names: Pilani]
“Search for a Medium of Instruction in India”, in Mitra


[Names: Felicitation, Volume]
“Shakespeare as a Creative Yogi” in Shakespeare, the Indian
Icon Ed. Vikram Chopra for Jay L. Halio (2011)


And now: English translation of all the four Vedas, in the Arsha
tradition of Maharshi Yaska and Swami Dayananda.


Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma has spent the last ten years on this
translation of the four Vedas, all the time saying: “I came for this”.
While English has been the language of his professional communication,
Sanskrit is the voice of his life and living.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xii )




Veda Bhashya by Prof. Tulsiram - A step to make Vedas
available to the English World

I have had the privilege of going through some of the
chapters of Yajurveda Bhashya written by Prof. Tulsiram, a well
known Vedic scholar and author of English language and
literature. I congratulate him because he has done this translation
for an average English reader who is keen to know the Vedas.
Knowledge of the Vedas is like the knowledge of science. Vedic
language is a scientific language and nobody can understand that
without the profound knowledge of Vedangas, especially Nirukta
of Maharshi Yaska and the grammar of Panini and Patanjali.
Nobody can interpret the Veda mantras without these two. This
translation proves that Prof. Tulsiram has done this insightful
translation after doing hard work in both Vedangas.

In translating the Vedas, only literal meaning is just not
sufficient, sometimes it may create confusion and contradiction.
[Names: Tulsiram, Vedic, Mantras]
thinking deeply about words, derivatives and analyzes the hidden
nuances of meaning in their context. For example, 'Sumitriya na
[Names: Yajur]
in the ordinary sense, "may the waters, vital forces of life, and
herbs be friendly to us and may they be enemies to those who
hate us and whom we hate", it will not make acceptable sense.
After raising some questions, he says, "How can we accept this?"
So, after going deeply into the words and context he gives this
meaning of the said mantra: May waters, tonics, pranic energies
and medicinal herbs be good friends of our health system and
immunity and let the same waters, tonics, pranic energies herbal
medicines act against those ailments, diseases and negativities
which injure us, which we hate to suffer and which we love to
effects too help the negativities and injure us.

After giving the actual sense of the Mantra he writes that
this Mantra is a reasonable prayer for the health programme of an


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xiii )


advanced society, and then, logically in the next Mantra, follows
the prayer for a full hundred years and more of life and healthy

[Names: Tacchakshurdevahitam]
The translation by Prof. Tulsiram is without any extraneous
motive and without any extra-academic intention. The translation
has been done purely as communication of the Vedic message
for the welfare of mankind.

While giving his opinion on the Vedas Prof. Tulsiram writes
in his Introduction....Veda is the Voice of God revealed in
scientific Vedic Sanskrit free from local color and historical facts,
therefore Vedic language is to be interpreted and understood
according to its own laws and structure, and the only key available
for such interpretation is the Nirukta of Maharshi Yaska and the
grammar of Panini & Patanjali. According to Maharshi Dayananda
Saraswati, "without reference to these bases of Vedic interpretation
certain words have been given a distorted meaning in the
translations of Max Muller, Griffith, Whitney and even Sayana.'
Actually the torch light for proper translation today, as Aurobindo
says, is the Arsha tradition followed by Maharshi Dayananda

[Names: Saraswati]
At the end I will say that this translation of Yajurveda, based
on Nirukta and Grammar, follows the known ancient Indian
tradition. It is factual, without prejudice or hidden motive. Prof.
Tulsiram thinks deeply on every word of the mantra, looks into
the context and etymology according to Nirukta and then does
the translation. I congratulate him on this one more pioneering
step to make the knowledge of Vedas available to the western
world and the average English knowing reader. May God give
him long and healthy life so that he continues to do this kind of

Ex-Prof. and Chairman of Sanskrit Department,


[Names: Jaipur, India, Presently, Chairman]
Dept. of Sanskrit and Vedic Vangmaya,


[Names: Maharshi, Dayananda]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xiv )


of the Yajurveda


I feel myself fortunate and blest with the Grace of God that
I received a few pages of the English translation by Dr. Tulsi
Ram Sharma with introduction of the Yajurveda. The comparative
views expressed by him about the Vedas are essential for every
student of the Veda since it is a further pointer to scientific research
in the field of Vedic interpretation.

Its conclusion is true: "In short Veda is an eternal articulation
of omniscience, the voice of God". Each work of Prasthana Trayi
i.e. Vedanta, Upanishads and Gita is not a take off from the Vedas
but a continuation of Vedic studies in its own context of
meditation, meditative teaching and a rousing call to action in a
situation of karmic crisis. This English translation is a welcome
addition to Vedic studies opening truly a new path establishing
with ease the Vedas in the service of humanity.


[Names: Krishna]
Former Professor and Head
of Sanskrit Department,
University of Delhi. Delhi.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xv )


English Translation of Vedic Hymns: An Opinion


Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma has taken an uphill task of translating
all the four Vedas in lucid and thought provoking English. Most
of the translations of Vedas by European scholars depend on the
ritualistic meaning given by the medieval commentators like
Sayana and others. But Dr. Sharma has taken a new course of
translation. He agrees with the idea that the Yajurveda basically
propounds the theory of Karma which it explains as Yajna, which
neither denotes sacrifice nor mere ritual (Agnihotra etc.). The
term Yajna carries a threefold meaning: the worship of God,
unification of diverse factors of human society, selfless charity
and replenishment of nature and the environment.

The hymns of the Yajurveda carry lofty ideas of spiritual
and ethical significance. Most of these mantras are, however,
complicated and tough. It is difficult to make out useful meaning
and draw important conclusion out of the text. But Dr. Sharma
has fully succeeded in drawing out the natural and meaningful
content of these mantras. In brief I can say that the present
translation of the Vedas will be appreciated by the scholars of
this Vedic lore as well as by the lay man who wants to understand
the deep meaning of the Vedic texts or at least the basic knowledge
hidden in these ancient works. It is all the more satisfying that
Dr. Sharma has followed the dicta laid down by Maharshi Yaska
and Swami Dayananda Saraswati in translating and explaining
the inner wisdom of the sacred mantras.



[Names: Bhawani]
Ex. Chairman and Professor
Dayananda Chair for Vedic Studies


[Names: Punjab, Chandigarh]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xvi )


AUM


It has been gratifying to go through the English translation
of the Vedas rendered by Dr Tulsi Ram Sharma in as much as it
conveys to the English-knowing world effectively the profound
meaning and transcendental secrets enshrined in the Vedas. The
most salient feature of this translation is its simple and lucid
English. The Vedic words have been expounded here following
the yaugik method of the Arsh tradition set up by Yaska, Panini
and Patanjali (as opposed to the rudhi method which takes only
the historically fixed meanings of words caring little for the context
and the subject). As per the Arsh tradition name words like Agni,
Vayu, Indra, Marut, etc., are synonyms indicating the various
attributive names of the One that is the greatest and the most
comprehensive 'Tattva' of existence, the Cosmic Spirit. It was
Maharshi Dayananda who for the first time after Yaska and
Patanjali advocated and followed this principle of interpretation
on the basis of ancient supporting material. Dr. Sharma has
religiously stuck to this theory while unfolding the truths enshrined
in the Vedas. Obviously Dr Sharma's interpretation of Vedic
hymns enjoys the authenticity of the Arsh tradition and challenges
the western Vedic perspective and the medieval Indian
interpretations of the Vedas which now need to be seriously
reviewed in our present day context of science and inter-cultural




[Names: Professor, Head]
Department of Sanskrit, Pali & Prakrit


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xvi )




Above the narrow boundaries of country, time, caste and
creed, the Vedas have been a treasure house of eternal universal
knowledge and spiritual wisdom. There have been numerous
attempts by Indians and foreigners to make the knowledge of
these Vedas available to the people at large. Among them the
Vedic commentaries of the great social and spiritual leader,
Maharshi Dayananda are the best works in this field. Inspired by
Swami Dayananda, the translation of the Yajurveda into English
by Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma is a commendable work in this line.
Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma has been a great devotee of sacred literature,
especially Vedas, Upanishads, and various philosophies. His life
long study of the Vedas has given him deep insight into Vedic
philosophy. His translation of the Yajurveda reveals it fully. Here
he has translated the Yajurveda, the Veda of Karma, in such a
way that even a common reader can grasp its essence. He has
very effectively brought out how this Veda teaches us to apply
spiritual knowledge in practical life. Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma
deserves our congratulations and best wishes for having done
translation of all the four Vedas in simple and clear English for
the international community.





[Names: Vice, Chancellor, Gurukul, Kangri, Vishwavidyalaya, Haridwar, Uttarakhand]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xviii )


I have gone through some chapters of the English translation
of Yajurveda by Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma. As he has stated at the
very beginning of the Introduction, this translation of Yajurveda
is meant for an average English-knowing reader who is keen to
know: What is Veda? What is it about? Is it old or new? To achieve
this object, he has followed the Arsh method of interpretation.
Accordingly, for example, he has mostly followed the
etymological method of literal translation. But whenever he finds
that the literal is not helpful in achieving his intended objective,
he adds the implied explanation so that the essence of the Vedic
hymn is quite clear. For example, his translation of, 'Yathemam
Vacham Kalyanimavadani janebhyah' is rendered as follows- Just
as I speak (reveal) this auspicious holy Word of the Veda for all
people (without discrimination of high or low), so should you
too communicate it to all people of the world, whosoever,
whatsoever, where so ever they be'. That is the technique of Swami

I regard Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma as one in the commendable
line of Pundit Damodar Satavalekara who studied Sanskrit at a
mature age and did unique work in that language. Dr. Sharma has
also mastered the Sanskrit language after his retirement and done
full justice to the translation of the Veda. He richly deserves our
gratefulness, our expression of gratification and our appreciation
for succeeding in his sacred mission of presenting an
understandable, logical and above all sensible English translation
of Vedas which hitherto was unavailable. Thus a long felt need
has been fulfilled. I am sure Dr Sharma's method of translation
will not only be widely approved but will also be followed by
others while translating the Vedas in other languages.


Formerly Professor of Sanskrit


[Names: Himachal, Pradesh, Shimla]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xix )




Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma, is a profound scholar of English,
Hindi, Sanskrit and Urdu. But his heart felt devotion goes to sacred
[Names: Vedas]
Puranas, Ramayana, and Mahabharata with concentration on the
Bhagwad Gita, Greek, Roman, Sumerian and English Epics,
Gathas of Zarathustra, Bible, Quran and the writings of Swami
Dayananda and Swami Vivekananda, in search of the essential
values of Veda and Sanatan Vedic Dharma. It seems his real spirit
and scholarly interest lies in the interpretation of the Vedas. I
have gone through some portions of his English translation of
Yajurveda and on perusal of this translation, I have marked two

1. His language is perfectly lucid and

2. His translation is faithful to the word and spirit of the

[Names: Veda]
is knowledge of existence, pure and simple, as Science is
knowledge. Science is the knowledge of nature as nature is and
as it works according to its own laws. In Science, there is no
story, no history. Similarly, in the Vedas, there is no story, no
history. And just as Science is knowledge in Scientific language,
free from local colour and historical variations of form and
meaning, so Veda too is knowledge in scientific language, free
from local colour and historical variations."

Veda is 'Knowledge' and knowledge is eternal. The
interpretation of the Vedas requires the knowledge of the Arsh
technique as explained by the Rshis like Yaska, Panini, Patanjali,
Dayananda and Aurobindo.

As Veda is pure knowledge, so is this translation in theArsh
tradition, free from myth and history with no local colour, no
attitude, no motive, except pure communication of the Original
for all.

With best wishes to the author and specially to the readers,


Formerly Professor of Economics,


[Names: Calcutta]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xx )


To the Reader


This translation of the *Hymns of Yajurveda' is an English
Version of the Yajurveda for the common reader who wants to
acquaint himself or herself with the content of this divine message
of the dynamics of Karma, both human and divine, in the context
of the nature, structure and purpose of the universe and the
condition and position of the human being in it. While the opening
mantra launches the human being on life with the exhortation:
*Be vibrant as the winds", the closing mantra seals the success of
vibrant humanity in action with the final achievement of *Om
Kham Brahma” with Grace Divine.


Life according to the Yajurveda is a journey from the
beginning-less beginning to the endless end with the message:


Immortal child of Divinity,

Your roots go deep to Eternity,
Your reach is unto Infinity.

And your path is up and onwards,


This version is a scientific translation of the text within the
parameters of Yaska and Dayananda with rational understanding
of Sayana at the one end and the western scholars at the other.
Sayana’s translation is ritualistic especially with reference to yajna.
It came at a time when the “Renaissance, Re-awakening of
Learning” was far off, not yet just at the next door. Even
communication between the East and the West was not as hectic
as it became after the advent of the East India Company into India.
Thus mutual criticism and appreciation too was silent rather than
vocal. Hence Ritualism was just the thing acceptable to a society
settled on the side of stagnation more than of fermentation.


Ritual, of course, is sacred. It is the most meticulous
programme of action in pursuit of a holistic plan of life and living


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xxi )


which arises from a spiritual vision of Divinity. It is conducted
with unreserved commitment of will in faultless action, and
completed with total surrender in absolute faith. For this reason
yajna in Veda and Upanishad, is described as the highest human
action, “Shreshthatamam karma". This view is accepted in this
translation too. But in addition, an extended interpretation of the
same view of yajna is incorporated and followed in the light of
Swami Dayananda, and also as warranted by the exhortation in
the opening mantra: “Apply yourself to the highest form of action,
yajna, in the service of Indra, lord of the universe, for the glory of
the human nation". The highest actions in the world of existence,
the creative evolution of the universe under the immanent
presiding presence of Divinity, and the total corporate action of
humanity for progress, peace and freedom, all this is yajna. And
this idea leads us to discover for ourselves and understand the
science, art and technology of participative living for progress,
from the individual level, through the social, to the cosmic, as
universal Yajna, human, natural and divine.


There may or may not be an escape from Sayana, but there
is no possible escape from Dayananda, and even from westerners
especially for the sake of caution and self correction.


I respect the western translators for their clarity and their
art of communication. In addition, I find that they did recognise
that the ideal way to interpret and explain the Sanskrit words of
Indian scriptures such as Vedas was to trace back every word to
its root, deconstruct and reconstruct it with the addition of the
affixes, and then structurally explain its meaning. That precisely
was the approach of Yaska, Panini, Patanjali and Swami
Dayananda. Monier Williams, author of the well known Sanskrit
English Dictionary, himself admired the Indians for their scientific
approach to language, specially Sanskrit:


“I draw attention at the very threshold to the fact that
the Hindus are perhaps the only nation, except for the Greeks,
who have investigated, independently and in a truly scientific
manner, the general laws which govern the evolution of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xxi )


He continues in relation to Sanskrit: *The synthetical
process which comes into operation in the working of those laws
may be well called Samskarana, ‘putting together’, by which I
mean that every single word in the highest type of language (called
Sanskrita) is first evolved out of a primary ‘Dhatu’—a Sanskrit
term usually translated as ‘Root’, but applicable to any primordial
constituent substance, whether of words, or rocks, or living
organisms, and then, being so evolved, goes through a process of
‘putting together’ by the combination of other elementary
of the evolution, structure and dynamics of the world of reality,
and Veda as articulation of the reality of existence. ]


“Furthermore, the process of ‘putting together’ implies, of
course, the possibility of a converse process of vyakarana. by
which I mean ‘undoing’ or decomposition (deconstruction), that
is to say, the resolution of every root-evolved word into its
component elements. So that in endeavouring to exhibit these
processes of synthesis and analysis, we appear to be engaged,
like a chemist, in combining elementary substances into solid
forms, and again in resolving these forms into their constituent
ingredients." (p. xii). And in respect of this special character,
Sanskrit, he says, is a different language from the Semitic
languages (of which the Bible and the Quran are expressions).


And yet, in spite of this clear understanding of Sanskrit, an
Arsha dictionary remained with him only “a beautiful philological
dream, a dream, however, which could not receive practical shape
without raising the Lexicon to a level of scientific perfection
unsuited to the needs of ordinary students." (p. xiii)


Why unsuited? The answer lies in his mission and the
main object of his mission. The scientific way of interpretation
and explanation was counter to the purpose for which Monier
Williams was appointed Professor of Sanskrit at Oxford where
he occupied the Boden Chair after H.H. Wilson who had been a


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xxii )


member of the Committee of Public Instruction in India under
Lord Macaulay as Chairman and Lord William Bentinck as
Governor General of India. And then English had been accepted
and introduced as the medium as well as the content of Education.


Monier Williams says: “One consideration which led my
predecessor (Professor H.H.Wilson) to pass on to me his project
of a root-arranged Lexicon was that, on being elected to the Boden
Chair, he felt that the elaboration of such a work would be
incompatible with the practical objects for which the Boden
Professorship was founded... The main object was really a
missionary one, as I have shown in the Preface of this volume."
(p. xi)

The object, Professor Williams explains in the Preface to
his Dictionary (p. ix): “I must draw attention to the fact that I am
only the second occupant of the Boden Chair, and that its founder,
Colonel Boden, stated most explicitly in his will (dated August
15, 1811) that the special object of his munificent bequest was to
promote the translation of the Scriptures (that is, the Bible) into
Sanskrit, so as 'to enable his countrymen to proceed in the
conversion of the natives of India to the Christian Religion'.


[Names: Surely]
following in the footsteps of my venerated master, I have made
it the chief aim of my professional life to provide facilities for
the translation of our sacred Scriptures into Sanskrit, and
for the promotion of a better knowledge of the religions and
customs of India as the best way to a knowledge of the religious
needs of our great Eastern Dependency (India). My very first
public lecture delivered after my election (to the Boden Chair)
in 1860 was on *The Study of Sanskrit in Relation to
Missionary Work in India' (published in 1861)". (pp. xxi)


For any student of Veda, specially in India, in fact anywhere,
it is difficult to overlook the words of Monier Williams in the
Preface and Introduction to his Dictionary of Sanskrit, for the
reason that from translation of Christian Scriptures into


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xxiv )


Sanskrit with a missionary motive, the translation of Sanskrit
Scriptures into English was but the next and ‘logical’ step
with that same missionary motive of conversion, one to extol,
the other to denigrate:


One example, of extolment, is the following translation of
the Bible, “The Gospel according to John’:




[Names: Yohana, Susamvadah, Ishvarasya, Yishor]
Jesus here is presented as an Avatara, someone a very God
for the traditional Hindu, although the Gospel does not mention
the incarnation at all. (The translation of The Bible in Sanskrit by
J.Wenger is available on the internet.)


The other example, of denigration, is given here below from
W.D. Whitney's translation of the Atharvaveda (7, 107, 1) edited
and revised by K.L. Joshi, published by Parimal Publications,




[Names: Namaskrtya, Meksamyurdhvastisthan]
*Having paid homage to heaven and earth, to the
atmosphere, to Death, I will urinate standing erect; let not the


[Names: Lords, Ishvara]
I give below an English rendering of the same mantra
translated by Pundit Satavalekara in Hindi:


*Having done homage to heaven and earth and to the middle
regions and Death (Yama), I stand high and watch (the world of


An English rendering of the same mantra translated by
Pundit Jai Dev Sharma in Hindi is the following:


*Having done homage to heaven and earth (i.e. father and
mother) and to the immanent God and Yama (all Dissolver),
standing high and alert, I move forward in life. These masters of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xxv )


I would like to quote my own translation of the mantra now


*Having done homage to heaven and earth, and to the middle
regions, and having acknowledged the fact of death as inevitable
counterpart of life under God's dispensation, now standing high,
I watch the world and go forward with showers of the cloud. Let
no powers of earthly nature hurt and violate me."


‘Showers of the cloud’ is a metaphor, as in Shelley's poem
‘the Cloud’: “I bring fresh showers for the thirsting flowers",
which suggests a lovely rendering.


The problem here arises from the verb ‘mekshami’ from
the root ‘mih’ which means ‘to shower’ (sechane). It depends on
the translator's sense and attitude to sacred writing how the
message is received and communicated in an interfaith context
with no strings attached (or unattached).


This extolment and denigration was happening around the
time when the English language, English education and missionary
work had been introduced into India and was raging on top. Swami
Dayananda faced this challenge with boldness and caution, still
with an open mind, all prepared even for correction. He based his
interpretation of the Vedas on Nirukta and the etymological
principles of word interpretation, and interpretation of the word
in the context, both local and total, because the local is an integral
part of the total whole.


We are living in an age of science and reason, democracy
and freedom, globalism and global communication, and we feel
the need for a free and frank interfaith dialogue. In such an age,
ritualism and mythology is not enough. If we want to understand
and present Veda as a body of universal knowledge and
articulation of divine awareness of existence, there is no escape
from Yaska, Panini, Patanjali, Dayananda and Aurobindo, because
they provide the key principles and practice of scientific
interpretation of an ancient scientific language such as Vedic
Sanskrit which has no historical parallel for comparison. The


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xxvi )


language of science tells no stories, no myths. It states the truth
pure and simple. Hence the resort to Swami Dayananda, either
before or after Sayana and the western scholars, is indispensable.


There is one observation I must make on Swami Dayananda.
Swami Dayananda has given a socio-economic orientation to the
Vedic mantras because he underscores the relevance of the Vedas
to the social, economic and political situation of humanity,
especially in India, which was necessary and highly meaningful.
For example, the Ashwins, in general, are the complementary
powers of nature and humanity working as twin forces like the
positive and negative currents of electricity, or like the theoretician
and the laboratory man, or the curative and recuperative powers
of medicine and nature's powers of rejuvenation. Swami
Dayananda often explains such powers in the interest of practical
understanding: he defines them as teacher and preacher, or father
and mother, sun and moon, fire and water, prana and Apana
energy, ruler and council, scientist and engineer, and so on,
depending on the mantra context. Sometimes it appears as if he
is delimiting the open-ended general meaning of the Veda. But
we should be careful before we say so, and realise that the
definiteness of his meaning is illustrative and in no way
exhaustive. In this translation such situations have been
appreciated and the meaning has been kept open ended, inclusive
of the meanings given by Swami Dayananda, as suggested by
Yaska and the etymology of the terms. In short, this translation
has been done with cautious reference to Sayana, under the
guidance of Swami Dayananda, with respect for Pundit
Satavalekara and with very careful observance of the western


Pundit Satavalekara comes in between Sayana and swami
Dayananda for his excellent syntactic structures of mantra
meanings in continuous Hindi. But he explains words such as
[Names: Indra, Agni, Ashwins, Vrtra, Trita, Bhujyu, Kashyapa, Jamadagni]
etc. as proper names so that the mantra appears to be a mythical
or historical statement of either fact or fiction. But Swami


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xxvii )


Dayananda interprets these terms in the yaugic manner and
explains them as scientific terms of the forms, functions, orders
and attributes of the powers of existence representing the
manifestive diversity of one Divinity and one Prakrti in the state
of objective existence. These words are not historical names,
because the time context of the creation of the Vedas remains
unknown beyond history and imagination as even Max Muller
confessed in his Gifford lectures in 1890.


This translation respects the entire tradition of Vedic
interpretation, and under the guidance of this tradition takes Vedic
interpretation to the original level of scientific rationality in the
context of modern consciousness, modern language and global
culture, a message both sanatan and, at the same time, modern


[Names: Atharva]
Take just one example of the problem I have faced, with
the solution I have suggested: Yajurveda (36, 23) says, if we take
the literal meaning in the ordinary sense: *May the waters, pranic
energies and herbs be friendly to us and may they be enemies to
those who hate us and whom we hate." How can we accept this?
How can the same waters, tonics and herbs be good friends to us
and enemies to those we hate or those who hate us? Medicine is
medicine after all. This is excellent stuff for a translator who
believes that Vedic poetry is nothing but the voice of a tribal
society in the barbaric, not civilized, state of social evolution.
But let us think deeply. What is the context? Who are our enemies
in that context? Who or what are those that injure us? What are
those we hate or want to injure and destroy? The context is health.
In the context of health, they are the ailments, diseases, germs
and bacteria, viruses, negativities and side effects of medicines
in our system. So the correct and scientific interpretation in the
context of health would be: *May waters, tonics, pranic energies
and medicinal herbs be good friends of our health and immunity
system and let the waters, tonics, pranic energies and herbal
medicines act against those ailments, diseases and negativities
which injure us, which we hate to suffer and which we love to


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xxvii )


[Names: Moreover]
effects too aggravate the negativities and injure us." This is the
reasonable prayer and health programme of an advanced society.
And then, logically in the next mantra, follows the prayer for a
full hundred years and more of life and healthy living (Yajurveda,
36, 24). Veda thus is food for thought.


In human terms: If a legendary celebrity can admire another
written in flesh and blood", how much more — infinitely more—
mysterious, inscrutable, apocalyptic would be the Cosmic Poem
(Devasya Kavyah) created in the language of the Ultimate Vision?


Veda is a Cosmic Poem: the more we know, the more we
know the Veda, and the more we know the Veda, the more we


Indeed, every reader should stand before the Veda, every
verse of It in fact, as Arjuna stood before the Cosmic Krishna,
waiting and watching intently, for the burst of a thousand suns,
for the Dawn on top of the Earth, for the Revelation.


May the light burst forth, I pray.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xxix )




This translation of Yajurveda is meant for an average
English knowing reader who is keen to know:


What is Veda? What is it all about? Is it old or new?


If it's old, what is its relevance today? And if it is relevant, is it
relevant to me also? Or is it relevant only to some particular
community in some particular country at some particular time.


These are relevant questions especially in an age of
science, democracy and globalism.


Veda is Knowledge. The very word ‘Veda’ means
knowledge. It is derived from the root ‘vid’, which means: ‘to be,
to know, to think, and to benefit from’.


So whatever is, is Veda, the very world of existence is
Veda. The knowledge of the world of existence is Veda. The
extension of knowledge through thought and research further is
Veda. And to use that knowledge for the benefit of mankind with
the protection and preservation of nature and environment, without
hurting any form of life, that is Veda.


Veda is knowledge pure and simple as science is
knowledge. Science is knowledge of nature as nature is and as it
works according to its own laws. In science, there is no story, no
history. Similarly in the Veda, there is no story, no history. And
just as science is knowledge in scientific language free from local
colour and historical variations of meaning, so Veda too is
knowledge in scientific language free from local colour and
historical variations. Therefore Vedic language has to be
interpreted and understood according to the laws and technique
of its own structure as stated by seers such as Yaska, Panini and
Patanjali and as explained by Swami Dayananda in his
grammatical works and his notes on Vedic words in his
commentary on the Vedas.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xxx )


But there is a difference between scientific knowledge
and Vedic knowledge: While science is knowledge of nature to
the extent that man has been able to discover it, Veda is the
quintessential knowledge of all that is, including Nature, all that
happens, all that we are, all that we do, and all that we reap in
consequence of our action. It is the Original and Universal
knowledge of the Reality of Existence and the Ideality of our
aspirations, covering the facts and processes of existence, their
interaction and the laws that operate in the interaction. In short,
Veda is an eternal articulation of Omniscience, The Voice of God.


Vedic knowledge is classified thematically into three:
Stuti, Prarthana and Upasana. Stuti is, praise, solemn reverential
remembrance and description and celebration of the attributes,
the nature, character and function of divine powers. Prarthana,
prayer, is an autosuggestive resolution to realise our limitations
and rise above those limitations by calling on Divinity for aid
and blessings when we have exhausted our effort and potential.
Upasana is meditation, the surrender of our limited identity to
participate in the Divine Presence. Stuti implies knowledge
(Janana), Prarthana implies humility and action (Karma), and
Upasana implies total love and surrender (Bhakti). So formally
Vedic knowledge is divided into four:


Rgveda is the Veda of Knowledge, Yajurveda is the Veda
of Karma, Samaveda is the Veda of Bhakti, and Atharva-veda is
Brahma Veda, an umbrella, celebrating the Divine Presence as in
Book 10, hymns 7 and 8.


Yajurveda is Karma Veda, knowledge of the application
of knowledge in practical living in a positive, creative and
constructive manner at both the individual and the collective level.
This way of living and working is *Yajna" which, in simple words,
means a selfless and participative way of life and thereby creating
the maximum out of the minimum for all, including nature,
humanity, the environment and the whole universe, with complete
faith in the living, breathing, self-organising, self-conscious,
Sovereign System. Living the yajnic way, we realise that Nature


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xxxi )


is a tree, Ashwattha, and the entire cosmos including ourselves is
a Purusha, and we as human beings are but cells in this Divine
Purusha. Without living this way in a state of full awareness, we
cannot realise that you and I, Mother Nature and the Supreme
Brahma are all together, one in union and communion.


Vedic knowledge then is the Divine knowledge of
existence from the dimensionless point and particle unto Infinity.
And prayerful living and communion in meditation and yoga
means: Self-integration of the particle, Re-integration of the part
with the whole, and Re-Union of the finite with the Infinite.


This is the climactic close of Yajurveda: The light and life
that shines in and beyond the sun is that Supreme Purusha. That
is there, and that is here in me.


Om is the saviour. Om is Brahma. Brahma is Infinite,


[Names: Sublime]
The message of Yajurveda begins with the rousing divine
call to live: *Be vibrant as the winds!" But we must be gratefully
vibrant: ^O Lord we pray for and thank thee for the gift of food
and energy for life, for the health and efficiency of body, mind
and soul." All of us must dedicate ourselves to Savita, giver of
life and light, with devotion to the highest, yajnic action, we must
not hurt the cosmic ‘Cow’, and we must not allow a thief to boss
over us and deprive us of our freedom of thought, word and deed.


As you open the text of Yajurveda, you find the words:
[Names: Savita, Devata, Prajapati, Parameshthi, Rshi]
the subject which is dealt with in the mantra. ‘Devata’ as a Vedic
term means a presence, a power, a force, which is brilliant,
illuminative, and generous. The ‘Devata’ of a mantra may be God,
the One Sacchidananda Brahma as in the closing mantra quoted
above, or Savita, the same One self-refulgent God as in the
opening mantra; or it can be a generous divine power of Nature
such as the sun, moon, earth; or it can be a noble person of brilliant
quality of nature, character and performance as a ruler, leader,
commander, teacher, etc. What the ‘Devata’ means in any


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xxxi )


particular mantra depends on the total context that emerges from
the mantra.


Prajapati Parameshthi is the Rshi of the opening mantra.
The Rshi in the Arsh tradition is not the author of the mantra,
Rshi is the exponent of the meaning of the mantra. As Maharshi
Yaska says in the Nirukta, Rishis are the ‘seers of the mantras’:
they are the sages who went into deep meditation unto the
universal frequency of the Cosmic Mind and experienced the voice
of Divinity speaking in the mantra; the mantra, a Semantic
correspondence of the Divine Voice; the Divine Voice, a sound
correspondence of Divine Awareness of the Reality of Existence
in the modes of Being and Becoming.


Who then is the poet of the Vedas? The answer is in
Yajurveda 40, 8: That Cosmic Spirit which pervades and rules
every moving particle in the moving universe is “the poet, thinker,
all-comprehending, and self-existent”. That is the Lord who
creates the world of existence, ordains the Laws of its dynamics,
and reveals the poetry of its beauty and majesty, the Vedas. “From
that Lord of universal yajna were born the Rks and Samans. From
Him were born the chhandas of Atharva-veda and from Him were
born the Yajus” (Yajurveda 31, 7). The Vedic lore comes in Pura-
kalpa, the beginning of the world of humanity
(Shvetashvataropanishad, 6, 22) and when its function is over at
the end of the kalpa, one cycle of existence, it retires into Brahma-


The Vedas were revealed by the Lord Omniscient to four
primeval Rshis: Rgveda to Agni, Yajurveda to Vayu, Samaveda
to Aditya, and Atharva-veda to Angira, directly in their spiritual
consciousness. The Sage Brahma received and collected the four
from them and passed them on to other sages.


When were the Vedas revealed? What is their age? How
old are they? As old as the age of humanity on earth. The Lord
who creates humanity leaves them not to nature like animals. He
enlightens them with the knowledge of existence and their place
in the world, with the vision of their journey, and its culmination.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xxxii )


Swami Dayananda works out the age of the Vedas on the basis of
Surya Siddhanta which in the year 2010 A.D. comes to
1,96,08,53,110 years. If someone does not accept it and insists
on historical proof, we learn the problem but no possibility of
solution on scientific and historical grounds from Max Muller, a
world renowned Vedic scholar and exegesist of the West: Max
Muller once ventured to pronounce a purely arbitrary date based
on unproven assumptions that around 1200 B.C. was the date of
the Rgveda. Later, he himself warned his students that “Whether
the Vedic Hymns were composed in 1000 or 1500 or 2000 B.C.,
no power on earth could ever fix .... Whatever may be the date of
the Vedic hymns... they have their own unique place and stand
by themselves". The daring presumptions of western scholars
about the date of the Vedas are exposed by Graham Hancock in
his latest researches, in his book: Underworld : The Mysterious
Origins of Civilization (2002). If no history, no Science, no human
imagination can help, better follow the sages, tradition, Surya
Siddhanta, and the daily sankalpa of the dedicated Brahmanas,
and lastly follow the internal evidence of the Vedas themselves:
Vedas are the Original, Universal, Eternal articulation of Divinity,
by Divinity, for humanity at the beginning of human creation.


Since Vedas are the oldest recorded knowledge of the
world, no one can guess how much time, even ages, might have
passed between the Vedas and the next work in Sanskrit. If so,
there is no other work in Sanskrit comparable to the Vedas.
Consequently the language of any other work would not provide
any clue for the interpretation of Veda mantras. Vedic language
then has to be interpreted on its own, and the only key available
for such independent interpretation is the Nirukta and Nighantu
of Maharshi Yaska, the grammatical works of Pinini and Patanjali,
and Swami Dayananda's notes in his commentary on Vedic verses
explaining the structure and meaning of words. Without reference
to these bases of Vedic interpretation, certain words have been
given a very twisted meaning in other translations, by Max Muller,
Griffith, Whitney, and even Sayana. The torch light for proper


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xxxiv )


translation today is the Arsh tradition followed by Swami


The Arsh way is the only right way, the key, to discover
the truth of the Vedas. According to Shri Aurobindo, Swami
Dayananda alone, in modern times, possessed this key to the secret
of the Vedas. Interpreted this way the Vedas shine in their essential
scientific refulgence. As science is pure knowledge, no story, no
history, no mythology, so are the Vedas, pure knowledge:
knowledge of nature, mind, spirit, human society, Dharma, the
dynamics of existence and the right way of living as individuals
and as members of organised society upto the international level.
Even Max Muller, though he was once committed to uprooting
the religion of India by his arbitrary translation of Rigveda, had
to admit in his Biographical Essays that: “To Swami Dayanand,
everything contained in the Vedas was not only perfect truth, but
he went one step further and, by their interpretation, succeeded
in persuading others that everything worth knowing, even the
most recent inventions of modern science, were alluded to in the
Vedas. Steam Engines, Electricity, Telegraphy and Wireless
Marconogram were shown to have been at least in the germ known
to the poets of the Vedas". In fact Shri Aurobindo in his essay on
“Dayananda and the Veda” goes even further: “There is nothing
fantastic in Dayananda's idea that Veda contains truth of science
as well as truth of religion (i.e., Dharma). I will even add my
own conviction that Veda contains other truths of a Science
the modern world does not at all possess, and in that case,
Dayananda has rather understated than overstated the depth
and range of the Vedic wisdom". (see Bankim, Tilak,


The basic requirement of scriptural interpretation for us
is faith and intellingential solemnity, not doubt and cynicism. This
way, if we want to confirm our faith in the scientific vision of the
Veda, refer to Rgveda 1, 34, 7 and 9 for three-stage rocket chariot
of the Ashwins, to 1, 36, 18 for Agni missile, to 1, 37, 3 for winds
and communication, to 1, 46, 10 for concentration of light, to 1,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xxxv )


52, 1 and 1, 36, 1 for the science of missile defence and space-
craft, to 6, 46, 11 for missiles and war heads, and so on. Position
of the solar system with planets and satellites, earth's and sun's
organisational structure of the nation and the international world,
water and electric energy, and so many other subjects are hinted
at in Vedic verses. We need serious research to work out the
details. Had even Einstein read the Purusha Sukta of the Vedas
and Brahma Sutras and Sankhya Vaisheshika philosophy,
probably he would have found clues to his Unified Field theory
of the universe.


Beyond faith and intelligential solemnity we need vision,
potential Darshan of the Vedic Rshis. Once you have had the
vision of truth, doubts disappear and questions recede into silence
because then, nothing shines but the Truth, and Divinity Itself
reveals It's Reality with showers of Grace. In this mood and in
this spirit, I suggest, you start your search for Vedic Truth and
the Mystery of Existence.


Lastly, if the Vedic lore is as old as humanity itself, what
is its relevance today in the modern world? Ask yourself other
questions: What is the relevance of Galileo or Newton or the
Theory of Relativity, two plus two makes four, Swaraj, the Vedic
word for freedom and self-discipline? Truth is truth, when the
statement was made is irrelevant. Vedic truth, if you find it
convincing and acceptable, is relevant not only for today but also
for all time, to every person, everywhere.




[Names: Yathemam]
Just as I speak (reveal) this auspicious holy Word of the
Veda for all people (without any discrimination of high or low),
so should you too communicate it to all people of the world




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


( xxxvi )


DIACRITICAL MARKS FOR TRANSLITERATION



[Names: Vowels]
81 a am à S d % 1



U e u al at o 3 au

SIR (^ )m fani (:) h
( 5»


[Names: Consonants, Guttural]
Palatal





[Names: Lingual, Dental, Labial]
ay X r vef 1 q v




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


AUM




1.  (Savita Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Tafatsstaent, Indraya]
pahi.

Be vibrant as the winds and thank the Lord
Creator, Savita, for the gifts of food and energy, light
and life, for the body, mind and soul. Pray that you
dedicate yourself to the noblest action, yajna, and play
your part in the service of the Lord. Be blest with the
best of health and wealth in plenty, cows, healthy, strong
and fertile, sacred, not to be killed. No thief to rule over
you, no sinner to boss over you ! Growing in power and
prosperity, be firm and loyal to this Lord of the Nation
and protect the wealth and honour of the yajamana.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




(Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Vasoh, Paramena]
Yajna is sacred. It is the light of the sun, the life


of the earth, the breath of air, the holy warmth of life
that sustains and sanctifies existence. Go on, expand
and raise the joy of life to the heights of heaven. Neglect
not yajna. May the Lord of yajna never forsake you.


3.


(Savita Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)


gA: Ua




[Names: Satadharam, Devastva]
Yajna is the sustainer and purifier of countless


worlds. It is the sustainer and purifier of the universe in
countless ways. May the lord creator Savita sanctify
yajna. May the Lord purify and sanctify us with yajna
and the knowledge of the Veda. What message do you
hope to receive ?


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




4. (Vishnu Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)


super aad fact gerer wen


[Names: Vayuh, Vayu, Indrasya, Indras]
Yajna: it is the life of the world. It is the science
and structure of the universe. It is the law and sustenance
of the system. It is the very act of the Lord of Creation.
I stand by it fast and firm with the light of knowledge
and the joy of life.


5. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Agne, Idamahamanrtatsatyamupairmi]
Lord of the fire of yajna, Lord of Law and vows
of faith, I take to the vow of commitment to truth and I
give up the untruth. Bless me that I may be able to keep
the vow. Bless me that I may realize it.


6.  (Prajapati Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Garr, Haut, Kastva, Karmane]
Who enjoins you? He enjoins you. Unto what


[Names: Unto, Himself]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




He enjoin you. He enjoins you for karma (action)
knowledge and virtue (through yajna).


7. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Fretars, Pratyustain, Urvantariksamanvemi]
Evil is uprooted, the selfish are eliminated. The
lawless are punished and corrected. The selfish and anti-
socials have suffered and converted. Let us be generous,


8.  (AgniDevata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)


RÈ yet gia spei ei aise gda vi et a erui




[Names: Dhurasi, Devanamasi]
Fire of yajna, you are destroyer and preserver
both. You save by burning up the evil and the dross.
Destroy that which destroys. Destroy him who
desecrates the yajna. Destroy what our yajna burns to
destroy. To the good you are the quickest and the fieriest,
greatest purifier, giver of highest fulfilment, most
reverenced and worshipped by the good and noble


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




9. (Vishnu Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)


Pawan HAMAS AAAI TATA PIM ASA i


[Names: Ahrutamasi, Visnustva]
Lord of yajna, Vishnu, yajna is simple, straight
and natural. Bless and increase the materials of yajna.
Neglect not yajna, O man. May the master of yajna never
forsake it. Lord Vishnu, the sun, expands yajna to space
to purify the air, to cleanse the environment of evil and
pollution. Apply your mind and senses to purify the


10. (Savita Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)



[Names: Aasaa, Devasya, Agnaye]
In this yajna of the creator, Lord Savita, I perform
the yajna with the heat of the sun and the cool energy of
the moon, and with the two-way motion of the pranic
energy of the air for the sake of the knowledge of fire
and of fire and water in the service of the Lord and his


11. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)
SIRASI gerer Ig


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Bhutaya, Prthivyastva]
I set the vedi of yajna on the navel of the earth
and in the centre of the sky for the prosperity of living
beings and eradication of poverty and selfishness. Open
the doors of the homes on earth and let us rise to the
sky for visions of heavenly bliss. Lord of yajna, Agni,
protect our yajna and the holy materials for oblations.


12. (Ap-Savita Devate, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Tears]
"ru ues




[Names: Pavitre, Suryasya, Suryas, Devirapo]
In this cosmic yajna of Lord Savita, holy fire and
wind are two carriers of yajna, sanctified by the ceaseless
showers of the purest rays of the sun. The holy waters
electrified by the sun, raised by the fire and carried by
the wind travel through space and sky and shower on
the earth to feed the growth of life. May the same divine
rays of the sun, fire and wind, and the holy water carry
the yajna ever forward, and may these and the yajna
bless the yajnapati to move ever onward with health,
wealth and noble virtue.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




13. (Indra Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Aaaa, Watt]
uires eem ues



[Names: Yusma, Daivyaya]
In the cloud-break-up, Indra, the sun, raises the
waters. On the break-up, the waters act under Indra,
Sun and wind. The waters are holy and you are sanctified
by the showers. I consecrate yajna for the sake of agni,
fire. I sanctify yajna for the sake of agni and soma, fire
and water. Be pure and seasoned for noble action, for
godly yajna. If there be things gone impure and polluted,
I purify the same with yajna for you.


14. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Rfid, Sarmasyavadhutain, Adrirasi]
The home of yajna is blessed. Evil is washed off.
Selfishness and want is eliminated. Yajna is the shield
of the earth, this home is the shield of the earth. Know
this and the earth knows this and responds in covenant.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Yajna is the cloud in the vast sky, replete with water for
the earth. It feeds and is fed by the greenery. It is the
preserver of the earth and the sky. Know this and the
yajna responds in covenant.


15. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)





[Names: Teta, Agnestanurasi, Haviskrdehi]
Yajna is the metaphor of Agni in fire, wood and
soma stone, speaking in the divine voice. I do it for the
gods to receive the gift of divine bliss. Prepare, prepare
the holy food for the fire. Offer it to the gods and receive
the divine bliss. Come, come fragrance of life, from the
flames of yajna-fire.


16. (Vayu Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)


eat da: ufaa Rivan: uhoaa




[Names: Kukkuto, Vayurvo]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




You are the voice of the dawn soaked in honey-
dew. Bring us the taste of life, strength of energy and
the light of wisdom and, with you, we'll win the battles
of the world. Lord of rain as you are, open for us the
flood-gates of showers. Sin is washed off, miseries are
gone, evil is eliminated. May the wind refine and carry
your gifts around. May the Lord of life and light hold
you fast and bless you with his hand of gold.


17. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Papeete]
ae | gad yai deg rei cm aaah



[Names: Dhrstirasyapa, Agnimamadam, Agnimamada, Dhruvamasi]
Agni, Lord of yajna, bold and fearless you are,
come and blow out the fire that consumes flesh cooked
or raw; light the fire that brings holy men together for
common good. Firm as you are, hold the earth steady
and advancing. Protect the Brahmana for knowledge,
protect the Kshatriya for justice and peace, protect all
mankind and living beings. I call upon you for the protection
of life, for the destruction of the enemies of life.


18. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)
ara dal puia ereutuear-afisi qz Talat car
fed exe saat cm aaah amaaan


[Names: Fact]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Dhartramasi, Visvabhyastvasabhya]
Lord of yajna, Agni, you are the centre-hold of
the universe. Accept our hymns of praise and worship.
Expand the light and love in our heart. I hold on to you
for the protection of knowledge, justice and love for all
like myself and for the elimination of the enemies of
the joy of life. Lord of the cosmic dance of existence,
protect and extend our vision of higher knowledge,
justice and love of life as ourselves, and eliminate the
enemies of the joy of life. We hold on to you for freedom
and fearlessness from all directions in time and space.
Children of the earth, be sanctified in freedom and
fearlessness in your heart and soul, be consecrated in
the bright and blazing discipline of the energy of life
and the law of existence.


19. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)
[Names: Raoa]
dq ugen




[Names: Dhisanasi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Yajna is the source of joy, it is joy itself. Evil is
eliminated, selfishness is eliminated. It is the protective
cover of the earth. Let the children of the earth know
this. The chant is the voice of omniscience. It is the
light of heaven and main-stay of the stars. The chant is
the music of the showers and the thunder of the clouds.
Let the children of the earth know, let the beneficiaries
of heaven know and realize.


20. (Savita Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)
arate faafe dem wore arama vem eur


[Names: Dhanyamasi, Dirghamanu]
mahinam payo’ si.

It is food consecrated by yajna, water purified by
yajna. It is food for the gods, our body, senses, mind
and soul. Take it for strength and energy, for smartness
and vitality, for virtue and action toward a long and full
life. May the Lord Savita, with His unstinted and
generous hand, bless us with the gifts of light and life
on the earth in abundance.


21. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Ufad, Gerdes, Herder, Gara]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






With the joint action of the light of the sun and
the vital warmth of the earth, and with the up and down
movement of the breath of air, I carry on a triple yajna
in this creation of Lord Savita. The waters join and
nourish the herbs, and the herbs join to produce the
juices. The juices are mixed with the soothing herbs,
and the soothing herbs with the honey-sweet juices. The
yajna goes on. Keep it up and on for the sake of life and




[Names: Yajna, Antyasya, Aagni, Sautram, Devat]
"meh A




[Names: Janayatyai, Somayorise, Somayoris, Srapayatu]
The yajna I perform is for the well-being and
prosperity of all on earth. The materials I offer is for
Agni, to atomize in the fire. It is for Agni and Soma,
generative powers of nature, for the production of food.
The fire of yajna is the life of the earth, it is universal.
Expand it, O man, and join the generative powers of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




nature. May the Lord of Yajna, Agni, expand it for
universal happiness. May the fire never injure your
protection of body and wealth. May Lord Savita mature
and perfect your yajna and bring about a very heaven
of bliss on the earth.


23. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Tritaya]
Fear not, be firm in faith. Yajna is an act of faith.
May the yajaman's children and other people be faithful.
Keep it up for three: fire, action and the materials; for
the purification of air and rain; and for the sole aim of
happiness and well-being.


24. (Dyauvidyutau Devate, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Adade, Vayurasi]
In this world of Lord Savita’s creation, I perform
the sacred act of yajna for the well-being of the holy
ones, for benefit from the light of the sun, soothing peace
of the moon and the vital breath of air. It is the mighty


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




arm of the sun working with a hundred thousand rays
maturing the vegetation on earth. It is the caressing
power of the wind and the generative shower of the
clouds on all forms of life for growth and energy. It is
the death of mutual opposition, the elimination of hate
and resolution of contradictions.


25. (Savita Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)
[Names: Test]
Hee



[Names: Prthivi]
Lord Savita of light and glory, I shall never do
violence to the fertility of the earth, mother of
vegetation. The earth is sacred, seat of yajna for the
holiest of the holy. May the fragrance of yajna rise to
the clouds and reach the sun and shower rain and light
on the earth from heaven. On this holy seat of yajna,
whoever oppresses us, and whom we oppose, bind him
down with a hundred bonds and leave him not.


26. (Savita Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)
miee a ot ad gen at die d
[Names: Thes]
wet mAsa ci cd ad feed ur
tile Ren


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Apararum, Satena, Araro, Satena]
mauk.


I destroy the evil from the earth which is the holy
seat of yajna. Go to the congregation for knowledge,
and shower the rain of knowledge and light of heaven
on the earth. Lord Savita of light and glory, who ever
opposes our yajna and whoever we oppose, bind him
with a hundred bonds and leave him not. The wicked
must not stop the light of heaven. The bubbles of his
drink must not vitiate the nectar. Keep going to the
congregation, bring the light of heaven on earth.


27. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)
maA ver wur Ra aes cur oa
udad cr non




[Names: Gayatrena, Suksma]
The earth is beautiful, kind and gracious, rich in
comfort and security, food and energy, overflowing with
the honey-sweet juices of fruits. It is so by virtue of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




yajna. I dedicate myself to yajna with the inspiring music
of gayatri, ecstatic freedom of trishtubh, and illuminating
expansiveness of jagati.


28. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)





[Names: Wattinrates, Pura, Yamairayamscandramasi, Proksanir, Anudi]
Lord of virtue and power, having taken up the
earth with its generative power, you placed it in the
region of the moon in life-friendly space. Brave men of
honour and virtue take up mighty arms and eliminate
the destructive, and restore its powers and dignity. Pious
men in advance perform yajna with oblations of
rejuvenating materials and restore the generative powers
of the earth. Men of virtue perform yajna, fight
negativities and keep the balance of nature. Yajna is the
death of the enemies of life.


29. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Preas, Rrasa]
areal Gar Re


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Pratyustam, Pratyustam]
Yajna is not a sharp-edged weapon of destruction
but a peaceful mode of regeneration. The lawless are
uprooted, the selfish are driven out. I take up the yajna
materials for the recuperative purpose and consecrate
these for the offering. The force of yajna is positive, of
love and non-violence, but it is most effective in
operation. It corrects the lawless, converts the selfish
and eliminates the destructive. I honor this power for
the sustenance of nature, life and humanity.


30. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)


Tq BAVIAT dol


[Names: Adityai, Agnerjihvasi]
yajuse yajuse.


Yajna, you are the nectar of life for the earth. You
are the presence of Vishnu, the creative power of yajna.
You are life on the earth and light in the sky. You are the
tongue of Agni, tasting the sweets of life. I see this
presence in truth with steady and blessed eye for the
sake of food, energy, and the light of life, in every place
and in every chant of mantra. You are so close, invoked
so freely, so be gracious for me too.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




31. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Gadd, Savitustva, Saviturvah, Prasava, Tejo, Sukramasyamrta]
Yajna, I consecrate you in the creation of Savita
with a ceaseless shower of the purest rays of the sun. I
consecrate you all in this cosmic yajna of Savita with a
ceaseless shower of the purest rays of the light of
Divinity. You are the light and fire. You are the life and
immortality. You are the heaven, you are the Word, you
are the darling of the gods, fearless and inviolable, you
are the lord of worship for the pious, you are the light
and life for humanity.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


18




1. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Pusat, Mate, Krsno]
Yajna is seated in the vedi carved out on the
ground, and it is carried to the sky by the window. I
refine and consecrate the holy offerings for the fire in
the vedi. The fragrance rises to the sky for the higher
vedi there for the formation of waters. I refine and enrich
the holy materials/offerings consecrated by the fire for
the yajna in the sky. The yajna is holy waters floating in
the sky for showers on the earth. I refine, enrich and
consecrate the holy materials of oblations, offered with
ladles into the fire, for yajna from the sky.


2.  (YajnaDevata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Ward]
Yajna is shower of life for the earth. It is the fiery
flag-pole of Vishnu. I refine the offerings with the stony
grinder and cover the snug and beautiful vedi with food


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




for the gods. The yajna is for the Lord of the earth, it is
for the Lord of the world, it is for the Lord of all the
creatures, it is for the best creative souls among


3.  (AgniDevata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Trideat, Raato, Gandharvastva, Mitravarunau]
Agni, Lord Supreme of the light and life of the
universe, worthy of worship and worshipped through
yajna, is Gandharva, the rest and haven of the world
that holds the earth and the Divine Word. It is Agni, the
fire and the sun, and Indra, the wind and rain of the
cosmic energy that feeds and sustains the dynamics of
existence. It is Mitra and Varuna, complementary
motions of the cosmic circuit which feed and maintain
the vitality of life. May Gandharva uphold the yajna
and be all-round protector of the yajaman for the welfare
of the world. May yajna, the right hand of Indra, provide
for all-round protection of the yajaman toward the
welfare and advancement of humanity. May Mitra and
Varuna by their natural and inviolable dharma, provide


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




for the yajaman's protection from above for the peace
and progress of the world. Agni, worthy of worship,
study and meditation, and worshipped, studied and
researched through yajna, is the ultimate haven of the
world, and yajna is the highest creative and productive
action of humanity performed individually and


4. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Vitihotram]
Agni, Lord Omniscient, may we, in this act of
love and non-violence, light the fire of yajna, great and
blazing giver of the gift of joy and prosperity, and may
we, through this yajna, worship, study and meditate on
you, Lord Almighty, greater than the greatest, most
glorious and most generous giver of the light of


5. (Yajna Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)





[Names: Heri, Sasa, Samidasi, Suryastva, Saviturbahu, Adityah, Aditya, Rudra]
Yajna: you are samidha, food of Agni, for the
illumination of rare qualities. May the sun, with its two-


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




fold power of illumination and rejuvenation, protect and
prepare you in advance for the sacrifice and higher life.
May all the eight Vasus (abodes of life), eleven Rudras
(sustainers of life) and twelve Adityas (lights and
durations of life in time) come and participate in the
rejuvenation as in the spring session of yajna. For this
refinement and advancement of life I cover the yajna-
vedi, snug, beautiful and pleasing, with holy offerings.


6. (Vishnu Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)
waredequremem di Ao emed fis nasora
[Names: Gasset]
Iain u




[Names: Ghrtacyasi, Dhruva]
You are an instrument of yajna, Juhu by name,
the ladle to offer oblations into the fire. With your own
dear place and position in the yajna, enrich this home
with all the gifts of plenty. You are Upabhrta by name,
close by to carry offerings for the fire. With your own
dear position and power, bless this happy home with
all the gifts of joy. You are Dhruva by name, firm and
inviolable in yajna. With your own dear power and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




potential grace this blessed home with all the gifts of
peace, freedom and progress. Be with this happy place,
dwell here with all power, potential and grace, firm,
secure, inviolable, in this blessed home of yajna, the
seat of truth and righteousness. Vishnu, Lord
Omnipresent and Universal yajna, protect all these,
preserve and advance the yajna, protect and bless the
yajnapati, save me and protect and advance the
organization and system of yajna.


7. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Namo]
Agni is the Lord of light and life, it is fire both
physical and vital. It is the giver and purifier of food
and the secret of victory and glory. It is fast in motion
and action, burning up the libations and sending them
up into the sky. I worship Agni and refine agni through
yajna for food and energy, light and victory. Salutations
to the Devas, celestial powers of light; food for the Pitris,
powers of nourishment. May they both help us with food
and energy to win honour and glory for us.


8. (Vishnu Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Uftaranfestor]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Askannamadya, Vishnu, Lord, Omnipresent]
bring libations of ghee, pure and secure, for the devas
through the fire of the vedi. Agni, Lord of Yajna, may I
never neglect or violate yajna, and I pray I may always
live in your protective shade. The fire in the vedi is the
seat of Vishnu. It rises from the vedi to the vast sky and
from there the sun and wind carry it all round and
convert it into the noblest acts of the devotees.


9. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Repna]
a wafer fA: usu



[Names: Jyotisa]
Agni, Lord of light and life, protect the act of
yajna into the fire, protect the fiery rise of fragrance
into the sky, protect the heaven and the earth, and may
the heaven and the earth carry on your blessed purpose
of yajna. May the sun, light of the world, with its
radiance convert the libation of holy materials into the
richest food for nature and for holy men. This is the
voice of Divinity.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




10. (Indra Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)





[Names: Tietdsstea, Uaioe, Gear, Gaara, Mayidamindra, Asmakam]
May Indra, Lord Supreme of power and glory,
in-vest me with the powers of sense and mind. May He
enrich us all with the knowledge wealth and prosperity
of the world. May all our hopes and aspirations come
true and turn into blessings for all of us. May the mother
earth invoked and served by us be kind and bless us.
May Agni bless us from the vedi, the seat of yajna, with
the gifts of fire. This is the voice of Divinity.


11. (Dyavaprithivi Devate, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Ranea]
er ver afad: hasaa t uerit Senay




[Names: Ufergrerr, Upahuto, Dyauspitopa, Dyauspita, Pratigrhnamyagnestvasyena]
Heavenly Father, invoked and worshipped! May
the Heavenly Father receive me into His care and bless
me with the gifts of fire from the vedi, the seat of yajna.
In this blessed world of Savita's creation, you receive a
free flow of good health and nourishment from the arms


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of Ashwinis and the hands of Pusha, nature's currents of
energy and the motions of vital air. Yes, with my own
mouth, I take in the food and inhale the breath of life
from the vital fire of the Lord's yajna. This is the voice
of Divinity.

12. (Savita Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Ufadda, Etam, Tena]
tena mamava.

Lord Savita, this is the yajna of creation, the
dynamics of existence and the paths of living in Dharma
with knowledge, action and worship together in yajna.
This yajna is for thee, they say. It is for Brihaspati, man
of knowledge, and Brahma, man of faith and vision, to
know and receive the highest gifts of yajna. Lord of
existence, save yajna by yajna, save yajnapati by yajna,
save me by yajna.


13. (Brihaspati Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Mano, Visve]
The mind is fast, instant in motion. May my mind
benefit from the offerings of yajna. May Brihaspati,
Lord of the wide world, expand the yajna of existence.
May the Lord sustain this yajna of ours in love and peace
without violence. May the powers of nature be ever fresh,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




may all good people ever rejoice by yajna. Be firm by
Om, the voice of existence, the Eternal Word, the very
name of the Divine. Om and yajna is our haven. Let it be
so in our heart.


14. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Asar]
agai ASAT ue



[Names: Vardhisimahi, Dyasisunahi, Sasrvamsam]
Agni, Lord of the fire of Yajna, this samidha (fuel
wood) is food for you. Burn with it, grow, expand and
illuminate. With the growth of yajna, expand us too in
body, mind and soul. We shall grow, and we shall
expand in body, mind and soul. Agni, you are food.
You are knowledge, speed and motion. You are the lord
of knowledge, speed and progress and the winner of
victories. For the growth of food and knowledge, for
the acceleration of speed and motion, and for the sake
of victory over want and evil in life, we study, refine
and multiply the power of fire through yajna for the


15. (Agni-Shomau Devate, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Site]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Agnisomayorujjitimanujjesam, Agnisomau, Indragnyo, Indragni]
Let us follow Agni and Soma, lords of fire and
water and win whatever this duo has won. With
inspiration for growth and development, we dedicate
ourselves to study and work. May Agni and Soma ward
off whoever hates us. For the sake of growth and
us follow Indra and Agni, lords of power and fire, and
win what this duo can win. With inspiration for growth
and development, we dedicate ourselves to study and
research. May Indra and Agni ward off whatever/
whoever hates us. For the sake of growth and


16. (Dyavaprthivi and Mitravarunau Devate, Parameshthi






[Names: Uttrardhasy, Vasubhyastva, Vyantu, Marutam, Maruta, Caksuspa]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Yajna is dedicated to the study of eight Vasus,
supports of life, eleven Rudras, catalytic agents of the
justice of existence, and twelve Adityas, centres of
gravity and balance of nature. May we, with science
and reason, know with reference to the sun and the earth
what we can achieve with the yajna extended in space.
May Mitra and Varuna, currents of vital energy, protect
and enrich the world with rain. May the oblations in
yajna rise to the sky with the wind, and from the sky to
the sun with the cosmic currents, and bring down from
there showers of rain to feed the rivers of earth. Just as
birds go to rest in their nests, so do we, devotees of the
Lord, meditate on the secrets of vaidic hymns to discover
the mysteries of yajna. Agni, Lord of light and life, you
are the giver of vision. Protect my eye and bless me
with vision.


17. (Agni Devata, Devala Rshi)




[Names: Aradudaatassra]
diqu ue




Agni, Lord of light and life, you hold and sustain
the law of Dharma observed by the powers of nature
and celebrated in the songs of the seers. I accept and
act within the bounds of that law and feed upon the
foods provided by nature and yajna. May I never neglect
or violate that law. May I never be ungrateful to the
Lord. May I never lose the vision of Divinity.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




18. (Vishvedeva Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)

[Names: Samsravabhaga, Imam]
Stay firm, dedicated children of the earth, on the
rock-bed foundations of knowledge and justice, and,
great and expansive within the bounds of Divine law,
sit around this yajna fire on seats of grass, chanting the
holy songs of praise, offering the honey-sweets of your
produce to the fire and receiving from agni, in return,
the nectar of life. Thus you celebrate the Lord’s gift of
life. Thus you enjoy in unison. Surrender and play your
part, this is the voice of Divinity.


19. (Agni-Vayu Devate, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)


garei cat eal ures YA eet: GAY At ere, | ae



[Names: Ghrtaci, Sive]
Fire and wind are foremost movers of the wheels
of yajna. Replete in nutriments such as ghee and water,
they are nature's agents of the growth and sustenance
of humanity in comfort and joy. Yajna and humility are
auspicious for you. Be firm in your devotion and
performance and you will live happy in the protective
shade of the Divine.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




20. (Agni-Sarasvati Devate, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)
Senay carat uon




[Names: Susada]
Agni, Lord of universal yajna, giver of life, free
and without fear, save yajna from evil and violence,
save me from suffering, save me from bondage, make
our food free from poison and inedibles, may our home
be a blessed place of peace and happiness. This oblation
is for Agni, protector of the home and the earth, this is
for Sarasvati, voice of the Divine, sister of honour.


21. (Prajapati Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)






[Names: Vedo, Manasaspata]
Prajapati, Lord of the universe, omniscient, you
are Veda, Divine Word Itself. The knowledge by virtue
of which you are omniscient for the seers and sages,
who know the Veda and the ways of the world, is the
knowledge for me too. Enlighten me with that. The seers,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




having realized that knowledge of existence, sing the
hymns and follow the paths of virtue. Lord of mind and
knowledge, take this yajna with the winds to the heights
of heaven and place it there. Our oblations for that yajna.


22. (Indra Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)


verat 3




[Names: Sambarhiranktam, Samindro]
Let the yajna-vedi be covered with havan
materials seasoned with ghee and offered by the best of
devotees and let the fragrance, carried by fire, wind and
currents of energy, rise to the heights of the sky with
Adityas, Vasus and Maruts and, there in the regions of
light, the sun would mix the fragrance with its rays and
convert it into vital vapour to shower on earth as water.


23. (Prajapati Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)






[Names: Posaya]
(i) Who leaves (offers) the oblations into the
fire? Who releases nature-materials into the cosmic
yajna of creation? The yajnapati. Prajapati, Lord Creator
and father of His creatures. For what purpose? For self
realization. For His purpose of creation. For


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




nourishment, for preservation and protection, for
destruction of the destroyers.


(ii) Who gives you away/up? He gives you away/
up. For what purpose/to what end? For self-realization/
self-negation. For nourishment: you are the share of the
good and the protectors; even of the wicked and the
destroyers, but, for their punishment and destruction.


24. (Tvashta Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)




[Names: Gent, Tvasta]
May Lord Tvashta, eternal maker and generous
giver, bless us with lustre of character and light of
knowledge, food for body, mind and senses, peace and
nobility of mind, good and glowing health of body. May
the Lord grant us all kinds of wealth and stability. May
He complete and perfect whatever is wanted in our body
and mind and refine us with culture and virtue.


Let us advance with holy light and lustre, honey-
sweets of food and blooming health, and a mind at peace
with noble aspirations, and attain all round prosperity.
And may Tvashta, Eternal Maker and generous giver,
complete what is lacking in our life and refine us to a
state of perfection.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




25. (Vishnu Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)






[Names: Prater, Feith, Foie, Wfresrarserr, Divi]
Vishnu, yajna, performed with the ecstatic chant
of jagati verses, reached the regions of the sun, and from
there eliminated all that opposes us and all that we
oppose for the sake of life. Vishnu, yajna, performed
with the spontaneous chant of trishtubh verses, rose up
to the middle regions of the sky, and from there
eliminated all that opposes us and all that we oppose
for the sake of life. Vishnu, yajna, performed with the
joyous chant of gayatri verses, went over the earth, and
from there eliminated all that opposes us and all that
we oppose for the sake of life. Feeding on the gifts of
nature purified by yajna, let us rejoice, and in the service
of the balance and harmony of life and existence, let us
rise to the heights of heaven and we'll be one with the
light of knowledge and Dharma.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




26. (Ishvara Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)


yiera ues




[Names: Svayambhurasi, Suryasyavrtamanvavarte]
Lord of the universe, self-existent, self-refulgent,
greatest of all, giver of light and honour, give me light
and honour. I follow the path of the sun in orbit, the
path of Dharma revealed by you.


27. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)




[Names: Asthuri, Satam, Suryasyavrta]
Agni, Lord of the House of Existence, Master of
knowledge and the fire of yajna, great as you are as the
keeper and sustainer of the world, so may I too, with
you as the ideal, be a good and efficient house holder.
And you too, over me, head of this family, be the
protector and sustainer of this household. May we two,
husband and wife, together perform the duties of the
home for a good hundred years. May I follow the path
of life like the sun in orbit, the path of Dharma revealed
by you.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




28. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)






[Names: Tarstet]
Agni, Lord of vows in the discipline of Dharma
and Truth, whatever vows at your behest I have followed
or would follow, I have followed and would follow
because you made it possible and would make it
possible. This me here, whatever I am, I am. Whatever


29. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)






[Names: Urata, Afad, Somaya, Soma, Apahata]
This oblation is for Agni, Lord of knowledge and
giver of the gifts of knowledge and yajna through the
science of yajna-fire. This is for Soma, lord of peace
and prosperity and the beauty of the seasons and powers
of nourishment. In truth and according to the voice of
the Veda, the ignorant, the wicked, the cruel and unjust,
robbers and grabbers of the vedi, seat of yajna, asuras
of the earth are eliminated by righteous action for


30. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)


[Names: Taera]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Parapuro]
And who are the asuras? They are masters of
hypocrisy and the art of changing faces. Friends and
allies of the wicked, they encroach upon the rights of
others and fill their coffers with ill-gotten wealth.
Enemies of humanity, they roam around the world like
giants. Agni, Lord of light, justice and social yajna, let
them be thrown out and eliminated from the face of the


31. (Pitaras Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)






[Names: Atra, Amimadanta]
Trustees and guardians of society, men of
knowledge and wisdom, justice and merit, take your
share as you deserve and, in your own right and proper
place here, rejoice and celebrate the victory of yajna.
Make all others happy and, as they deserve on merit, let
them too rejoice and celebrate.


32. (Pitaras Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)
fusi sitara vat a: fü: caer aut a: fü


[Names: Gurag]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Namo vah pitaro rasaya namo vah pitarah
Sosaya namo vah pitaro jivaya namo vah pitarah


Salutations to the seniors of knowledge for the
joy of learning. Salutations to those seniors who fight
out exploitation. Salutations to the guardians of society
for the joy of life and the means of the good life.
Salutations for economic, social and political justice.
Salutations for the fight against suffering for the advent
of happiness. Salutations for righteous anger against
the wicked. Salutations to the seniors, leaders and the
guardians of knowledge, justice and well-being, life of
good health, prosperity and happiness. Come to our
homes and institutions and bless us with your gifts.
Come that we may offer you the best we have. Come
and accept our hospitality and gifts of clothes as mark
of gratitude.


33. (Pitaras Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)






[Names: Usha, Adhatta, Yatheha, Puruso]
Teachers of knowledge, masters of wisdom,
admit into your house of learning this boy wearing a
lotus garland as a mark of desire for education. Accept
him and hold him here as a mother bears the foetus in
her womb so that he grows and is shaped into a brave
and cultured young man.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




34. (Apo Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)






[Names: Urjam, Svadha]
Be masters of your own wealth and power and
manage it well with justice and in virtue. Offer liberal
hospitality with love and reverence to the senior
benefactors of society, men of knowledge, experience
and wisdom. Offer them delicious drinks of water and
nourishing juices, health giving milk and ghee,
sumptuous foods and honey-sweet fruits to their




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




1. (Agni Devata, Angirasa Rshi)






[Names: Samidhagnim, Asmin]
Light up the fire and raise it with fuel, serve it
like an honourable guest with pure ghee, and offer rich
oblations of samagri into it, with love and faith.


2.  (AgniDevata, Sushruta Rshi)






[Names: Sere, Susamiddhaya, Socise]
To the fire, omnipresent, lit up, rising bright and
of ghee, pure, inflammable and purifying.


3. (Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)
sever afar a




[Names: Brhacchoca]
O agni, bright and beautiful, young and powerful,
generous giver of things, we offer samidhas and ghee
and raise you to the heights.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




4. (Agni Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


wee ufum wet ine




[Names: Jusasva]
O fire, bright and beautiful, generous giver, here
come to you my samidhas soaked in ghee and fragrant


[Names: Accept]
5. (Agni Vayu Surya Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Bhur, Tasyaste]
In expanse as vast as the bright heaven, in virtue
as firm and generous as the earth, agni is ever present
on the earth, in the sky and in heaven. Earth Mother,
seat of yajna by the devas (noble people and the powers
of nature) for the devas (good people and the powers of
nature), here on the ground in the vedi on your surface,
I place the sacred fire, consumer of the oblations of food,
for the sake of food and energy.


6.  (AgniDevata, Sarparajni Kadru Rshi)








[Names: Waxed, Ayam, Pitaram]
This earth, child of the sun and waters in space


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




— solid concentration of agni (fire) and apah (waters)
— revolves in its orbit round the sun, its father and
sustainer in heaven, through the presence of its mother,
the waters in space.


7. (Agni Devata, Sarparajni Kadru Rshi)




[Names: Anta, Vyakhyan]
The power of Agni is light and energy/electricity
which creates and produces the circuitous currents-
going up as prana in the universe as well as in the body,
and the complementary current going down as apana in
the body as well as in the universe. This universal energy
of Agni is a mighty power which is the light of heaven
and burns in the sun.


8.  (AgniDevata, Sarparajni Kadru Rshi)

[Names: Pressure, Trimsaddhama, Prati]
Vak, the speech mode of Agni, dominates thirty
abodes of life (out of thirty-three) and is used in the service
of its lord, Agni, for the expression of the light of
knowledge with which the omniscient and omnipresent
power illuminates the world.

9.  (Agni-Surya Devate, Prajapati Rshi)
[Names: Carel]
wt | aNd wade: crear wat reet


[Names: Aade, Safa]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Agnirjyotirjyotiragnih, Agnirvarco, Suryah, Surya, Jyotih, Suryah, Surya]
Agni, Supreme Spirit, is the light (jyoti) of
existence, and Light (jyoti), Eternal Consciousness, is
the identity of the Spirit. Vak, the virtual speech of
Eternity is the common attribute of both spirit and

Sun, the Lord of Life, is the light (jyoti) of the
world, and Light (jyoti), Omniscience, is the identity of
the Sun, the Divine teacher of teachers. Veda, the
universal voice of Divinity is the common attribute of
both the knower (sun) and knowledge (Omniscience).

Fire is the power and prosperity of the world, and
power and prosperity from the heat energy of fire is
converted to power by science and technology.
Tecknowledge with its language is for the common
benefit of both, the fire and the user.

The sun is the power and prosperity of the world,
and power and prosperity flows from the vital energy of
the sun converted to power by science and technology.
Tecknowledge with its language is for the common
benefit of both, solar energy and the user.

Light is the Lord and the Lord is Light. Light
and the Lord are one. Veda, knowledge, is coexistent
with both in unison. We offer the oblations to the Lord
for the Light in faith with reverence.


10. (Agni-Surya Devate, Prajapati Rshi)


wee | wegen ufaat aseresac | TOT:


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Sajurdevena, Jusano, Sajurdevena, Agnirvetu, Jusanah]
May Agni, along with Savita in His creation and
the dark night of energy, receive this oblation.

May the Sun, along with Savita in His creation
and the dawn of morning energy, receive this oblation.


11. (Agni Devata, Gotama Rshi)




[Names: Upaprayanto, Srnvate]
Close to the vedi, while we are performing this
sacred yajna, we chant the mantras for Agni who hears
the chant near at hand as well as far away.


12. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi)




[Names: Agnirmurdha, Apain]
This Lord of the earth, Agni, who rules on high on
top of heaven, constantly refreshes the generative powers
of the waters for the earth.


13. (Indragni Devate, Bharadvaja Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Ubha, Ubha]
Indra (wind and electric energy) and Agni (heat
and fire), givers of energy, food, power and wealth, I
call upon you both and invoke you for the gift of
knowledge, energy, and food for joy and well-being.


14. (Agni Devata, Devavata and Bharata Rshis)




Agni, Lord of the Universe, the fire is born of vayu,
wind and electric energy, and, according to the seasons,
rises and shines and, like the suns, brightens the world.
Knowing that, and with the knowledge of that, raise us
and develop our power and wealth.


15. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)




[Names: Ayamiha, Yamapnavano]
visevise.

Here in the world of Lord Agni, the fire, placed
and lighted in the vedi by the devotees, is the first and
foremost agent of yajna for production and
development. Adorable and worthiest of pursuit in study
and research through collective action of the most


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




cherished kind as it is, scholars of the science of heat
and energy should maintain and continue through their
disciples the tradition of research and development of
this wonderful and versatile power in laboratories and
institutions in every country for every community.


16. (Agni Devata, Avatsara Rshi)




[Names: Waray]
NQGI




[Names: Asya, Payah]
The Rishis and scholars dedicated to the study of
the heat and light of agni in yajna have discovered and
received the purest showers of the waters of life from
this timeless source-power of a thousand gifts of
achievement (just as you tend and milk the mother cow
and receive the gift of the purest nourishment for life).


17. (Agni Devata, Avatsara Rshi)






[Names: Tanupa]
Agni, you are protector of the body with health
and nourishment. Protect my body. You are the giver of
life. Give me full life. You are the giver of lustre and
glory. Give me lustre and glory. Whatever is short and
wanting in me, that, I pray, fulfil and complete and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




18. (Agni Devata, Avatsara Rshi)




[Names: Indhanastva, Vayasvanto, Citravaso]
paramasiya.


Agni, wonderful lord and treasure-home of the
wealth of the world, we, men of full life and vigour,
strong yet forbearing, fearless and irresistible, having
lighted the fire of yajna in worship of you — you, bright
and blazing, giver of life and health, strength and
forbearance, irresistible destroyer of enemies —we pray
that we keep the fire of yajna burning and bright in
honour and service of you. May we, by your grace and
blessing, overcome the want and hurdles of life and
attain prosperity and happiness. May we thus live on
for a hundred years and more.


19. (Agni Devata, Avatsara Rshi)






[Names: Terardor]
Agni, celebrated by the Rishis’ songs of praise,
come full well with the light and glory and energy of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the sun to your own home of celebrity. Come that I may
also, with the same songs of praise and the pranic energy
of the sun, come to attain a happy home, full age, honour
and lustre, a good family and liberal means of life.


20. (Apo Devata, Yajnavalkya Rshi)


are emet at weit ud ca wel at srefpursi




[Names: Treen, Andha]
There are foods for health — herbs, vegetables,
grains, etc. — I would feed upon these to be strong.
There are foods for greatness — agni, vayu, electricity,
knowledge, etc. —I would feed upon these and be great.
There are foods for energy — water, milk, ghee, honey,
etc. — I would take these and be smart and energetic.
There are rich tonics — invigorating, rejuvenating — I
would take these to increase my competence and


(Know the quality of foods and drinks and take
what is good to maintain your health and efficiency).


21. (Vishvedeva Devata, Yajnavalkya Rshi)


[Names: Yeldt]
Bea *d Aa Ren




[Names: Revati, Ihaiva]
Revati — all the variety of wealth, good health,
sense and mind, knowledge, ethics, good conduct, cows,
etc. — may abound in this life, this body, this home,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




this farm-house, everywhere in this world. Rejoice,


22. (Agni Devata, Vaishvamitra Madhuchhanda Rshi)




[Names: Samhitasi, Namobharanta]
Immanent in all the forms of existence, universal
energy, come, inspire and bless me, as a protector and
sustainer. Agni, dispeller of darkness of the night, we
come to you for light day in and day out. With all our
wealth of food and energy, mind and intelligence, in all
humility and faith, we come to you.


23. (Agni devata, Vaishvamitra Madhuchhanda Rshi)




[Names: Rajantamadhvaranam, Vardhamanam]
With all our wealth and power, in all faith and
humility, we come to Agni, bright and blazing, protector
and sustainer of yajnas, illuminater of Truth, Right and
the Law of existence, thriving in His own state of bliss.


24. (Agni Devata, Vaishvamitra Madhuchhanda Rshi)


aa: fude mas qure we |




[Names: Bata, Sacasva]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Agni, as father to the child, be the father, guardian
and protector for all of us. Be with us always, for
happiness and well-being.


25. (Agni Devata, Subandhu Rshi)




[Names: Wissrdussq, Afar, Sivo, Vasuragnirvasusrava]
Agni, life of our life, saviour, kind and gracious,
be an intimate friend and giver of goodness. Vast abode
of all, brilliant and all-percipient, bless us richly with
the brightest wealth and knowledge of the world.


26. (Agni Devata, Subandhu Rshi)





[Names: Afaa, Uilssrarad, Ssocistha]
Lord of the universe, Light of life, purest of the
pure and self-luminous, we pray sincerely for happiness
for us and our friends. May the Lord enlighten us and
hear our chant of yajna, may He save us from sin and
evil.


27. (Agni Devata, Shrutabandhu Rshi)




[Names: Mayi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Come earth, come freedom, justice and
abundance. May all desires come true wholly. May the
Lord in-vest me with the stability of ambition and


28. (Brihaspati Devata, Prabandhu Rshi)



[Names: Pups, Somanam, Somana, Kaksivantam]
Lord of Eternal knowledge, keen as I am for
knowledge and learning like a very child of Wisdom,
shape me into a scholar with a sense of ethical values, a
persuasive speaker and a teacher and maker of


29. (Brihaspati Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)


[Names: Asahia]
a a: faved weg ure



May He who is Lord of wealth and knowledge,
who destroys pain, grief and disease, who is the knower
of all the good things of the world, who gives all physical
and spiritual strength, who is keen and instant in doing
and having things done, may He bless us with all virtues
and good actions.


30. (Brahmanaspati Devata, Varuni Saptadhriti Rshi)


[Names: Wore, Boll]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Raksa]
May our songs of praise never be lost. Lord of the
universe and of the Divine Word, save us against the
selfishness and violence of the mrtals.


31. (Aditya Devata, Varuni Saptadhriti Rshi)


[Names: Raeadr]
auf AAE gae



[Names: Mahi, Mitrasyaryamnah, Mitrasyaryamna, Duradharsam, Varunasya, Varunas]
Lord of the universe, may the generous and
inviolable protection of the three, Mitra (pranic energy
both internal and external), Varuna (air and water), and
Aryama (sun and stability) be ours for the divine
knowledge of the Veda, illuminating, irresistible, and


32. (Aditya Devata, Varuni Saptadhriti Rshi)






[Names: Roasts, Nahi]
Never in their homes, nor in their paths of life, nor
ever in their defences, shall there be any enemy or a
supporter of evil. The Lord is in command of the life of
the pious devotees.


33. (Aditya Devata, Varuni Saptadhriti Rshi)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Jyotiryacchantyajasram]
Mitra, pranic energy, Varuna, air and water, and
Aryama, the sun, they are the children of Imperishable
Nature. They provide inexhaustible light and energy for
the life and sustenance of the mortals on earth.


34. (Indra Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)




[Names: Etta, Huen, Gera, Kada, Upopennu]
Indra, lord of generosity and well-being, when is
it that you don't wholly favour the man of charity,
overwhelming him with gifts of knowledge and joy?
Lord giver of power and prosperity, your gifts of reward
for karma (action), again and again, constantly, follow
upon the philanthropists' acts of charity.


35. (Savita Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)






[Names: Tatsaviturvarenyam, Dhiyo]
Let us meditate on the blazing glory of Savita, Lord
Creator, pure and generous giver of light and happiness
— glory which is magnificent, most worthy of our choice.
And may the Lord with His grace inspire our mind and
will to dedicate ourselves to noble actions.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




36. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)






[Names: Pari, Yena]
That formidable chariot of knowledge by which
you protect and redeem the man of charity in all ways
from all sides, by that very chariot protect us too, Lord
of the Universe, and let us cross the panorama of


37. (Prajapati Devata, Vamedeva Rshi)


[Names: Gost]
me: pre wot N are vreset us 3 ured ftd
a ur usen


[Names: Bhurbhuvah, Narya]
pahi.

Lord Existent, Intelligent and Blissful, merciful to
the noble people, protect my people, Lord worthy of
praise, protect my wealth and cattle, Lord firm and
irresistible, protect my food, I pray, may I be a happy
family man with noble people and children, nobly brave
with heroic friends around generously supportive, blest
with rich means of health and support.


38. (Agni Devata, Asuri Rshi)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Aganma]
Agni, Lord of the Universe, blesses with all round
honour and glory, all round enduring strength. Light of
the world, may we realize and attain to the spirit
omniscient of the universe, to the power omnipresent in
the abodes of life in the world.


39. (Agni Devata, Asuri Rshi)






[Names: Aymagnirgrhapatirgarhapatyah]
This agni that resides in the home with the inmates
is the sustainer of the home and brings all kinds of wealth
to the family. Agni, Lord of Light and Energy, bless us
with honour and glory all round and bless us with


40. (Agni Devata, Asuri Rshi)






[Names: Ayamagnih]
This agni is the source of wealth, with it we grow
and develop in health and prosperity, it helps to complete
our plans and projects, to make up all our wants and to
grow further. Agni, Lord of Light and Energy, bless us


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




with all round honour and prosperity, bless us with
strength and endurance all round.


41. (Vastu Agni Devata, Asuri Rshi)






[Names: Auai, Teri, Grha]
Masters of the house, inmates of the home, fear
not, tremble not. Bubbling with energy and power, go
forward. With energy, power and enthusiasm, with a
happy heart and high intelligence, I come home rejoicing
at heart, for you.


42. (Vastupati Agni Devata, Shamyu Rshi)


retenu weet ae Sa aE: |




[Names: Seed, Yesamadhyeti, Grhanupahvayamahe]
The man far away, the visiting guest, remembers
the homes abundant with happiness of the mind and
open doors of welcome. We, the guests and chance
[Names: They]
continue to know.


43. (Vastupati Devata, Barhaspatya Shamyu Rshi)


[Names: Wassdedssmiad, Amass, Erde, Rrra]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Upahuta, Atho, Ksemaya, Sivam, Samyoh]
The cows are brought and called in, sheep and
goats are brought and called in, and then, plenty of food
is brought in and stored in our homes for your comfort
and safety and for our comfort and protection. With all
the means of comfort in safety, I am at peace with the
joy of well-being. Peace! peace! and joy!


44. (Maruts Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Praghasino, Marutasca, Karambhena]
We home-keepers invite and treat guests and
learned men dedicated to yajna who, free from
ignorance, are men of universal love, who fight evil
and remove human weakness, and who welcome our
hospitality and love and enjoy good food.


45. (Maruts Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


rx wa edu ad aura ufafud d

[Names: Yadgrame]
Whatever wrong we have done or might do in


our village community, in the forest among the foresters
(Vanaprasthis), in the assembly or in the mind with our


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




senses, that we abjure and give up, and whatever is
true and good, to that we commit ourselves and dedicate.


46. (Indra and Maruts Devate, Agastya Rshi)






[Names: Arfa, Indratra, Susminnavayah, Mahascidyasya, Maruto]
Mighty Indra, in the battles of this life, protect
us well along with the learned and the wise, hurt us not.
Lord of infinite power, surely the high and divine voice
of yours reveals the nature and virtue of those who, in
every season, with appropriate samagri, perform the
yajnas. The yajamana, host-performer of yajna, with his
offerings sings the songs of praise in honour of the lord
of rain and the carriers of the yajna, the winds.


47. (Agni Devata, Agastya Rshi)






[Names: Herne, Akran, Devebhyah]
Men of noble action, yajna, who act together in
the company of the pious and dedicated people, using
the delightful language of love in communication in
accordance with the sacred Word of the Divine, Veda,
having played their part, go home and retire from life
in peace and tranquillity.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




48. (Yajna Devata, Aurnavabha Rshi)






[Names: Para, Prager, Atep, Avabhrtha, Pururavno]
Cleansed and purified by knowledge and Dharma,
I am calm and constant. You are calm and constant too.
I collect and arrange the Samidhas (fuel wood for yajna)
and through yajna, give up the sins committed with the
mind and senses as well as the evil done with the body.
You too save yourself from sin and evil. Lord Supreme,
save us from violence, sin and evil, the cause of long


49. (Yajna Devata, Aurnavabha Rshi)




[Names: Srdendt, Purna, Vasneva]
The ladle, full with ghee and samagri, goes up
(to the sky from the vedi). It comes down to the earth,
full again (with water). Lord of infinite vision and a
thousand yajnas, may we too, yajamana and the priest,
give and take, as in exchange,yajna, food, energy and


50. (Indra Devata, Aurnavabha Rshi)


fet a ete d fer faea à carat uod


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Dehi]
Niharam ca harasi me niharam niharani te
In truth of word: you give me, I give you. You
use what I give you, I use what you give me. Give me
for a price, I pay the price to you.


51. (Indra Devata, Gotama Rshi)






[Names: Aksannamimadanta, Astosata]
Lord of the world/assembly, Indra, your people,
learned and wise, brilliant in their own right, with latest
application of their mind and discovery/invention, sing
in praise of the Lord, celebrate their success, feast and
enjoy themselves and, dear even to others who are
opposed, shake the enemies of humanity. Saddle your
horses fast, Indra. Rise up, nation, with all your might
and mind.


52. (Indra Devata, Gotama Rshi)


aes vem ad qe aai a aa guider




[Names: Susandrsam, Anu]
Lord of the world/President of the assembly.
Indra, lord of all the wealth and power, brilliant and
blissful to the eye, we sing songs of praise for you. Sung
and celebrated, full of love and kindness, everything in


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




bond with you, you proceed to us with all the gifts and
blessings for us. Saddle your horses fast, Indra. Rise
up, nation, with all your might and mind.


53. (Mana Devata, Bandhu Rshi)


Fagor a AAT: 3n



[Names: Pitrnam]
With the contribution of our predecessors,

continuous sacrifice and dedication of our colleagues,
and the generous resources of our seniors, we


concentrate on the mind to develop its power and


54. (Mana Devata, Bandhu Rshi)




[Names: Jyok, Suryam]
May the mind, seat of memory, come to us whole
and entire, again and again, from birth to birth across
time, for continuous and cumulative retention of
knowledge, karma and sanskaras — seeds and
impressions of thoughts, actions and ideas — for
growing strength and competence, for increasing health
and longevity of life and for a constant vision of the
Sun, the Supreme Spirit of life and the universe.


55. (Mana Devata, Bandhu Rshi)


uii: fuat Tit aata da wa: |
Wet areas uuu


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Punarnah, Jivam]
May this wonderful sagely man, with the
blessings of our forefathers who protected, prepared and
shaped him, help us regain, here and hereafter, a noble
mind and intelligence, so that with him we live a virtuous
life of discipline and holy vows.


56. (Soma Devata, Bandhu Rshi)




[Names: Vayam, Prajavantah]
Soma, Lord of peace and creator of the universe,
giver of health and vitality, may we, biding within the
holy bonds of your discipline and our vows, with alert
minds and healthy bodies, live on in peace and joy with
our children and the community.


57. (Rudra Devata, Bandhu Rshi)




[Names: Esate]
Man of justice, Rudra, this is your share of
knowledge. Take it with its sister, companion, the vision
of the Veda. Serve it with reverence. Extend it in creative
action through yajna. Man of justice and power, this is
your share of wealth. Take it with its sister, companion,
the voice of the Veda. Serve it with reverence. Use and
enjoy it with restraint. Take up the tool, the spade, and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




dig your garden. Work is wealth and worship. Use the
tool and the wealth with the voice of the Veda.


58. (Rudra Devata, Bandhu Rshi)
a: Adama AT areal ue




[Names: Yatha]
We worship Rudra, Lord of justice, destroyer of
evil, brilliant and generous, constant in vision and
awareness in the three phases of time, past, present and
future. We worship him so that we eliminate want and
suffering, so that he may bless us with comfortable
homes, greatness and honour, and firm resolution in hard
work and industry.


59. (Rudra Devata, Bandhu Rshi)






[Names: Tasvata, Wears, Fart, Bhesajamasi, Purusaya, Purusa, Sukham]
You are the panacea, universal cure for the
ailments of the body, mind and soul, saviour against
the evils of ignorance, injustice and poverty. You are
the healer for the cows, horses, humans, rams and their
females. You are health and happiness for all.


60. (Rudra Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)


shack asad are dita 1 saena


[Names: Heia, Arad]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Tryambakam, Urvarukamiva, Tryambkam, Urvarukamiva]
We worship Rudra, Lord of the Universe,
constant and invariable in all the three phases of time,
and the first cause of health, growth, prosperity and
happiness. May we, with His grace, be released from
the bonds of death into freedom, immortality and eternal
joy (ananda), just as the ripe fruit of melon falls off
from the stalk on the branch to fullness and freedom.
And may we never fall off from the state of freedom,
immortality and eternal joy in the company of the Lord.
We worship the Lord, Rudra, constant and invariable
through time, purest and purifying, sustainer and
protector who reveals Himself to His devotees. May
He with His grace release us from the bonds of mortality
here just as the melon fruit is released from the stalk,
but we may never fall off from freedom, immortality,
ananda and the presence of the Lord.


61. (Rudra Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)


wad ware ad at taisit 1 aaaea



[Names: Etatte, Rudravasam, Rudravasa, Avatatadhanva]
Rudra, warrior of the bow in readiness, strong in
position with shield and armour, this is the way you
defend and protect. Come down from the mountain
heights and be with us wholly. Hurt us not, be good and
kind and gracious.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




62. (Rudra Devata, Narayana Rshi)





[Names: Tryayusam, Yaddevesu]
Bless us with the threefold life — of the body,

mind and spirit, for the three stages of life - childhood,
youth, and age, upto 300-400 years, for all the ashrams
(functional periods), and all the varnas (professional
communities). Give us the threefold life of the eye,
internal and external, of knowledge of the body, mind
and soul, and of the world. Give us the threefold life of
creativity for service, growth and spirituality. Give us
the threefold life of the devas, the learned, wise,
generous people, for excellence, contribution and
removal of ignorance, injustice and poverty.


63. (Rudra Devata, Narayana Rshi)
qera gatas ue 30




[Names: Nivarttayamyayuse]
Rudra, Lord and father, Shiva you are by name,
saviour, giver of knowledge, peace and prosperity.
Salutations to you in reverence and worship. Hurt me
not, father. I abide and pray for life and health, food
and sustenance, virility, children, family, strength and
prowess, prosperity, and freedom from suffering.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


66






(Apah and Oshadhis Devate, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Bassa, Triefesdr, Edamaganma, Rksamabhyam]
Lo! here we come to this holy place of yajna for


the gods, powers of health, where the noblest of the
world collected and delighted in their sacred enterprise.
With joyous recitation of Riks, Yajus and Samans (with
knowledge and action in the hope of joyous benefits)
we offer food for the fire with libations of rich materials
energetically and enthusiastically and cross the hurdles
and suffering. May the holy waters bring health and
peace. Noble herb, cure and save; unfailing power, do
not hurt or kill this person.


PA


(Apah Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




auf weh usu


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Visvam, Diksatapasostanurasi]
Mother waters purify us: with their essence and
efficacy, they sanctify us. The waters are sacred powers
of nature: they wash off the entire dirt and let all the
wanted health and knowledge flow in. Pure and
sanctified by the waters, I come up. This body is a gift
of Diksha and Tapas, commitment to health and laws
of nature, and hard discipline of body, mind and soul.
That body I bear as a blessing, lovely, strong and
graceful, shining with the golden glow of good health.


3. (Megha Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


qaia miarat aAA ate uad


[Names: Mahinam]
dehi.


The waters of life flow to the earths from the sun.
The life of the cloud radiates from the sun. The sun is
the giver of light and lustre. Give me the light and lustre
of life. The sun is the giver of the light of the eye. Give
me the light of the eye internal as well as external.


4.  (Paramatma Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Genta]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Citpatirma, Tasya]
Lord of intelligence and awareness, I pray,
enlighten me. Lord of the Divine Vak, I pray, sanctify
me with the voice of the Veda. Savita, Lord Creator of
the universe, I pray, consecrate me with a ceaseless
shower of the purest rays of the sun. Lord of purity,
purest of the pure, whatever the desire for which I pray
for purity, that desire may be fulfilled. Bless me that I


5. (Yajna Devata, Prajapati Rshi)





Devas of Yajna, mother powers of nature, learned
and wise men, experts of the science of yajna, through
the performance of this yajna, we pray for virtues of
character, competence and of noble action. We, devotees
of yajna, ask for your blessings that our desires and
projects may be fulfilled and completed with success.


6. (Yajna Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


veTel aa ata: career | ver


[Names: Svaha]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




With the voice of the Veda, in the language of
expertise through education and training for the
illumination of knowledge, with the sentiments of truth
and love in togetherness for the sanctity of dealings in
the business of living, I begin the yajna from the purity
and sincerity of the mind, from the wind, and then from
the vastness of the sky and space, in the service of the
earth and heaven.


7. (Agni-Ap-Brihaspati Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Wasisma, Herat, Akutyai, Brhaspataye]
This oblation is for lighting of the fire for the
resolution and dedication of the mind to virtue and the
voice of the Veda. This is for the development of
intelligence and the study of science and electricity for
the general good in the language of common
understanding. This is for commitment to Dharma and
the teaching and learning of solar energy and the original
universal heat in the language of universal
understanding. This is for knowledge and education and
the study of nourishment and vital heat of the body with
scientific language for all. We study the heavenly waters
of great and universal good and peace, earth and heaven
and the vast middle regions of the sky. And we study


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




all these with oblations of appropriate samagri materials
with the chants of the divine revelations of the Vedas.


8.  (Ishvara Devata, Atreya Rshi)






[Names: Aqta, Visvo]
May all mankind choose and pray for the love
and friendship of the Lord and Ruler of the world, and
may all, with prayers to Him, try for the attainment of
wealth and prosperity for health and growth.


9.  (Vidvan Devata, Angiras Rshi)


fè: neu




[Names: Rksamayoh, Silpe, Sarmasi, Sarma]
After the study of Rigveda and Samaveda, both
treasures of science and technology, in which study the
content of the verses is actually realized, I begin this
practical yajna of science and technology (in the
laboratory and the workshop). May the two protect me
and bless me. Reverence and salutations to you, to the
teacher, to the Lord. Accept my salutations. Hurt me
not, put me not off. You are peace and comfort. Give
me peace and comfort of mind.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




10. (Yajna Devata, Angiras Rshi)






[Names: Arata, Sagas, Tarea, Urgasyangirasyurnamrada, Somasya, Somas, Ucchrayasva]
You are tecknowledge, giver of wealth and power,
realized with the energy of fire (heat), revealer of the
secrets of energy and cover of safety for the creations
of power. Give me energy and power.


You are the source of comfort and prosperity,
gifted by yajna created by the man of knowledge, meant
for the people devoted and dedicated to yajna by the
grace of Indra. Increase and multiply the products of
agriculture. Herbs and trees, grow and increase. Nourish,
protect and help me to grow and rise high. Nourish and
protect the man of yajna who has realized the mysteries
of the power of the divine knowledge of nature. Save
us from sin and evil.


11. (Agni Devata, Angiras Rshi)


[Names: Castes]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Vratam, Daivim]
Keep the vow of yajnagni, the fire of yajna. Agni
is Brahma, the ultimate existent, omniscient, blissful
Reality. Agni is yajna, individual, collective and
ultimate act of creation. Agni is the nourishing and
sustaining power of the forests, and must be served
through yajna. We work and pray for sacred intelligence
— excellent instrument of the knowledge and pursuit
of science and spirituality, source of brilliance and
power and the means of the extension and development
of yajna — for the sake of happiness and well-being.
May this intelligence, bright and gracious, saviour as a
‘tirtha’ for pilgrimage, ever shine in our mind and faith.
May the masters of the science of yajna, men of genius,
dedication and application of mind protect us, nourish
us, advance us. Theirs is the language of enlightenment.
They have it for us, for yajna, for Agni, for Brahma.
Keep up the vow.


12. (Apah Devata, Angiras Rshi)




[Names: Ysera, Svatrah]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Taste and drink deep of the celestial waters of
immortality, so sweet and agreeable to assimilate and
internalize. Free from sickness, disease and sin, peace-
giving and replete with knowledge and wisdom for all
of us, they extend the frontiers of our knowledge of
truth and divine law. They protect you against diseases
like fever, dysentery and tuberculosis.


13. (Apah Devata, Angiras Rshi)






[Names: Arly, Iyam, Amhomucah]
This body of yours is for yajna by yajna. I release
the waters but not my creation and my people — I save
my people. Mix the waters — sterilized, purified,
reinforced, invigorated — wholly and fully with the
earth, and you too be one with the earth (to regain health
and vigour).


14. (Agni Devata, Angiras Rshi)
mA wax y bie eeu Haaf i


Agni is universal, ever awake. It is awake while
we are awake. It is awake while we are asleep. Never
relenting, it protects and preserves us. And after our


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




15. (Agni Devata, Angiras Rshi)






[Names: Gada, Garretssierga, Sesser, Punarmanah, Srotram, Vaisvanaro, Agnirnah, Agnirna, After, Pralaya]
we get back the mind, we get back the life, we get back
the vital pranic energy, we get back the spirit, we get
back the eye, the ear, and all other senses. May Agni,
immanent life and lord of the earth, irresistible and
indomitable, save and protect us from despicable evil
and sin.


16. (Agni Devata, Vatsa Rshi)
[Names: Treader]
"ela i9 N




[Names: Tvamagne, Tvam, Rasveyatsoma]
Agni, Lord of the universe, immanent vitality and
energy of the world, you are the guardian and preserver
of our spiritual vows, moral commitments and projects
and resolutions in the mortal human world. You are
worthy of adoration, of study, service and development,
through yajna and collective enterprises. Soma, lord
giver of honour and glory through art and industry, give
us the wealth of success and honour again and again.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Savita, Lord Creator of the world, giver of stability and
security of home, give us inspiration, security and
stability of the good life.


17. (Agni Devata, Vatsa Rshi)






[Names: Seer, Jurasi]
O man, virile and brave, this body is yours, borne
with love and service and maintained for Vishnu,
sustainer of the world, and for yajna, noble action. It is
your honour and glory. Be with it, act with mind and
soul and achieve the glory of life. You are fast in action
and vibrant in spirit. Act fast with your mind and soul
and achieve the brilliance of knowledge and wonder of
succes in enterprise.


18. (Vak & Vidyut Devata, Vatsa Rshi)
wake dada: waa det uenit caret |


[Names: Sukramasi]
masi vai$vadevamasi.


Lord Creator, true and glorious, in the yajna of
creation of yours, with electric energy and the divine
knowledge of the Veda in unison, I pray, I may design
an instrument and apparatus of the form and structure
which would be faultless and a source of comfort, peace
and happiness for all in general, and a matter of pride
and satisfaction for the scholars.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




19. (Vak & Vidyut Devate, Vatsa Rshi)






[Names: Raat, Cidasi, Ssirsni, Mitrastva]
Lord of truth and glory, in this creation of yours,
great is the use of the vision and power of the language
of Divinity, Veda, in the development of human society.
So is the use of the power of universal electric energy.
It gives us an awareness of knowledge, which makes
thought and communication possible. It is a tool and
instrument of intelligence and will. It facilitates
expertise and the business of governance. It augments
yajna and production, which is efficacious and powerful
both internally and externally. It is permanent and
indestructible, and a source and means of comfort and
well-being before and after. We pray that Pusha, the
powers of nourishment and development friendly to
mankind, may hold and control the use of these powers
in the way of their application in the service of the Lord
Supreme, observer and controller of the wealth of the
world, and may the Lord protect humanity in the course
of their progress.


20. (Vak & Vidyut Devate, Vatsa Rshi)




[Names: Harare]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Somam, Rudrastva, Somasakha]
May your mother approve and bless your pursuit
of energy and the literature of knowledge. May your
father permit and bless and help, may your brother agree
and support, may your friend in the community consent
and cooperate in your project. May that goddess of light
and energy come and bless you with sweet success in
your programme for the glory of Indra and the happiness
of humanity with beneficent means of comfort and well-
being. May the Lord of justice and love inspire you.
May the scholar of Rudra discipline and knowledge
guide you. May success and honour come to you again
and again, friend of humanity and devotee of the Lord
Supreme, for the sake of life and the environment.


21. (Vak & Vidyut Devate, Vatsa Rshi)




[Names: Vasvyasyaditirasyadityasi, Rudrasi, Brhaspatistva]
racake.


This energy and the language (which you pursue)
pertains to the heat of agni that supports life on earth,
pursued by scholars of twenty four years discipline. It
relates to the pranic energy of life, pursued by scholars
of forty-four years discipline. It pertains to the solar
radiation, pursued by scholars of forty-eight years
discipline. It is blissful as the light of the moon. It is
correct and beneficent like the justice and love of Rudra,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




it is brilliant like the glory of the sun. And this energy is
indestructible, eternal. May the great lord of knowledge,
Brihaspati, inspire you; may Rudra, lord of love and
correctness, dedicate you; may they bless you to enjoy
this noble pursuit of yours and shine with the scholars
dedicated to life-energies of nature.


22. (Vak & Vidyut Devate, Vatsa Rshi)






[Names: Weal, Adistyastva, Asme]
Energy and Word of the Divine, you are on top of
the sky, in the middle of the earth, and in the chant of the
divine verses in celebration of the devas in yajna. I light
up and activate the energy and the Divine voice with
rich libations of ghee and chant of the vaidic hymns. You
too light up and activate this energy and the Divine voice.
Come with us and rejoice. It is our brother, our love,
yours too. Wealth is yours. Mine too. The wealth of
knowledge, power and materials you gain. We too.
Knowing, resolving and doing, we may never be void
of this wealth of life for health and happiness.


23. (Vak & Vidyut Devate, Vatsa Rshi)




[Names: Assia]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Samakhye]
With a vision and intelligence, inspired,
enlightened and versatile, precise, scientific and practical,
I clearly see the divine gifts of natural energy and the
voice of the Veda, and describe and show them applied
and enacted in actual life. May this energy and this voice
never hurt my life. May I never neglect or lose it. May I
never be unfair to your heroes. You too never be unjust to


24. (Yajna Devata, Vatsa Rshi)






[Names: Horis, Barat, Todi, Teil]
“This is that part of Soma-Yajna which you can
realize for yourself with the Gayatri verses", say this
for me, to the seeker of the chemistry of Soma. “This is
that part of Soma-Yajna which you can realize for
yourself with the Trishtubh verses", say this for me, to
the seeker of the manufacture of Soma. “This is that
part of Soma-Yajna which you can realize for yourself
with the Jagati Verses", say this for me, to the seeker of
the value of Soma. “Perform the Soma-Yajna with the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




specific verses for social management and governance
and be on top of success", say this for me, to the seeker
of the power of Soma. You are pure, specialist of Soma-
Yajna, you are purifier, you are ours, so wise,
knowledgeable, so adorable. We, the seekers of
knowledge and discrimination, accept you, support you
and advance the yajna.


25. (Savita Devata, Vatsa Rshi)
[Names: Tasers]
vail e Waren SOTO wah-


[Names: Urdhva, Prajabhyastva]
For the love of the people I adore the lord of light,
creator of earth and heaven and the middle regions of
the skies, the eternal poet who composed this wonderful
world of paradisal beauty and truth adorned with the
jewels of life from His inexhaustible treasure of nature,
lord so dear to the learned and the wise, the brilliant
manifestation of whose existential form blazes in the
heaven above and the earth below which He made. With
His infinite mercy He created the regions of bliss for
the people, the creatures He created and loved. The
people adore you, lord, with their breath of life. Lord of
the golden bough in both hands, bless the people with
the breath and energy of life existential as well as eternal.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


26. (Yajna Devata, Vatsa Rshi)






[Names: Geers, Sukram, Sagme]
Yajna, you are a symbol of the discipline of fire.
You are the golden choice of Prajapati, father of the
creatures. Your gifts are begot for the price of the highest
wealth. You are pure and immaculate, begot in return
for the purest offering of mine. Golden and blissful you
are, I offer the richest gold of my life for the celestial
bliss. You are the nectar of life. I get you with the offering
of the immortal knowledge I have. Your wealth is in the
womb of the moving earth and the environment. May
that wealth be ours too with yajna. You nourish life in a
thousand ways. May I, by the grace of Prajapati,
participate in the nourishment.


27. (Vidvan Devata, Vatsa Rshi)






[Names: Bary, Mitro, Svana]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Friend of friends, man of knowledge and wisdom,
come, be friends with us. Pleasant and aspiring, come
along, sit on the right side of Indra, lord of power and
wealth and knowledge. Gentle and decent, come to the
gentle and the decent. Persuasive teacher, guardian of
Soma, brilliant, fearsome to the wicked and the non-
defend and protect those who value the gifts of Soma
and knowledge. Let no one bully you.


28. (Agni Devata, Vatsa Rshi)






[Names: Udayusa]
Agni, Lord of light and life, save me all round from
evil, drive off from me all that is bad in character and
conduct. Establish me firmly in good character and
conduct. Help me stay up there for a long age of
goodness and high immortal virtue.


29. (Agni Devata, Vatsa Rshi)






Agni, lord of light and life, may we all follow the
path of goodness, love and non-violence by which the
good man keeps off all hate and fear and attains to the
safe haven of happiness and freedom.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


30. (Varuna Devata, Vatsa Rshi)


qadar aas fasàa atoa a i01




[Names: Adityastvagasya, Asta, Adityastvagas, Asidadvisva]
Varuna, Lord of the universe and power of the
sun and wind, you are the protective cover of the earth
and the presiding presence of its order. Omnipotent
Lord, you keep the heaven and the sky in position and
maintain the excellence of life on earth. Glorious ruler
of the world, you are the absolute centre and
circumference of all the spheres of the universe, and all
of them move in observance of the inexorable law of
the divine power.


31. (Varuna Devata, Vatsa Rshi)






[Names: Vanesu, Hrtsu, Somamadrau, Suryamadadhat, Varuna, Supreme]
and forests, velocity in the motion (of waves and winds),
speed in the horses, milk in the cows, vision and will in
the hearts, heat and desire in the living creatures, sun in
heaven, nectar of life in the cloud, juice in the soma
plant, and the soma plant on the mountain.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




32. (Agni Devata, Vatsa Rshi)






[Names: Yatraitasebhiriyase]
Ascend to the eye (light) of the sun, and enter into
the pupil of the eye of agni (light of fire) where, self-
illuminating with the rays of your light, you would be
approached and pursued by the discriminative scholar of
science.


33. (Surya & Vidvan Devata, Vatsa Rshi)






[Names: Usravetam, Svasti]
Scholars dedicated to science and spirit in search
of the good life should commit themselves to the study
and application of the energy of the sun and vayu (wind
and electricity), both treasures of scientific power and
means of comfort, to be specifically investigated and
used just like two bullocks bearing the burdens for life's
comfort to the house of the master without tears or hurt
to anybody but supporting the young and the brave. The
scholars also, for guidance, should reach the senior man
of knowledge who, too, silently bears the burdens of
life for the knowledge and comfort of others. Let the
joy and comfort of this scientific yajna, in consequence,
reach the home of the yajamana.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




34. (Yajamana Devata, Vatsa Rshi)






[Names: Rafar, Gerry, Bhadro, Syeno]
Lord of the earth, master of knowledge, you are a
blessing for me. With the product of your study and my
effort and support, reach any part of all the regions of the
world shooting to your destination as an eagle. May no
robber, no thief, no wolfish highway man, no man of evil
pursuit, meet you on the way. May no one rob or deceive
you or steal anything. Let the product of your yajna and
mine reach the house of the yajamana fast.


35. (Surya Devata, Vatsa Rshi)


Qat casita chet aaa weiter ree tut




[Names: Mitrasya, Mitras, Duredrse, Suryaya]
Salutations in reverence, recognition and
gratitude to the Sun, best friend, highest, all-seeing,
great, brilliant, far-seeing light of the world, self-
luminant,child of heaven. Sing in praise of him, serve
his law of right and truth in life.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




36. (Surya Devata, Vatsa Rshi)
adama sei




[Names: Varunasyottambhanamasi]
You are the bond and ultimate pillar of the
universe. You are the centre and sustenance of vayu's
hold on things and the sun's two-fold power to move
the waters in space. You are the mainstay of the world's
phenomenal reality of Satyam and the seat and working
of Rtam, the universal law of Right and Truth. By your
grace only, we realize the meaning of existence and
follow the divine law of Dharma.


37. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi)
[Names: Yatisdital]
CIE non




[Names: Gayasphanah]
Lord of the universe, whatever places are
sanctified by the performance of yajna with oblations
in your honour, all such places, O Soma, yajna may
grace and sanctify for us too — yajna, promoter of the
home, family and wealth, saviour from suffering, maker
of the brave, redeemer of the weak, all-round generous
and universal, may sanctify us too. Soma, scholar wise
and dedicated, go round, speak for, propagate and
perform yajna in every home.


se agais: d


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1. (Vishnu Devata, Gotama Rshi)


aNd ferular cat sire vem ruga




[Names: Syenaya, Somabhrte, Somabhrt]
Yajna (Yajna materials), you are the body of fire
(heat and electricity) dedicated to Vishnu for the
completion of the noble act of service. You are the body
of Soma (life-juice of the created phenomena) dedicated
to Vishnu, for the purification of the air and the
environment. You are the hospitality for the chance-
visitor, dedicated to Vishnu for the attainment of
knowledge. I do the yajna and offer the libations for
Vishnu, for the ‘eagle’, fastest carrier of Soma to the
Yajamana, for rapid advancement of the science and
power of yajna. I offer the libations to the fire for the
development of wealth and energy, for Vishnu, the
powerful giver of virtue, for knowledge and the ability
for action.


2. (Vishnu, Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi)




[Names: Fess]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Agnerjanitramasi, Pururava]
Yajna (yajna materials), you are the birth-place
of fire, source power of fire-arms. You are the food of
the cosmic agents of rain, air and the sun. You are the
producer and provider of various comforts of life. You
are the secret of the knowledge of the Shastras through
learned gatherings. I refine and kindle the fire with the
inspiring chant of the Gayatri verses. I invigorate you
and raise the fire with the exhilarating chant of the
Trishtubh verses. I boost you and rouse the fire with
the ecstatic chant of the jagati verses.


3. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi)
adi a: aA aeaarearual i ar aaa

[Names: Bret, Bhavatam, Sivau]
May the teacher and the disciple of the science
of yajna be of equal mind in teaching and learning,
harmonious in knowledge and instructions, gentle and
free from coarseness in manners and communication.
May these two devotees of the fire of yajna be auspicious
harbingers of peace and happiness for us. May they not
disturb or ruin the yajna. May they not hurt the yajnapati.


4. (Agni Devata, Gotama Rshi)




[Names: Gast]
marat wen


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Agnavagni]
Agni (fire) present in agni (electricity) is
universally active and operative. Deeply involved in the
study of agni, child of the rshis of scholarship, one with
his subject, graceful, enlightened, serious and dedicated,
the teacher and researcher roams around with his love.
May he, for us here, carry on the yajna of his project
with the libations of his special materials and create
new knowledge and food for further yajna.


5. (Vidyut Devata, Gotama Rshi)






[Names: Apataye, Sakvaraya, Anadhrstam]
Lord/Energy and Power of the universe,
indestructible, dauntless and undaunted, light and lustre
of the powers of nature, faultless and protector against
misfortune, beyond calumny and condemnation, I
accept/take you for all-over protection from all sides,
for a blooming body, for the gift of ability, strength and
power, prowess and lustre, so that you help to put me in
a state of comfort and welfare in a straight and natural


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




way and I celebrate in song the true and eternal cause
of the good life.


6. (Agni Devata, Gotama Rshi)






[Names: Aardam, Saha]
Agni, Lord/Power of light and energy,
omnipresent protector and keeper of the vows of
discipline, I take the vow of discipline and study and
come in to you. This presence of yours is in me, and the
same presence in me is in you. You and I are together,
the preceptor and the disciple are together. Lord
protector of the vows of discipline and pursuit, Lord of
commitment and consecration, Lord of fire and
relentless exercise of discipline, recognize and permit
our vow of discipline and study, approve and consecrate
my commitment, accept and bless my dedication and
pursuit of the undertaking and programme.


7. | (Soma Devata, Gotama Rshi)


[Names: Areata, Rataa]
szilq inel


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Amsuramsuste, Apydayaydsmant, Esta]
Soma, Lord and spirit of life, power brilliant,
omnipresent in nature, master of unique knowledge and
promoter of wealth, nurture the growth bit by bit, wave
on wave, for the glory of Indra, the power of nature,
and may Indra, the power, grow for you, the spirit. And
may the seeker (the master and the disciple) grow for
the joy of life. Help us grow, help our friends and
comrades grow by virtue of your penetrating
intelligence. Let joy and comfort grow. May success
greet you! Man of brilliance dedicated to the spirit of
life, joining you in your creative efforts for the
production of food and energy, and the achievement of
honour and prosperity, may we obtain the wanted power
and wealth of life. To the speakers (and discoverers) of
the Law (of nature), knowledge (of truth and law)! To
earth and heaven, salutations (in gratefulness for fire
and light and growth)!


8.  (AgniDevata, Gotama Rshi)








All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Ugram, Ugram, Ugram]
Agni, Lord of fire and speech, your presence (in
the devotee), silent but potential as in the metals of the
earth, generous and deep in the caverns of the mind,
defeats the cruellest and most fearsome words of the
opponent. Your presence (in the devotee), loud and
powerful as in the air and waters of the sky, generous
and deep as in the caverns of the clouds, defeats the
strongest and most passionate words of the opponent.
Your presence (in the devotee), clear and brilliant as in
the rays of light, generous and deep as in the implosions
of the sun, overwhelms the most brilliant and most
formidable speech of the opponent. This is the voice of
nature. This is the voice of the Veda. This is the voice
of the Divine.


9. (Agni Devata, Gotama Rshi)




[Names: Aste, Rider, Qadtaa]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Taptayani, Videdagnirnabho]
Agni (fire, electricity and light) is the bringer of
home for the homeless and wealth for all. It saves from
destitution and exploitation, and from fear and
deprivation. Know this agni: it is water from the sky,
lives in the body parts as vital heat and comes bearing
the name of health and longevity. It lives in this earth
and that is its yajnic and indestructible form. For that
reason, we light it in the vedi, raise it and feed it for the
attainment of noble virtues.


Know the agni: it is in the vapours in the sky, the
second region of space, in its yajnic and indestructible
form. It comes bearing the name of health, longevity
and comfort. For that reason, we light it in the vedi of
science, raise it and feed it for the attainment of noble


Know the agni: it is light which illuminates
various regions of the universe and lives in the moving
sun in heaven, the third region of space, in its yajnic
and indestructible form. It comes bearing the name of
health, logevity, prosperity, light and life. For that
reason, we light it in the vedi of technology, raise it and
feed it for the attainment of noble virtues.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


10. (Vak Devata, Gotama Rshi)


fuese uen: deed: acura faesata




[Names: Simhyasi, Sundhasva]
Speech is powerful, as powerful as a lioness.
Develop it for the good people so that they can face a
rival and prevail. Purify it so that the noble people can
resist an adversary and defeat him. Beautify it so that
the holy people can fight out the enemy and win over
darkness and evil.


11. (Vak Devata, Gotama Rshi)





[Names: Tilsen, Indraghosastva, Rudraih, Rudrai]
(Speech is a sacred trust to be developed and
preserved.) The voice of the Divine Power, Veda, and
the scholars of the Veda, with the observation of the
external world of the Vasus such as the earth and work
of the *vasu' scholars of 24 years standing may develop
the language of science from the front, taking it forward.
Pracheta, the man of awareness and illumination, with
insight into the internal world of the pranas and the spirit


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and work of the scholars of 36 years standing may
extend it and preserve it from behind. The man of
judgement and valuation as fast as the mind (manojawa),
with the senior scholars past and present, should
maintain the clarity and acceptability of its meaning and
refinement on the right side of it. Vishwakarma, scholar
of the world of existence and the structure of language,
with the work of the scholars of 48 years standing,
should maintain the overall beauty and effectiveness of
it. (This is the yajna of creative speech.) With the
fragrance of this yajna I breathe out the vapours of Vak
(universal language) to be crystallized into the objective
speech of communication.


12. (Vak Devata, Gotama Rshi)


[Names: Ragai]
waar: eaafa: caret asai guai


[Names: Wanda]
qd UII




Language is sacred and it is power. It is the
treasure of science, science of the stars and light
especially of the sun in the zodiacs. It is the language
of the Veda and eliminates ignorance. It is the language
of governance, administration and military science and
fights out injustice and crime. It is the language of
economics, commerce, finance and management and
removes poverty and suffering. It is the language of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




social science and human welfare and eliminates anti-
social forces. For the yajamana it brings spiritual
knowledge and noble virtues. I serve and develop this
noble language through yajna for the enlightenment and
happiness of all the living beings.


13. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi)






[Names: Dhruvo]
Yajna is firm and immovable, the centre of
movement. It develops the earth and enriches its wealth.
Develop yajna. It is the treasure-home of knowledge
and prosperity. It expands the sky and increases its
wealth and waters. Develop yajna. It is the seat of
indestructible wealth. It expands radiation of light and
energy from the regions of the sun and brings the light
of knowledge. It supplements and sharpens the powers
of nature. Develop yajna. Expand. Accelerate. Intensify.
It is the completion, the finale.


14. (Savita Devata, Gotama Rshi)


aad: Nefa: carat gi



[Names: Yunjate, Vayunavideka]
Great are the songs of celebration in praise of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Savita, the Creator, Omnipresent Lord Supreme of
infinite knowledge and Karma. Wise and dedicated men
of multiple orders of yajna concentrate their mind and
intelligence on that One Universal Presence. Knowing
that language of celebration and Karma I meditate on
the presence of the Lord all alone by myself.


15. (Vishnu Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)






[Names: Carat, Idam, Samudhamasya]
Vishnu, Lord omnipresent sustainer of this
dynamic world, visible and invisible, created it in three
fold order — earth (prithivi), skies (antariksha) and
heaven (dyu), or sattva (mind), rajas (motion) and matter
(tamas) — and, alongwith the mystery that it is, set it in
space. This is the divine voice.


16. (Vishnu Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)






[Names: Travati, Vyaskabhna]
The earth full of grain, rich in cows, covered with
grass and greenery so pleasing to man, this earth with
all her creatures held fast all round in orbit by the waves
of gravitation, and the heaven above well-sustained in
position, Vishnu, Lord immanent of the world, you


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




maintain both of these and, of course, the divine word
of the Veda.


17. (Vishnu Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)


[Names: Rade, Aden, Svam]
Scholars well-versed in the science of yajna go
forward to the noble people and proclaim that they
strengthen and extend the yajna over the earth and to
the sky so that they receive, like the two fold movements
of prana and apana, the fragrance of the yajna of love
and non-violence and send it onward to the heavens.
Take the yajna high, never take it down. Pious men of
virtue stay in their home and look after the cows fully
well. Abuse not life. Revile not the people. Enjoy life
on the earth under the showers of peace and joy.


18. (Vishnu Devata, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi)




[Names: Visnornukam]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Let us celebrate the wonderful exploits of Vishnu
who makes the threefold order of the heaven, the earth
and the sky with the original materials of nature.
Immanent with the later forms of the dynamic universe
which He made and makes, He sustains the world.
Celebrated in the hymns of the Veda, Lord, we worship
you for the sake of the universal yajna of creation and
pray for inspiration to perform yajna in our life.


18. (Vishnu Devata, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi)




[Names: Divo]
Vishnu, Lord omnipresent of the universe, we
worship you with yajna for the gifts of yajna. We pray:
from the regions of heaven bless us with energy and
light. From the vast sky and from the earth, and from
the great womb of nature — the ‘mahat’ form of the
creative mode — bless us and fill our life to the full
with materials of joy and peace with both hands, from
both sides, right and left.


20. (Vishnu Devata, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi)




[Names: Teed, Yasyorusu]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Like an awful mountain lion that roams around in
his sole majesty, Vishnu, the omnipresent Lord of
tremendous power and glory rules the world and
commands the homage of His creatures. All the regions
of the world rest in the vast spaces of the three orders
of His wonderful creation — the earth, the sky and the


21. (Vishnu Devata, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi)





[Names: Visno, Vaisnavamasi]
The world is a manifestation of Vishnu's glory
at two levels of existence, the animate and the inanimate.
The elements of existence have been integrated into
form by the presence of Vishnu. The form is one, firm,
inviolable and organismic. The world is divine, it
belongs to Vishnu. It is yajna. It is for yajna in
celebration of the maker.


22. (Vishnu Devata, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi)


[Names: Ulad, Brhannasi]
In this world of Lord Savita's creation and
blessedness, with the double strength of Ashwini's arms


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




(nature's powers of health, prana and apana) and the
double gifts of nourishment from Pusha (earth's powers
of gravitation and stability), I accept and undertake to do
yajna. Yajna is a noble work for humanity. With this, we
can drive away the forces of evil even by the neck. It is
great and growing. It is the voice of divinity loud and
clear. Proclaim this great voice of truth for the glory of
Indra, ruler of the earth.


23. (Yajna Devata, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi)




[Names: Raksohanam]
Just as I perform, refine and expand this yajna —
an act that gathers strength, bestows strength of power,
prosperity and happiness, and destroys negativity and
evil, an act performed with the voice of the divine (Veda)
for the divine — just as I do the yajna, you too do the
same for advancement.


What my dedicated friend or my chief assistant
has done to dig up the vedi for knowledge of the earth,
and as he has performed the yajna of research, so I do


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the act for enlightenment and you too do the same for


What my equal or my unequal has done and does
in the field of education, the same I do for development
and you too do the same for refinement.


What the equal of my brother or the unequal of
my brother has done and does for the advancement of
the science of yajna, I do the same developmental act,
and you too do the same — for expansion.


What my brother, colleague or another higher or
lower has done and does regularly for heightening the
possibilities of yajna for the advancement of knowledge,
prosperity and happiness, I do the same inspiring act
and you too do the same for the higher life.


24. (Surya & Vidvan Devate, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi)






[Names: Svaradasi]
You are self-disciplined, self-Iuminous, free, able
to defeat the rivals. You are ruled by the sessions of the
community-yajna; you shine in the community sessions
and you suppress the proud. You are ruled by the people,
you shine among the people, and you eliminate the
wicked. You are ruled by all, you shine among all and
you win over those who are not your friends.


You are the individual, self-disciplined, self-
enlightened, free, able to defeat the rivals. You are the
the insidious. You are the nation, governed by the people,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




nationally enlightened, free, able to suppress the wicked.
You are the united nations of the world, governed by the
united people, humanly enlightened, sovereign, able to
win over the opposition and non-friends.


25. (Yajna Devata, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi)






[Names: Raksohano]
You are fighters against suffering and destroyers
of evil while I rout the force of the enemy. You are devotees
of Vishnu, Lord of the universe, and dedicated to yajna,
a life of positive creative and constructive action. I bless
and sanctify you. You are the destroyers of the wicked. I
gauge the strength of the enemy and drive them away
from you, friends of yajna. You are fighters against human
poverty and misfortune. I know the powers of the
exploiters. I shower success and prosperity on you,
friends of social and economic well-being through yajna.
President of the council and master of yajna, you are
crusaders against ignorance and injustice and you face
the power of the adversaries. By virtue of your dedication
to Vishnu and to yajna, I take you close to me for success.
Eliminators of sin and pollution, you break down their


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




power in the service of society. I know your faith and I
strengthen your faith and resolve. Yajna is holy, it is a
Godly mission. Stay firm in your dedication to yajna, to
God, to nature and to society.


26. (Yajna Devata, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi)


dena ver fer: tas Raag it yoo Sena




[Names: Yavo]
In this world of Savita's creation, with the
strength and vigour of prana and apana, and with the
power and prowess of the bold and the brave I do
homage to the man of learning and dedication and accept
yajna as a mission so that I may catch the wicked and
the evil by the neck and eliminate them head and foot
from life and society. You are young and fast, speed
itself. Drive away hate and fear from us. Eliminate
poverty, adversity and failure. May all the people
cooperate and join in the yajna in the search for the
light of truth and universal Dharma, for exploration of
the sky and space and for enrichment of the earth and
the environment. This is the assembly of the wise and
the learned people. May all the people join these men
of knowledge and be enlightened. O woman, you are
strong and bold. You too join in this venture.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




27. (Yajna Devata, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi)




[Names: Tred]
Wat eee gel



[Names: Uddivam, Brahmavani, Brahma]
Yajna, man of knowledge, president of the
assembly, reach the regions of light and reveal the
secrets of knowledge. Rise to the skies and fill the space
there for knowledge. Reach into the earth and strengthen
it. May the wind join you and help with the light of
energy. May the two-fold movements of wind-energy,
prana and apana, help you with their firm and unfailing
power. I know and appreciate your dedication to
knowledge and education, to governance and
organization, to the economic system and wish you well.
Promote knowledge, strengthen the social system, enrich
the economic system. Promote life and health. Promote
the welfare of the people.


28. (Yajna Devata, Autathya Dirghatama Rshi)


[Names: Dhruvasi, Ghrtena]
chaya.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Lady of the house, hostess of yajna, you are firm
and strong. May the yajamana, your husband, also be
firm in this yajna, in this home, in this world, with his
family, his people and his wealth. May both of you fill
the earth and the sky with the fragrance of ghee and
fertility. You are the protective shade of Indra, lord of
power and prosperity. You too be the protective cover
for all the people of the world.


29. (Ishvara and Sabhadhyaksha Devate, Autathya






[Names: Dirghatama, Gaga, Vrddhayumanu, Justayah]
Lord President, adorable in songs of praise, may
these chants of celebration reach you whole and from
all sides, and may these praises, ever loved, increase
and grow in their truth and value alongwith the lord,
first in time and oldest in wisdom.


30. (Ishvara and Sabhadhyaksha Devate, Madhuchhanda


teta àsa uso




[Names: Aindramasi]
You are the life-link of the world’s beauty and
grandeur. You are the centre-pin of the wheel of
existence. You are the power and the glory. You are the
ultimate rest and haven of the universe.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




31. (Agni Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)






[Names: Vibhurasi, Svatro]
Agni, you are vast as space, flowing as a river
and rolling as the sea, the fire that carries the fragrance
of yajna across the world. You are the lord giver of
knowledge and awareness and promoter of wisdom, and
you are the vision of the world.


32. (Agni Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)


aara carafe: uu




[Names: Usigasi]
Agni, you are the lord of light, eternal poet of
vision and creation, enemy of sin and evil, deliverer
from bondage, protector from suffering, adorable,
edifying purifier and sanctifier. Self-refulgent, you burn
away the dirt, wash away and dry up pollution; centre-
presence of the assembly, you emanate joy; light of the
sky, you refine the yajna and carry it in space. Light of
heaven and abode of the eternal law of Dharma, you
are the spirit of patience and the power of endurance.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


33. (Agni Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)




Ja MIEEIT



[Names: Samudro]
Agni, vast and deep as the ocean, unfathomable
as space, immanent and omnipresent, you are the
original power and motion of existence. Unborn and
eternal, spirit of all knowledge, the world is but one
vibration of this eternal consciousness, and the Veda is
just one Word of its articulation.


Man of wisdom and learning, path-maker and
guardian of advancement in knowledge, Dharma and
science, Agni, Lord of Life, is the lord of knowledge
and power. He opens the doors of internal and external
knowledge. You too keep the doors open, extend the
paths, do not cause any suffering, help us cross the
hurdles and lead us on in this noble pilgrimage of divine
life on earth. Lord of life, knowledge and action, bless
us that we may succeed.


34. (Agni Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)


"me AA ura ubera: faga uber ware


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






Men of knowledge, worthy of praise,
broadminded as the sky, voracious as fire for knowledge
and passionate for work, look at me favourably with
the eye of friends. Remain broad-minded and liberal.
Liberal and gracious as you are, protect me with the
fiery passion for knowledge and power in growth and
development. May the men of the fire of yajna and
science fill and full me with plenty and let me grow in
safety and peace. Salutations to you! Pray hurt me not,


35. (Agni Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)





[Names: Jyotirasi]
Agni, you are the light of universal knowledge, a
flame of fire for the scholars of the world to light up and
reveal the form and structure of the world. Soma you are
the vast power of order and control over the envious, the
self-expansive servers of the flesh, the negative and
uncreative people. May the lover of tecknowledge, fast
and anxious, choose to dedicate himself to the great and
valuable secrets and powers of agni, and know and
confirm the divine voice of the Veda.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


36. (Agni Devata, Agastya Rshi)






[Names: Yuyodhyasmajjuhuranameno, Vayunani]
Agni, light of the world and treasure-home of all
the power and wealth, lord of all the knowledge, karma
and paths of life, lead us on by the right path, simple
and straight, to the highest goal of life, Moksha, through
right knowledge, right action and right wealth. Fight
out and ward off from us all that is evil and leads to
suffering — crookedness, deviousness, intrigue and
deceit. We bow in thanks and surrender to you and sing
the sweetest songs in praise of you.


37. (Agni Devata, Agastya Rshi)








[Names: Wear, Satrunjayatu]
May this Agni, this fiery man of courage and
prowess, make the way to safety, security, wealth and
bliss. May he, breaking through the lines of the envious,
go forward. May he defeat the enemy in battles and win
the victories. May he, in joyous song, celebrate the
victory for Agni.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


38. (Vishnu Devata, Agastya Rshi)





[Names: Ghrtam]
Vishnu, lord of life and sustenance/Man of
knowledge, power and wealth, go far and forward in
your exploits and enable us to expand with our homes,
wealth, knowledge and happiness. Born of ghee and
rising with ghee the fire devours its food and blazes. You
too light the fire with knowledge and action and grow
continuously in knowledge, action, wealth and happiness.
Take the master of yajna across the fields of life, chanting
the hymns of yajna, to a safe haven of joy.


39. (Soma & Savita Devate, Agastya Rshi)






[Names: Gare, Fatal, Somastam, Somasta, Etattvam]
Savita, lord of life and growth, Head of the
people, this is your Soma, honour, strength and power.
[Names: Protect]
deceive or destroy you. Soma, man of energy and
inspiration, shining with strength and intelligence,
bright as you are, go to the men of virtue and wisdom. I
too approach them to be with them. Thus with the wise


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and the virtuous people, with friends and comrades, with
wealth and growth, I get free of the chains of Varuna,
the powers of worldly bondage.


40. (Agni Devata, Agastya Rshi)








[Names: Yathayatham]
Agni, man of light and brilliance, man of truth,
man of knowledge, teacher, man of discipline on oath
as you are, so may I be as your disciple. Your body of
knowledge, truth and faith may be in me too. And my
body of growing knowledge may be in you. Man of
discipline and commitment, you and I both shall observe
common vows corresponding to each other. May my
initiation and dedication on oath be accepted and
approved by my master of initiation. May my discipline
and austerity be in accord with the discipline and
austerity of the master of tapas, austere discipline.


41. (Vishnu Devata, Agastya Rshi)


se fep fahu arate apie |




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Vishnu, man of courage and knowledge wide
expansive asthe wind, equip yourself with the knowledge
of science and technology and expand our comfort and
ghee and electricity in the sky consumes water in the
clouds, drink deep at the fount of knowledge. Help the
master of yajnato overcome the hurdles and swim across
the seas with the chant of the Veda.


42. (Agni Devata, Agastya Rshi)






[Names: Ware, Atyanyam, Osadhe]
Agni/Master of knowledge, I won't go to the
fools. I would go to the others, to the wise, yes, to the
wise only. You are higher than the highest (in
knowledge), and closer than the closest (in love). I
would be with you, know you, attain to you.


Lord/Master of herbs, brilliant and generous, we
love you and adore you for the sake of gifts of knowledge
and life's inspiration. May all the devas, noble ones,
love you and adore you for the same gifts of knowledge
and blessings for the sake of Vishnu, lord of yajna.


Life-giving herbs, power of the lord, save this
man, save this yajna, hurt not, kill not.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




43. (Yajna Devata, Agastya Rshi)


SOA Wal




[Names: Dyam, Atastvam, Satavalso]
Don't breach the regions of light, let the heavens
be. Hurt not the skies, pollute them not. Be with the
earth and the environment. This yajna is a great power,
a weapon sharp and tempered, come to you for a great
good fortune. Lord of herbs/Greenery of the earth,
generous power of the Divine, grow from a hundred
roots, spread and rise. We too may, by the grace of the
Lord of yajna, grow and rise from a thousand roots,
from a thousand shoots, through a hundred years,




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


115




1.  (Savita Devata, Agastya Rshi)






[Names: Sundhantamllokah]
In this world of lord Savita's creation, with both
the arms of Ashwinis (the wind's energy of prana and
udana) and both the hands of Pusha (the earth's gift of
strength and prowess), I accept you and consecrate you,
Head of the people and President of the assembly and
your life-partner, in this social yajna. With this
acceptance and investiture, I catch the evil and the
wicked by the neck and destroy them. You are the power
to join and disjoin. Remove the envious from us. Drive
out all poverty and suffering from here. This is the
august assembly of the noble people. May the noble
people sitting in this assembly accept and consecrate
you for the heavens (the light of knowledge), for the
skies (internal purity of conduct), and for the earth
(earthly prosperity and well-being). You are the centre-
seat of the great and the noble ones.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




2.  (Savita Devata, Shakalya Rshi)





[Names: Agrenirasi]
You are the leader on top of all those taking this
polity high. Settled with confidence in your Dharma,
know well this polity, this economy, and the people.
Savita, blazing lord of power, light and generosity,
would shower His blessings and protection from above.
May the Lord anoint you with honey and bless you with
nectarious herbs. With top initiative, touch the heaven
(in matters of justice and enlightenment). At the middle
level, fill the sky with peace, security and Dharmic
conduct. At the ground level, strengthen the earth (with
food, planning and employment).


3. (Vishnu Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)





[Names: Atraha]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




The houses of the government we would wish to
visit are those which are bright with the light of Lord
Vishnu's glory of human art and awareness so that we
exclaim spontaneously: *Ah! here is the place where
the highest offices in Vishnu's dispensation are wholly
and exclusively held by learned and meritorious people".
I know your Brahma system of education and research,
your Kshatra system of defence, justice and peace, your
economic system of production and distribution.
Strengthen and extend education and enlightenment,
consolidate and advance governance and administration,
improve and promote health and age, strengthen and
expand the welfare of the people.


4. (Vishnu Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)
zw usu: erat owe




[Names: Visnoh]
Watch the divine acts of Vishnu, omnipresent lord
of the universe, acts of creation, sustenance and
annihilation of the world, wherein are manifested the
inviolable laws of His dominion operative in nature.
Therein I see the sacred rules of conduct and
administration of my dominion too and I bind myself
irrevocably as a friend of the lord of universal power
and as an instrument of His will. Watch, meditate, learn
and bind yourselves too to the rules of this dominion
and His.


5. (Vishnu Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)
Ria aada nei


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Tadvisnoh, Diviva]
Men of courage and divine knowledge, the Veda,
always have a vision of that highest glory of Vishnu
manifested everywhere and blazing like the light of the
sun in heaven, which you too should see.


6.  (Vidvans Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)




[Names: Parivirasi, Divah]
You are the centre of attraction, reverence and
homage. You are the child of heaven like the sun. May
the brilliant in knowledge and merit come to you in
reverence. Yajamana as you are of the social yajna of
this dominion, may the people of wealth all round be at
your command in homage. The people of this land and
the foresters are yours, so is the animal wealth of the


7. (Twashta Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)




[Names: Upavirasyupa]
Close to the people, you are their protector.
Brilliant in power and virtue, you are the destroyer of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




suffering. Just as meritorious people of quality and
character approach the most lovable benefactors, so may
they come to you. Abide in delight by your dominion
and may the people enjoy what they offer for the social
yajna and what they receive from it.


8.  (Brihaspati Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)



[Names: Rtasya]
(People of the land), happy and prosperous, abide
(by the law) and enjoy the good life. Brihaspati, master
of knowledge and wisdom, teacher, accept the gifts
offered by us. Take the brahmacharis.

You are an oblation for the Divine and the laws
of universal truth in the yajna of education. I invest you
with the bond of truth and the law of Dharma. Be a full
man and be strong.


9. (Savita, Aswinau, Pushacha Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)


[Names: Gout, Sena, Faas]
ver Are Hara fuer Mra TAS] AT A: |




[Names: Wrath, Agnisomabhyam, Agnisomabhya, Adbhyastvausadhibhyo, Agnisomabhyam, Agnisomabhya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




In this yajna of the creation of the refulgent and
generous Lord Savita, with the arms of Ashvinis (powers
and virtues of the sun and moon), and with the generous
hands of Pusha (the fertility and sustenance of the earth's
gravitation and stability), I accept you, favoured as you
are as a child by Agni, lord of light and heat, and Soma,
lord of life and peace. I enjoin you to the discipline of
brahmacharya with waters and herbs to enjoy and
consecrate you, loved as you are by Agni and Soma.
brother support and your friends of the group cooperate.


10. (Apah Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)




[Names: Wercurdi, Apam]
You are a protector of the waters (through yajna).
May all the living beings taste and enjoy the sweet and
celestial waters and other things of their own like the
blessed gifts from yajna. May you, with all your body
and will, and by my blessings (i.e., the teacher’s
blessings) help and cooperate with those who are
dedicated to yajna. May your very breath rise with the
wind carrying the fragrance. Be a master of yajna.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




11. (Vatah Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)



[Names: Yelfer, Riera, Saez, Ghrtenaktau, Urorantariksat, Varso]
Anointed with ghee, both of you, the priest and
the yajaka, protect and promote the animals. Betake
yourself to the prosperous yajamana, perform yajna with
oblations of rich materials and, joining the celestial wind
like a friend, bring from the vast skies all that is loved
and wanted by the yajamana. With your very heart and
soul, be one with the body of yajna. You are the shower
of joy through yajna, establish the yajamana in yajna, a
very shower and treasure-house of joy. This is the divine
voice. Chant the divine voice with the generous and the
wise for the attainment of divine virtues.


12. (Vidvans Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)


[Names: Geet, Mahirbhurma, Ghrtasya]
Man of knowledge, promoter of joy, never be like
a snake or violent as a hunter or tiger. Come irresistibly
like a stream of ghee close by the path of truth and the
law of Dharma. Salutations to you. Gifts of food and
hospitality for you in plenty.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


122
13.


(Apah Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)




[Names: Devirapah]
Women, pure and cool as celestial waters, marry


by choice and settle with noble men in security and
protection all round. So should we, men, settled and
secure with the women, be their guardians and all-round
protectors, in love and duty.


14.


(Vidvans Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)


are a vpenfa uri d vpenfa arated ventu sitet





[Names: Vacam, Sundhami, Sundhami, Sundhami]
your eye, I purify your ear, I purify your navel, I purify
your organ of generation, I purify your organs of
excretion, I purify all your character and conduct. (Be a
pure and complete person by education.)


15.


(Vidvans Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)

waked masarata Aea ad wea


[Names: Peiefee]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Manasta, Yatte, Sudhyatu]
(Through education, study and practice) may your
mind grow full and strong. May your speech be pure
and perfect. May your breath be full and strong May
your eye be clear and perfect. May your ear be strong
and sensitive. Whatever be wrong and hurtful, that be
cast out. Whatever be decided for sure that be
accomplished. May everything be pure and strong and
ever grow stronger. May all be peace and blessed day
by day. Man of knowledge and science, save and
strengthen this disciple. Spirit of knowledge, power and
nourishment, save the inmate of the school, hurt not


[Names: Save]
16. (Dyava prithivi Devate, Medhatithi Rshi)




[Names: Tater, Nerang, Tatsdorasganetansaa, Talel, Hred, Raksasam]
Young man of education, the evil and the wicked,
want, poverty, injustice and ignorance fall to your lot


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of responsibility. Say this and do this: *You are of the
party of the devil. Off you go." Be determined: Here I
confront the anti-social devils. I neutralize them, drive
them off and eliminate them. I send them to the lowest
dungeons of the dark.


Seeker of discriminative knowledge, know the
properties and behaviour of the finest materials and,
with refined and rarefied vapours of ghee, fill the earth
and the sky with waters. Let the scholars of science know
the processes and results of your oblations in the yajna.
Let the earth and the sky, replete with the vapours of
ghee and waters sent up with the chant of vedic verses,
send them onward to the winds (for the completion of


17. (Apah Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)




Weg uel




[Names: Idamapah, Yaccabhidudrohanrtam]
Whatever is despicable (in me), whatever is dirty
(such as ignorance and illusion), whatever is wrong,
toward the innocent, these waters may wash off that sin
from me, the purifying wind may dry that off from me,
the holy men of wisdom may absolve me of that and
release me from self-bondage.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




18. (Agni Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)






[Names: Wert, Redasyagnistva]
Young warrior, may your mind be full of strength
and knowledge, and your spirit full of courage and high
morale. You are a destroyer of the enemy. May the fire
season and temper you, may the waters inspire you to
the speed of the winds and the velocity of the sun-rays.
Full of ardour and passion, send the enemy-army of


19. (Vishvedeva Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)





[Names: Disah]
Protectors and lovers of waters, protect and drink
of the nectar of the waters. Protectors of homes and
policy, protect the homes, and protect and benefit from
the policy. Commander of the forces, you are the
oblation of the defence-yajna rising to the sky for every
warrior. Command the forces in the language of power
for the defence of all the directions, interdirections,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




directions in front and back, and the directions of the
target. Command others too so that they may also plan
and conduct the defence with similar language and
action.


20. (Twashta Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)

we: Ru m Adada








[Names: Aindrah, Devatra]
Commander, you are the breath and spirit of
divine power (Indra) throbbing in every part of the army.
You are the current of passion and enthusiasm
overflowing in every section of the force. Twashta,
router of the enemy, brilliant and powerful, may your
army of various form and formation march on as one
body with one mark and one target. And while you
march on your noble mission of defence, may your
mother, father and other seniors, and your friends exhort
you on your way and wish you all success.


21. (Senapati Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)


[Names: Tres, Margit, Hour]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Samudram]
Man of knowledge, in service of the government,
with the knowledge of navigation and ship-building,
go to explore the seas. With the knowledge of aviation,
fly to the skies. With the knowledge of space and space
dynamics, go to the brilliant regions of light. With the
knowledge of yoga, explore the secret of the pranic
energy of breath and vitality of the inner spirit. With
the knowledge of astronomy, know the motions of the
sun and planets and the formation of day and night. With
the knowledge of grammar and versification, study,
interpret and apply in practice the four Vedas. With the
knowledge of geology and astrophysics, go deep into
earth and space. With the science of yajna, know and
practice the yajna of science and technology in the socio-
practical economic and spiritual fields. With the
knowledge of herbs, pursue the science of health and
life. With the knowledge of water and gases, explore
their celestial presence and formation of water and rain.
With the science of energy, study heat, light, electricity
and all-pervasive agni (fire), and harness it for use in
life. Know all this, do all this, follow up all this and
justify all that I have taught, to my heart-felt joy and
satisfaction. Let the fumes and vapours of your yajna
rise to the sky. Let the light of it reach the sun. Fill and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




cover the earth with the essence and alchemy of your
yajna for valuable products. This is the divine voice.


22. (Varuna Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)




[Names: Mapo, Yadahuraghnya]
varuneti $apamahe tato varuna no munca.


[Names: Sumitriya]
Head of the republic, pollute not the waters,
destroy not herbs and trees: From this, from any other
place, leave us not out, except no one from this. Let
things like water and refreshment be available anywhere,


Lord of justice, water, herbs and trees, cows are
sacred, they are not to be destroyed: This you vouchsafe,
we too take the oath. Back not out. We too will not
back out. Under your governance, may waters and herbs
be like friends to us. And they would be unfriendly to
those elements which injure us and our sanctity, and to
those ailments which we oppose, they would be enemies.


23. (Ap-yajna Surya Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Havismatirima, Havisman]
The waters are a blessing carrying the purity and
joy of yajna. May the wind too bless us with the gifts of
yajna. May yajna, non-violent, a very god of love and
peace, overflow with life-giving fragrance. May the sun
be replete and generous with the light and life of yajna.


24. (Apah Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)






[Names: Geta, Feri, Agnervo, Mitravaruna, Amurya, Brahmacharini]
you in the home/s (refined and cultured with education
and learning) of the unmarried graduate/s bright as Agni
in marriage according to your own choice. You know
the virtues and advantages of sun and fire. You know
the properties of prana and udana (forms of pranic
energy). You know the nature and learning of the
scholars and you know the properties of the powers of
nature such as earth and others. Be partners in their
blessings in your life. And those who imbibe the virtues
of the sun and whom the light and life of the sun has
already blessed, we invite to grace this marital yajna of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




25. (Soma Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)


ES at ada vem fad ver oue cm a
saia fafa dag erat mes Re


[Names: Hrde, Urdhvamimamadhvaram]
yaccha.


Brahmacharini, just as we perform the yajna in
the company of our noble and learned men, so you too
perform yajna with your man after marriage. We have
taught you and we teach you for joy of the heart, for
clarity of the mind, for the value of happiness and peace,
and for the life and light from the sun, so you too, in the
company of your man, send up your invocations and
oblations of this auspicious yajna, so peaceful and
lovely, for the sake of joy and enlightenment.


26. (Soma Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)
Raosa get: iret mao ferat a aax sur
aa: daa ed À carat ren




[Names: Srnotvagnih, Srota]
Soma (ruler of the republic), lord of majesty, stay
close to the entire people and rule like a father. So should
the entire people be close to you and grow like children
of the father. Like the fire of yajna grown by samidha
fuel, listen to my prayer, listen to the people. So may


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




intelligent, educated and cool-minded women listen, like
mothers, to the prayers of women. Man of reverence
and wisdom, listen to our prayers like the yajnic chants
of learned and faithful devotees. May Savita, lord of
power and light, listen to my prayers and words of praise.


27. (Apah Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)


«i demit den dx shave Sat In ee wena!




Noble and intelligent people, to one who, among
you, is of good and constant character, strong of sense
and will, happiest and most inspiring, like a wave on
the ocean of existence, worthy of reverence and homage,
defender and supporter of the virtuous, to him, for the
gods among men, the noblest preservers, protectors and
promoters of life's vitalities, give your share of the social
yajnic offering. You too are a part of the noble ones.
Accept him in good grace with words of love and
reverence — the one of you and for all of you.


28. (Praja Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)


[Names: Karsirasi, Samapo]
You are the farmer. I exhort you to fill the sky
with the vapours of water for the enrichment of the earth
and the sea. With the oblations of herbs into the fire,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




get the herbs. With the oblations of water into the sky
(through the fire) get the waters.


29. (Agni Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)






[Names: Yamagne, Sasvatirisah]
Agni, lord of power and virtue, the man you
protect in battles and the man you send to the fields for
farming, such a man gets lasting food and progeny.


30. (Savita Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)


[Names: Prosar]
eased AT R01




[Names: Uttamena]
In this world of Lord Savita's creation, with both
the arms of Ashvinis (power and vitality of sun and
moon) and with both the hands of Pusha (the nourishing
virtues of mother earth's herbs), I accept you. You are
the giver. In the service of Indra, lord and ruler of this
land, with the best and most graceful words of piety,
enrich and expand this non-violent social yajna of love
and good fellowship, so deep and full with blessings,
so generous with milk and honey, health and energy


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and the joy of life. You have heard the words of the
wise. Worthy you are of acceptance and welcome. Come
and give me the pleasure of fulfilment.


31. (Praja, Sabhyas, Raja Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)


Wb d adaa ard À adaa woi d adaa weld À




People of the land, with your character and
performance satisfy my mind with a sense of fulfilment.
Satisfy me with your response to my words. Satisfy and
fulfil my energy and ambition. Satisfy my eye that I see
no wrong. Satisfy my ear that I hear nothing evil. Satisfy
[Names: Satisfy, Keep]
and frustration.


32. (President-Raja Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)
[Names: Grayasma]
wares i22!




[Names: Rudravata, Syendaya]
We elect and appoint you for Indra, honour and
glory of the land, for the creation of Vasus, young men


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of 24 years standing of education, and for Rudras, young
men of 44 years education who can rout the enemy. We
appoint you for the honour and glory of education and
creation of Adityas, heroes of 48 years education and
training who can shatter the pride of the enemies of the
land. We accept and appoint you for the force of eagle-
like commandos of defence, for the lovers of peace and
good health, for the development of energy and
electricity and for the producers of wealth and


33. (Soma Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)


ware mA wa cpeafet arx ata: 1330




[Names: Yadurav, Tenasmai]
Soma, blessed lord of the land, the light of your
power and glory shines over the earth, in the sky and in
the heaven above. By virtue of that, and for the sake of
this generous man of yajna of the social order, make it
richer, expand it further, and proclaim: He shall grow
happier and more prosperous.


34. (Yajna Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)




[Names: Svatra]
Women, brilliant and virtuous, quick to learn and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




instant in action like thunder in the clouds, life-partners
of your men, be strong, join the men in this holy yajna
and take it forward to the heights. Invited to the vedi,
have your fill of the immortal drink of soma, the nectar
of life and joy.


35. (Dyava-prithivi Devate, Madhuchhanda Rshi)


[Names: Papma]
hato na somah.


Woman, wise and intelligent, fear not, nor
tremble; take heart and be bold of heart and soul. You
being strong and standing by your husband, both of you
collect strength and firmness of body, mind and soul.
Eliminate evil and sin, and shine happy and blessed like
the moon.


36. (Soma Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)






[Names: Amba]
Mother, all your children and others, keen to make
you feel happy and comfortable, may run to you eagerly
from east, west, north and south and all round. Love
them, protect them, and may they too know you, be with
you, and love you well.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




37. (Indra Devata, Gautama Rshi)


"- car dues ufedqe adit ue: sion




[Names: Tvamanga]
Dearest Indra, brilliant and generous, lord
mightiest of power and wealth, truth, honour and glory,
there is no one else other than you to love, appreciate
and approve the human being, no one more
compassionate and more gracious than you to vouchsafe
for man. I say this for truth — it is the very word of




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


137




1.  (PranaDevata, Gotama Rshi)





[Names: Vacaspataye, Devo]
Be pure for the Lord of Divine speech, purged as
you are by the rays of the sun and the moon, two arms
of the Creator whereby He showers life with vitality
and purity. You are a part of the brilliant and the
generous, a darling of the gods. Be pure for them.


2. (Soma Devata, Gotama Rshi)
ae arate wemer aA aR aAA usu




[Names: Madhumatirna, Somadabhyam, Somadabhya]
Soma, Lord of knowledge and vitality, bless us
with honey-sweet food and energy. Lord of inspiration,
great, universal and imperishable is your name. To that
name, to the Divine Word, to the universal acts of the
Divine, and for the sake of knowledge, good action and
honour, I dedicate myself to the universal presence of
the Divine.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




3. (Vidvans Devata, Gotama Rshi)


[Names: Tans, Sateigt]
we Wore vem curare vem dai



[Names: Svankrto]
Man, bright and virtuous, with all your earthly
but excellent and celestial senses, you are self-made,
self-existent and autonomous. Bless you with a pious
mind and the voice of divinity, the Veda. Light of the
Spirit, of auspicious birth, your life is dedicated to the
Lord of Light, mother-powers of nature, and all the noble
servants of the life-divine. This is why I praise you.
May this praise come true. With one blow of truth from
above, the evil is destroyed. You are for the breath of
life, for vitality, joy and virtue.


4.  (Maghava Devata, Gotama Rshi)




[Names: Tami]
seer Tasu uum qe



[Names: Upayamagrhito, Urusya]
Man, you are the power and the glory of the self,
placed and accepted in the law of existence. Preserve
and promote the inner life and dedicate the innermost
self to the Law of the Divine. With yoga, eliminate
suffering and grow, and obtain the higher wealth and
power of the soul.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




5. (Ishvara Devata, Gotama Rshi)




[Names: Weare, Antaste, Sajurdevebhiravaraih]
Man of power and glory of the self, in pursuit of
yoga, I place the heaven and the earth within you, and
the vast intervening spaces of the sky too. Friends with
the noblest powers of nature and humanity, rejoice
within by yourself in a state of divine bliss and spread
the joy around.


6. (Yogi Devata, Gotama Rshi)






[Names: Tala]
Man of yoga, of noble birth and noble life, self-
existent and self-made, endowed with all the wonderful
powers of sense, blessed be your mind with the voice
of the divine, the Veda. I consecrate you and dedicate
you to the love and service of all the noblest powers of
earth and heaven, to the lord of light and the protectors
and servants of the light and life divine for the attainment
of the higher life.


Man of yoga, self-existent and free with excellent
powers of sense, of noble birth and noble living, blessed


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




be your mind with the divine voice, the Veda. I
consecrate and dedicate you to the love and service of
all the noblest powers of earth and heaven, to the lord
of light, and the servants and protectors of the light and
life divine, for the attainment of the higher life.


7. (Vayu Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)




[Names: Asore]
cat Il




Vayu, preserver, protector and promoter of purity,
yogin, versatile master of all virtue, loved, adored and
cherished by all, strengthen and edify us with a thousand
noble virtues. I come up to you for the sumptuous food
of yoga with insatiable appetite — for the gift of that
power and vision of the spirit which our forefathers
attained and which you have attained and preserved.


8.  (Indra-Vayu Devate, Madhuchhanda Rshi)





[Names: Watts, Saat, Indravayu, Indavo, Indravayubhyam, Indravayubhya]
Indra and Vayu (teacher and student of yoga),
you are like the sun and pranic energy. These essences,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




joys of spiritual experience, distilled from the soma of
yoga, are anxious to reach you. Come by these, come to
us. Disciple of yoga, accepted you are in the discipline
of yoga for success like the wind. Yoga is your home
alongwith Indra and Vayu (power of the mind and purity
of the soul). You are the favourite of both Indra and
Vayu. With the love and power of these two, I love you
too with reverence.


9.  (Mitra-Varuna Devate, Gritsamada Rshi)




[Names: Mamediha]
Mitra and Varuna, practitioners of yoga, seekers
of the law of universal truth and the existence of the
Universal Spirit, both of you dynamic in action like
prana and udana energies of the breath of life, the Soma
of your search, the joy of successful yoga, is realized.
Here, then, listen to my praise and accept the homage
of an admirer.


Yajamana, master of the yajna of yoga, accepted
and sanctified you are in yoga in the discipline of yama
and niyama (social and personal ethics of purity). With
your realization of the powers of prana and udana, I do
reverence and homage to you.


10. (Mitra-Varuna Devate, Trisadasyu Rshi)
ai af araeo get at fasat eee


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Raya]
Noble men of discriminative knowledge and
wisdom, let us rejoice on wealth fit to be offered to the
gods for food, rejoice just as cows enjoy the green grass.


Teachers and students of yoga, friends like pranic
energies, both of you attain and preserve for us the voice
of divine knowledge, Veda, versatile and eternal giver
of universal knowledge, revealed in the state of


[Names: Samadhi]
Yajamana, this knowledge is your element, your
very home of existence. We do homage to you alongwith
the seekers of divine law through yoga.


11. (Ashvinav Devate, Medhatithi Rshi)




[Names: Natea]
«eT 09 9 Il




[Names: Taya]
Teacher and seeker of yoga, bright as Ashwins
(sun and moon), advance your yajna of yoga in the light
of the divine voice of the Veda, so sweet, so true, so

Seeker of yoga, sanctified in the discipline of
yama and niyama (social and personal ethics of purity),
this yoga is your element, your very home of existence.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Teacher and seeker, with your control over the
vital energies of prana and apana, and for the sweetness
and light of your spiritual awareness, we do reverence
and homage to you.


12. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi)







[Names: Wists, Sarat, Jyesthatatim, Praticinam, Sukrapah]
Yogi, established you are in the rules of yamas
and niyamas, the discipline of social and personal purity.
This is your natural element, a very home and blessed
state of being.


Cleansed of ignorance and suffering, peaceful at
heart, you explore, follow and advance in that state of
yoga which, like that of the ancient Rshis and yogis old
and new, is supreme, powerful, instant and victorious,
remover of negativities, shaker of sin and giver of
strength, and which is the light residing in the deepest
cave of the heart. Man of love and peace, protect this
state of strength and purity invincible for yourself. And
may the powers of the divine, saviours and protectors
of life and energy, be with you and lead you on.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




13. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi)








[Names: Want, Suviro, Sanjagmano, Sukrasyadhisthanamasi]
You are good and bold, make others good and
bold, and come to the yajamana with all the wealth and
honour. Going forward in harmony with the earth and
heaven, shining bright and virtuous as by the light of
the sun, drive out the dark, attain peace of mind, and be
the haven and life-support of the creative and purifying
energy of humanity.


14. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi)


fasaa: un




[Names: Acchinnasya, Agnih]
Seeker of yoga, cool and excellent, bright and
brave, we are the generous source, givers of continuous
undisturbed stream of the wealth of life and yoga to
you. May that first original and universal culture of life
bless you. May the teacher, bright as Agni, deep as the
ocean, and benevolent as the sun be your foremost


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




15. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi)






[Names: Gard, Heat, Trmpantu]
The first friend, master of knowledge, worshipper
of the Divine Voice, Veda, is Brihaspati, lord of the
power and vision of yoga. For him and in his honour,
speak the most sacred words and offer him the sweetest
distilled soma. Go to him as you approach agni, the
sacred fire, and in the spirit of yajna treat him with the
most wanted, most loved, most cherished offering with
the utmost courtesy and respect in words of the highest
reverence.


16. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi)


guuureidu uer fore a faut ufasit Refa a




[Names: Imamapam, Upayama]
This ruler of the republic, like the bright moon in
the womb of the vast space covering other lights in the
celestial regions, inspires and moves about in orbit
majestically, powerful as the sun in the battle of the
waters. Men of knowledge and wisdom advise him with


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the gift of knowledge and policy just as freely as a
teacher teaches the disciple. Accepted (by will),
consecrated (through yajna), positioned in the laws and
structure of the republic, we accept and honour you for
the defence of the society and elimination of the
enemies.


17. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi)


wirage ue




Ruler and Head of the republic, lord of power
and wealth, this land and its governance is your haven,
the very meaning of your existence.


The enlightened ruler and the people, both
dynamic and intelligent, working at the speed of the
mind, sharp as an arrow and strong as adamant, think
hard and plan for the nation. In the light of his glory
shining in all directions and under the protection of the
fighters of this man of a mighty host working at his
command, they shine in peace and burn in war.


Protect and serve the people. Free of the enemies
as you are, may the divine powers who protect the brave
help and lead you on. Be invincible.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




18. (Prajapati Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi)






[Names: Wurm, Went, Suprajah]
Just and enlightened head of the nation, enlighten
the people as reborn, and shower the yajamanas of this
social and development yajna with all-round wealth and
nourishment. Dynamic and inspiring, going along with
earth and heaven in harmony, with the light of
discrimination, you are the ideal and ultimate resort of
the enlightened. And by the dazzling brilliance of your
discrimination, the enemies are overthrown.


19. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi)






[Names: Apsuksito]
Eleven vital powers are there above, existing by
their own virtue (prana, apana, vyana, udana and
samana, naga, kurma, krikala, devadatta and
dhananjaya: these are the vital pranic energies, and the
eleventh is the soul). There are eleven on the earth
existing by their own virtue (earth, water, fire, air and
space: these are the elements; sun, moon, nakshatra
ahankara, mahat and prakriti: these are objects and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




modes of nature). There are eleven in the vital energy
(prana), existing by their own virtue (ear, skin, eye,
tongue, nose, speech, hands, legs, two organs of
excretion, and mind: these are organs of perception and
volition). May all these powers of life and nature join
and contribute to this common yajna of the ruler and
the people.


20. (Yajna Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi)






[Names: Pahi]
pahi.

You are accepted, sanctified and positioned in the
laws and structure of this social yajna of the nation.
(By virtue of your political wisdom and humility) you
are the first and best oblation of this social yajna, self-
sacrificing promoter of thought, science and economy.
Protect and advance this yajna. Support and advance
the yajnapati, men of law and justice, polity and
economy. Protect and advance Vishnu, man of science
and spiritual knowledge, and may Vishnu strengthen
you with the virtues of mind and character and advance
you in social and economic progress. Protect and
promote all the creative, constructive and productive
activities of this national yajna.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




21. (Soma Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi)


"rd: vad art: was es spare tad




[Names: Aara, Somah]
Soma flows. Soma flows and is purified. Soma
is purified and is offered for sacrifice. So does the ruler
flow, issues in action, and, through action, is purified,


The ruler is sanctified and dedicated to the
Brahamana sub-system (learning, education and
research), to the Kshatra sub-system (defence and
governance), to the devoted yajamana, participant in
the creative activities of the system, for food and energy,
for waters, herbs and vegetation, for earth and heaven,
for good life and conduct, for all the noble people of
the land.


Ruler of the nation, this life, this land, this socio-
political system is your haven and your justification.
You are accepted, sanctified and honoured for all the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




22. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi)






[Names: Tara, Warf, Yatta]
Indra, meritorious man of arms, self-controlled
and established in the rules of law, good conduct and
service of the nation, I appoint you as commander of
the army in the service of Indra, lord of the land —
great is he, long-lived he be! Great is your work, a life-
time undertaking. For that you are appointed. For
Vishnu, lord supreme, for yajana, for the nation you are
consecrated. For the lord’s songs of praise, to the noble
people, to the health and continuance of the social yajna
of the land, to the defence and advancement of the noble
powers, you are dedicated. This is now your haven, your
very being, the meaning and justification of your


23. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vatsara Kashyapa Rshi)


efe em Revel uut erie


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Mitravarunabhyam]
Head of the council, protector of the good and
the noble people, I select you for the progress of this
social yajna (from agnihotra upto the governance of the
land) for the noble people of love, friendship and


Protector of the men of knowledge, I appoint you
in the service of Indra, the ruler, man of power, majesty
and grace, for the advancement of this social yajna of
unity and cooperation.


Man of science and technology, protector of
higher and astral sciences, I welcome you for the
progress of this technological yajna for the realization
of the power of heat and light.


Man of science and industry, protector of the men
of scientific and industrial enterprise, I sanctify you for
the promotion of the yajnic realisation of electric and
water power.


Teacher and man of education, promoter of
education and yoga-vidya, I consecrate you for the
promotion of social and ethical education as a yajna for
the improvement of administration and the collective
yoga of ethical governance of the land.


Man of knowledge, friend of the spiritual people,
I dedicate you to the advancement of the sacred yajna


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of moral and spiritual values for the realization of
Divinity and knowledge of the shastras.


24. (Vishvedeva Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi)






[Names: Murddhanam, Kavim]
Men of knowledge (of defence science) study and
light the fire — refulgent and universal presence,
forehead of the light of heaven come down to join the
earth with its properties, born of the truth and force of
the universal law and reality, given to the comfort and
joy of the world, a guest of honour for all the people,
source of power for industrial enterprises, the light that
reveals everything to man. (Light the fire, use it for
defence and progress).


25. (Vaishwanara Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi)






[Names: Dhruvam, Somamava]
Vaishwanara, Lord Supreme of the world, Indra,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Lord of power and glory, Soma, Lord Creator and giver
of peace and joy, you can be reached through the
discipline of *yamas' and ‘niyamas’, rules of social and
personal ethics ranging from love and non-violence to
total surrender to you. You are firm, inviolable base of
the stability of the stars and planets, firmest of the firm,
most imperishable of the imperishables (i.e., above the
original prakrti and the souls). This universe and the
laws of existence are pervaded by you — they are like
your universal home. Life and light of the world, Lord
of peace and joy, firm and eternal, to you, with a mind
of inviolable faith, in words of sincerity, we surrender
in obedience and homage. Lord of power and glory, let
our people be free of all enemies, let our nation be of
one and equal mind.


26. (Yajna Devata, Devashrava Rshi)


aed ga cene aesaremideqa feraotat-
wuwerq | aada aR em a: ufeard d were






[Names: Yaste, Adhvaryorva]
Host and master of yajna, whatever part of yajna
offerings goes over the earth and to the sky with the
wind, and whatever part gone up from the sacred lap of
the earth and the womb of space is released from the
clouds, and whatever part goes up from the hota and
the adhvaryu (the priests) and proclaims the virtues of
the performance, all that, in words of truth, with sincerity
of mind and honest conviction, I say, comes to bless


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




you. All the devotees of yajna and men of learning and
wisdom rise in lustre and look up to you.


27. (Yajnapati Devata, Devashrava Rshi)


acia ade wen maaha A delat ada




[Names: Pranaya]
Lord and giver of the light of life, bless me with
the light of knowledge and sanctify the pranic energy
of my heart. Lord and giver of lustre, bless me with the
glow of health and nourishment and energize the vyana
vitality of my body. Lord and giver of vigour, bless me
with the passion for action through the udana energy in
my mind. Lord and giver of the force of truth and
conviction, bless me with the courage of conviction and
the power of speech. Lord and giver of the ambition of
enlightenment and strength of the spirit, bless me with
the light of self-knowledge and brilliance of intelligence.
Lord of omniscience and giver of speech, bless me with
the revelation of the voice divine and consecrate my
ear. Lord and giver of light and beauty (like the sun and
moon), venerable teacher of the teachers, bless me with
the celestial vision of the eyes to see and reveal the
beauty of the mystery of existence.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




28. (Yajnapati Devata, Devashrava Rshi)






[Names: Atmane]
Lord and giver of the light of the soul, bless me
with the light of the soul and awareness of the self. Lord
and giver of the brilliance of personality, bless me with
the light of knowledge and power of yoga. Lord and
giver of life, bless me with the glow of health and gift
of longevity. Lord and giver of brilliance, and you,
teacher and seeker of brilliance, both of you, bless the
entire people with the strength and ambition to be great
and glorious.


29. (Prajapati Devata, Devashrava Rshi)




[Names: Gust, Yasya]
suviro viraih suposah posaih.


Who are you? Which one (in rank/position) are
you? Whose (son/appointee) are you? What name are
you, the name by which we would know you, and the
one we would serve with sumptuous entertainment on
soma?


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




I love and want the beauty of the earth, the
vastness of the sky and the light of heaven. I want to
have many noble people by the people. I want to be a
great hero of heroes by the heroes. I want to be well-
provided, with nourishments (of the land).


(I am none by myself alone, I am one and many
at once, by virtue of the people.)


30. (Prajapati Devata, Devashrava Rshi)


was ade veraemrdétarsfar regm




[Names: Sukraya, Sucaye]
Lord/People of the land, accepted, sanctified and
positioned you are in the laws and the structure of the
land. Therefore I/we accept you for the month of Chaitra,
for the month of Vaishakha, for the month of Jyeshtha,
for the month of Ashadha, for the month of Shravana,
for the month fo Bhadra, for the month of Ashwina, for
the month of Kartika, for the month of Marga-shirsha,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




for the month of Pausha, for the month of Magha, for
the month of Phalguna for the defence and security of
the power and safety of all (within the laws of the state
through monthly meetings of the Head of the state and
the representatives of the people).


31. (Indragni Devate, Vishwamitra Rshi)
wbeftsmdasqd What ava | ster uid




[Names: Baam]
Ruler and the Councillors, both brilliant and
powerful as Indra and Agni (power and fire), come and,
with words of enlightenment, create for us the wanted
joy and prosperity. With your knowledge and mind, and
our suggestions and request, guard this land and protect
the prosperity of the people.


People of the land/Ruler and the Councillors,
accepted and positioned you are in the laws and
constitution of the state. You (the people) are dedicated
to Indra and Agni (the ruler and the council), and
accepted in law. You, the ruler and the councillors, are
dedicated to Indra and Agni, Lord of Power and
knowledge, and Lord of the people and the land. This
constitution and this land is your mainstay, the meaning
and justification of your being and position.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




32. (Vishvedeva Devata, Trishoka Rshi)






[Names: Asaa, Aiert, Agnimindhate, Agnimindhat, Yesamindro]
The scholar councillors light the fire of scientific
yajna and, working in proper form, cover the sky with
fragrance (machines and missiles). Youthful and friendly
is their ruler who is accepted and honoured in the land
for his qualities of Dharma, knowledge and man-
management. President and ruler, this land and its
governance is your mainstay and you are here for the
service of Indra and Agni, power and enlightenment of
the people.


33. (Vishvedeva Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)






[Names: Omasascarsanidhrto, Dasvanso]
Men and women of learning and wisdom, best
minds of the land, supporters and protectors of the
people, generous benefactors of the generous givers,
come to this yajna of education and receive this child
for instruction.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Young learner, you are initiated and consecrated
in the discipline of this sacred institution by the
venerable teachers. This institution, these teachers, this
programme, this now is your home and life. You are
dedicated and committed to the service and support of
the good and the enlightened people with reverence.


34. (Vishvedeva Devata, Gritsamada Rshi)


[Names: Edam]
Learned and wise people, come and sit on this
seat, and listen to my prayer.


Young learner, you are accepted and consecrated
in the rules of this institution by the learned teachers.
This is now your home. You are dedicated to the support
and service of the good and the wise in faith and
reverence.


35. (Prajapati Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)
vem Hec usa




[Names: Marutva, Tava, Sura, Marutvata, Marutvate, Marutvat]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Glorious ruler of this noble and powerful people,
support, protect and advance this yajna of education in
this world as you have already tasted the sweets of your
efforts in this field. Hero of the land, dedicated people
of vision, poets and scholars of yajna, follow your
policies and enjoy your protection under your
benevolent rule. Accepted and consecrated you are in
the laws of this land for the glory of the nation and the
welfare of the people. We dedicate you to the glory of
the nation and welfare of the people.


36. (Prajapati Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)
[Names: Tedd]
Tiasa ver Fectasuy er age car Tata




[Names: Marutvantam, Marutvanta, Visvasahamavase]
We, men of vision, poets and scholars, call upon
and praise you for new modes of defence and protection,
Indra, glorious ruler of the land, leader of a great people,
first and best of all, dynamic and progressive saviour
against suffering and evil, celestially virtuous, able


Ruler, you are accepted and consecrated in the
rules and structure of the state for the glory of Indra
and Maruts, glory of the land and welfare of the people.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




This land and its protection, now, is your home and
justification. We dedicate you to the glory of the land
and the welfare of its people. We accept and honour
you, a man of law, discipline and commitment as you
are, for the strength and glory of the people.


37. (Prajapati Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)






[Names: Hecdd, Sajosa, Jahi]
Man of love for all, joy and power, Indra,
commander of the army, attended with forces swift as
the wind, scholarly, fearless and brave, destroyer of the
enemy, wipe out the enemy host, eliminate those who
destroy happiness and cause suffering to mankind, and
make us free and fearless from all sides. And, just as
the sun pours out the waters when it breaks the cloud
Vritra with the winds and drinks to the health of the
earth and her people, so do you drink with your friends
and allies to the joy of Soma and success.


Accepted and consecrated you are in the rules of
the army and the laws of the land. I appoint you in the
service of the lord of the land and head of her people.
Now the rules, the law, the army, defence of the land
and freedom of the people: this is your home and haven,
the very meaning and purpose of your life. You are


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




consecrated and dedicated to the people and the lord of
the land.


38. (Prajapati Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)




[Names: Setters]
ver Hecdq use




[Names: Marutvan, Asificasva]
Indra, head of the council/commander of the
army, leader of the people/army, first and best among
all, you are a man of honour and power. For joy and for
the battles, drink soma according to your taste and
capacity with every meal. Stimulate your appetite with
draughts of the best and the choicest sweets of juices.
You are intelligent and brilliant for every occasion of


Accepted and consecrated you are in the laws of
the land and rules of the council/army. We honour and
celebrate you in the service of the lord of the land and
head of the people. You are dedicated and committed to
the honour of the land and the welfare of the people for
the development of airy weapons and missiles (marut-
weapons). This commitment, this dedication, now is
your haven, the very meaning and purpose of your


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




39. (Prajapati Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi)



[Names: Terareiifurussa, Mahan, Asmadryagvavrdhe]
Lord of the universe, you are great and adorable,
compassionate and so close to humans, giver of bliss to
the people, lord of knowledge secular and sacred, of
omniscient knower of us all, just and kind with those
who do good. We grow and rise in strength, power and
prowess and honour only with His grace.


Lord of light, you can be realised only through
the rules of yama and niyama and the discipline of yoga.
He resides in the light of the heart. For the realisation
of the glory of that light we worship Him. For His


[Names: Greatness]
40. (Prajapati Devata, Vatsa Rshi)




[Names: Stomairvatsasya]
The Lord is great, Lord of power and glory who,
like the cloud laden with rain, showers the worshipper—


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




who sends up his songs of praise natural as a child's—
with light and lustre. In the light of that glory, we grow
in body, mind and soul.


Lord of us all, you can be reached only through
the discipline of yoga. You reside in the light of your
glory revealed in the heart. We worship you for the
realization of that glory, for the attainment of that infinite
love and compassion.


41. (Surya Devata, Praskanva Rshi)



[Names: Ulddad]
Just as the rays of the sun carry the light of the
sun to the world to reveal the glory of the sun for all to
see and realise, so do the manifestation of the Supreme
Light and Spirit reveal the glory of the Lord for all to
see and realise the presence of the power and the spirit.


So also do the words of the Rishi reveal the truth
of existence and the glory of the creator to help us realise
the presence of the Lord of Creation.


42. (Surya Devata, Kutsa Rshi)


Carat wx




[Names: Citram, Varunasyagneh, Varunasyagne]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




There arises the sun, wonderful splendour of the
gods, the light and eye of Mitra, Varuna and Agni, filling
the earth, the sky and the heaven with its glory, and
soul of the world moving and unmoving. This is the
divine voice. This is the oblation for him.


So is the Lord Creator and Supreme Spirit of the
universe, the light of lights, life of life and the real power
of the gods. That alone is the object of worship.


43. (Antaryami jagadeeshwara Devata, Angirasa Rshi)






[Names: Guat]
Agni, Lord of light and knowledge, you know
all the paths of the world into the treasures of wealth,
(the science of yoga also). Take us, lead us on by the
right path to the wealth of life, and remove from our
heart all the sin and evil. We sing in praise of divine
glory in all humility from the core of our heart. Bless us
with success in Dharma, artha, kama and moksha
through yoga and the divine voice, the Veda.


44. (Prajapati Devata, Angirasa Rshi)






All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




May this warrior, agni, clear the path for us. May
this warrior, breaking through the enemy lines in front,
advance on and on. May this one, fighting in the thick
of battle, win the battles one after another. And may
this one win the victory over the enemies and rejoice.
(May one look after the wounded and treat them with
medicine.)


45. (Prajapati Devata, Angirasa Rshi)
sud uem Ud agate fa ve usa aR




[Names: Rupena]
With a descerning eye, I see the various grades
of ability among you. The one who knows you all and
knows the world may form you into different classes
and councils for appropriate jobs. The highest in
intelligence may touch the skies — realise the divine
presence and the eternal values of life and action. Ruler
of the people, with the members of the council, by the
path of truth, act and move on. Men of golden
generosity, go ahead on the path of Dharma with charity.
(The ruler should constitute three councils: The Council
of Education, Vidyarya Sabha, The Council of
Governance, Rajarya Sabha, and the Council of Dharma,
Dharmarya Sabha, to assist and advise him in the
governance and administration of the country.)


46. (Vidvans Devata, Angirasa Rshi)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Brahmanamadya, Asmadrata]
avisata.

I go and meet a Brahmana, a virtuous man of
divinity and divine knowledge, of illustrious parentage
with a heart of parental love, venerable man of vision
and discrimination who has realized the soul of the
Veda-mantras, a man of real gifts of gold — generous,
obliging, giving, redeeming all those who reach him.


Go to the generous man of knowledge, wisdom
and virtue, give freely, and the gifts will turn to blessings
and come back to you to enrich your soul.


47. (Varuna Devata, Angirasa Rshi)






[Names: Garg, Asyada, Rudraya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




May Varuna, man of knowledge and
discrimination, assign me to a teacher of Vasu's standing
of 24 years so that I become a Vasu brahmachari
(graduate) of agni's brilliance and have the joy of
scientific truth and reality. May health and longevity
come to the giver, the teacher. May comfort and
prosperity come to the receiver, the disciple.


May Varuna, man of knowledge and
discrimination, assign me to a teacher of Rudra's
standing of 44 years so that I become a Rudra
brahmachari (graduate) of Rudra's justice and power
and have the joy of eternal knowledge of the world and
heaven. May the strength of pranic vitality come to the
giver, the teacher, and a life-time of health and
prosperity to the receiver, the disciple.


May Varuna assign me to a teacher of the Aditya
order of 48 years standing so that I become an Aditya
graduate of Brihaspati's knowledge of the Vedas and
have the bliss of eternal vision of life. May the sensitivity
of tactual and all other senses come to the giver, and
the eternal joy of life and vision come to the receiver,
to me.


May Varuna assign me to a preceptor who has,
through yoga practice, transcended the ups and downs
of worldly existence so that I realise in practice the
pleasures of home-life and their value against a
comprehensive picture of life and death and attain,
through living, the eternal ananda of Moksha. May
divine realisation come to the giver, the preceptor, and
the joy of life and ultimate bliss of eternity come to the
receiver, to me.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




48. (Atma Devata, Angirasa Rshi)




[Names: Satchel, Satara, Kamo]
Who gives? For whom ....? Desire gives. Gives


for desire. Desire is the giver. Desire is the receiver. It
is all desire. Love for you! For fulfilment.


Who gives the fruit of karma? To whom does the
giver give the fruit of karma? Ishwara, Divine love and
desire, gives the fruit of karma. He gives the fruit of
karma to the jiva, the soul, who desires and acts the
karma. Ishwara is the object of love and desire for the
yogis. He is the giver. The jiva desires and acts out of
desire. He is the receiver of the fruit. It is all desire.
This is for you — the knowledge. It is for you to know.
(You cannot live without desire, and you cannot survive
only with desire. Integrate desire (kama) with Dharma
and Artha, and you’ll have both life and freedom




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1.  (Brihaspati-Soma Devate, Angirasa Rshi)








[Names: Visna]
Young man, Brahmachari of the Aditya order,
selected and accepted by me for marriage, you are now
bonded and consecrated in the sacred code of marriage
for a life-time. Observe the rules and discipline of
wedlock according to the Dharma-shastras meticulously
like the sun through the zodiacs in the year. Noble in
nature, culture, habit and conduct, this home, the life of
grihastha, is your paradise to live in and grow. Preserve
it, protect it, and let nothing violate or destroy this sweet
life and home.


2.  (Grihapati Maghava Devate, Angirasa Rshi)






Dear husband, man of excellence and power,
wealth and generosity, you are never dry or stingy or
non-obliging. You are always and readily with the
generous Giver. Your gifts in cash and kind, instruction
or advice, multiply and mature in no time and may they


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




come to me too! I dedicate myself to you for a life-time


3. (Aditya Grihapati Devate, Angirasa Rshi)






[Names: Turiyaditya]
Aditya, man of brilliance and discipline, you are
never funny or neglectful. Bright, generous and holy,
superior in wisdom and character, you are doing full
and fair justice to your life both present and future, just
as you would do to the transcendent state of your mind
and consciousness. If your sex-life and your mind and
senses are stable under control, free from indulgence,
you will enjoy the supreme bliss of happiness in a state
of enlightenment. Man of light and virtue, I accept you
and dedicate myself to you for a lifetime.


4. (Aditya Grihapati Devate, Kutsa Rshi)




[Names: Yajno]
The home-yajna of a noble husband and noble
wife brings joy and grace of the gods to the family.
Noble and brilliant people of wisdom and virtue, be
kind and and bless the home with peace and happiness.
May your wisdom, auspicious and blissful, which gives


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the knowledge of right conduct and behaviour, come
hither and always abide with us to guide us and protect
us from sin and evil. I accept you for dedication to the
noble and the brilliant people for a life-time.


5. — (Grihapatis Devata, Kutsa Rshi)


ade amaa aasia quit asqa: | qa




[Names: Vivasvannadityaisa, Sradasmai, Puman]
Brilliant young man, settled in this new home
with your wife, after leaving the ‘gurukul’, the school-
home, this family home is the yajna-vedi of your
grihastha where you will drink the ‘soma’ of joy for a
long long time. Man in this home life should observe
truth of word and conduct to make the married life happy
and successful. The home in which the husband and
wife observe the ethics and discipline (Dharma) of
marriage is blessed with wealth, growing prosperity and
the birth of a noble and virtuous son who helps and
protects his parents and fulfills their wishes.


6.  (Grihapatis Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi)






[Names: Vamamadya, Vamasya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Lord Savita, creator of this wonderful world of
joy and beauty, create for us a life of joy, joy today, joy
to morrow, and joy from day to day so that, doing good
actions, with our intelligence we may enjoy a happy
and prosperous family life in this home.


7. (Savita Grihapati Devate, Bharadwaja Rshi)


"feu wen




Accepted you are (as me) and consecrated in the
ethics and discipline of matrimony (grihastha dharma).
A devotee you are of Savita, creator of the universe,
and so gracious a giver of food and the wealth of life.
Give me the food for life and joy. Promote yajna,
promote the master devotee of yajna, for wealth, for
honour and generosity, for the grace of Savita, lord of
generation — for health, wealth and procreation — for
you and me.


8. (Vishwedeva Grihapatis Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi)
xe: uci




[Names: Visvebhyastva]
Dear husband, accepted you are (by me) and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




consecrated in the sacramental law and discipline of
marriage and firmly settled in a beautiful home. Healthy,
virile and handsome, salutations to you and good food
and drink. This home, this family, is now your haven
for life, the meaning and purpose of grihastha. I dedicate
you to all the noble people of the world and to all the
godly powers of nature, yes to all the great and noble


9.  (Grihapatis Vishvedevas Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi)




[Names: Risada, Aham, Aham]
guha yat.


Accepted and consecrated you are (along with
me) in the matrimonial Dharma. Noble man of peace
and brilliance, happy at heart, blest with wealth of men
and material, son of a mighty vaidic scholar, and blest
with a noble wife, I pray I (we) abide by the vows and
promises of wedlock and grow stronger and more and
more dedicated. And may all that is upfront and present
and may come hereafter and all the knowledge and
wisdom and all the mysteries hidden deep in the mind
of the saints and sages, may all this, like a father, nourish
my mind and soul. And with all this knowledge and all
their blessings, may I, both of us together, realise the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




presence of the light of life, the Supreme Soul of the
universe, here and hereafter.


10. (Grihapatis Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi)





[Names: Xadrerat, Agna, Prajapatirvrsasi]
Manly man of a darling wife, lord of brilliance
and joy, come and, with the inspiring poetry of Veda in
honour and praise of the Creator, and eliminater of
suffering, Twashta, drink the elixir of life with me.
Husband of an admirable wife, virile and generous like
the rain-god cloud, lover and guardian of people and
children, rain the shower of life and joy on me. Replete
with the seeds of life, sow the seed in me. Would-be
father of your child, virile and lustrous, I shall receive
and hold the seed and bear your son and spirit — the
Lord bless him — as brave and lustrous as you.


11. (Grihapatis Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi)
edi cat geasa ue]


[Names: Haryordhana]
Accepted and consecrated you are in the
sacramental dharma of marriage and the household,
carry on the business of the home like a leader, using


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




all the resources with joy and satisfaction to everybody.
Drive on this chariot of grihastha with the steeds of Indra
(i.e., men and materials) for the glory of Indra, Head of
the universal family. Manage your horses (resources)
and ever be strong, drinking the joy of life to the honour
and glory of the Lord of Bliss (Soma).


12. (Grihapatis Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi)




[Names: Mmaa]
Invited by you, blessed soul, to the celebration
of your power of horses, your wealth of land and cows,
and your culture of the divine voice, the Veda, admirer
of the Rks, lover of the Yajus and singer of the Samans,
I am delighted to enjoy what you have so generously


13. (Grihapatis Vishvedeva Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi)


—— areren iue e-




[Names: Devakrtasyainaso, Yaccaha]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




You are the redeemer from the sin committed by
the generous superman; you are the saviour from the
sin committed by the ordinary person; you are the
redeemer from the sins committed by the forefathers; you
are the redeemer from the sin committed by one's own
self; you are the redeemer from the sins begotten of sin.
Whatever the sin I have committed in a state of
knowledge, or I have committed in a state of ignorance
(or I might commit in future), you are the saviour from


14. (Grihapatis Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi)




Twashta, refiner of manners, behaviour, method,
and culture and generous giver of health, wealth and
knowledge, let us go forward with a noble mind, able
body, plenty of food and drink and the vigour and lustre
of life. Give us all-round wealth of life, and whatever is
wanting in us in health of body and mind, be gracious
to make up and complete.


15. (Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi)




[Names: Samindra]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Indra, Lord of power and honour, Maghavan,
Lord of wealth and knowledge, take us forward in a
healthy state of mind and sense at peace, comfortably,
with men of wisdom and brilliant intelligence, with the
vaidic voice of universal knowledge, and with our cows,
into the way of whatever is nobly done in the vaidic
tradition of universal values, and whatever is good
according to the noble genius of the superior people of
yajnic dedication and culture.


16. (Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi)
dada wea i aerate wur ase




[Names: Yaar]
Follow as we do the noble genius of superior
people among us, bless us Twashta, remover of the veils
of ignorance and giver of knowledge. By the bright day
and in the night, with the help and guidance of healthy
and intelligent scholars and sages, and with the gift of a
noble mind and concentration, bless us with the wealth
of life, knowledge, wisdom, health and culture, and
cleanse us of all the negativities and impurities of body
and mind.


17. (Vishvedeva Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Dhata]
Men and women of household, maintain the culture
and institutions of the family, give peace and comfort to
all, produce wealth for prosperity, look after your children
and others, protect and promote wealth and knowledge,
be brilliant and victorious, eliminate darkness with light,
create joy and happiness around, expand your noble
presence through noble works, and, through charity and
generosity, through good manners and good deeds, enjoy
life with your family and friends. Create wealth with good
work and keep it for the yajamana, the host-organizer of


18. (Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi)


wet gen




[Names: Suga, Bharamana]
Auspicious powers of nature/ Noble men of
brilliance, wisdom and generosity, efficient in creation,
production and management, conducting, maintaining
and enjoying this social yajna of production and
prosperity, we have created and obtained these
comfortable homes and valuable materials for you. Take
these and hold these for us for onward creation and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




19. (Vishvedeva Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi)




[Names: Jaksivamsah]
O brilliant and generous Lord of yajna, Agni/man
of knowledge, inspire to high acts of dharma and yajna
all those who come to your house anxious to receive
higher wealth and virtue.


Men of the household, all of you, eating and
drinking, enjoy the sacred voice of divinity, the food of
yajna and Dharma, the spirit of life and the bliss of


20. (Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi)






[Names: Vayafn, Rdhagaya]
Agni, man of knowledge and brilliance, we, the
house-holders in this family yajna of the household
going on here, we select and accept you as the priest (to
conduct and guide it). Expert man of yajna, knowing
the spirit and essence of it, come close, join and enrich
this yajna which is the creator and giver of prosperity.
And not only join and conduct, but also come again
and be blest with peace and prosperity.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




21. (Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi)






[Names: Mana]
Man of the household, brilliant and generous,
knowing the nature, properties and movements of the
dynamic earth, having known the movements, know
further and go further, and deeper inside it know the
wealth and attain prosperity.


Man of the household, brilliant and generous,
master of your sense and mind, with the voice of the
Veda and virtuous action, bring yajna into the practical
scientific acts of life and hold on to the yajnic way of

22. (Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi)


[Names: Weed]
vere Ru




House-holder, man of yajna, with the voice of
the Veda and virtuous acts of dharma, do the yajna of
hospitality to the learned. Observe the collective yajna
of loyalty and reverence to the head of the nation. Be
true to your inner self.


House-holder, observer of the ritual and the social
yajna, this household yajna of yours, performed with


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the hymns of the Veda, inspiring to the young heroes of
the nation, is for the safety and education of the people.
Observe it with the voice of truth and justice in the
business of the nation.


23. (Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi)




[Names: Nest, Uruin, Scakara, Apade]
pasah.

Ruler and President of the Council, be not angry
and poisonous as a snake, nor ferocious as a serpent.
Be not false, hurtful and heart-breaking in speech. Be a
ruler shining brilliant, supreme in virtue. Do excellently
as behoves your chosen status. Make the highways of
justice broad in honour and worship to the sun, the
supreme light of the world, for all to see and follow the
light so that none may stray into the paths of evil. Let
the rule of law and the penal code be as firm and
inviolable as the chains of Varuna and the thunderbolt
of Indra.


24. (Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi)




[Names: Bran]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Agneranikamapa, Damedame]
Agni, brilliant and generous house-holder, enter
the flames of fire and the depth of waters and know
their secrets of power. Protector of the waters, digging
into and protecting the material wealth of the earth and
ocean, go from house to house, and light the fire of
material knowledge of energy and its applications. Let
the tongue of the truthful man taste the sweets of life
and proclaim.


25. (Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi)




[Names: Gere, Samudre, Yajnasya]
Yajnapati, pursuant of yajna, we put your heart
and mind in touch with vital energies and dynamic
modes of social conduct and behaviour revealed in the
hymns of the Vedas dealing with foods, source
materials, and yajnic cooperation of the community. Let
your searching mind go deep down into the ocean and
rise up into the waters of space. And then celestial waters
and rejuvenating herbs would emerge into your mind's
eye of discovery (for common good).


26. (Grihapati Devata, Atri Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Devirapa, Somaisa]
Women, bright, educated and meritorious, this
grihasthashram, sacred family-home, is your real world
of existence. Keep it, maintain it, manage it well with
love and competence.


Noble man of peace, love and honour, this family-
home is your intimate world of existence. Find peace
and fulfilment here. Keep it, maintain it. Guard it. Guard


27. (Dampati Devate, Atri Rshi)


[Names: Frag, Reece]
seratesefiafa non


[Names: Devanam]
Initiated and consecrated couple in grihastha,
gentle, noble and lovable virtuous producers of wealth,


you are one of the bright, meritorious and generous
community. You are an instrument of the devas.


Deva, lord of the bright and the generous, living
with the noble ones and the ordinary people, I pray,
that I keep away from any sin or misconduct or
misbehaviour committed with the mind and senses, or
with the body, or by the ordinary people or even by the
superior ones. Save me from violence to Dharma —
such violence is the root of all sin and crime.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




28. (Dampati Devata, Atri Rshi)


"E lI


[Names: Ejatu, Evayam, Vayurejati]
May the foetus of the tenth month stir with its
membrane-cover just as this wind moves, just as the
sea moves. And may this foetus of the tenth month be
born (safe and alive) with the membrane cover.


29. (Dampati Devata, Atri Rshi)





[Names: Wrap, Yasyai, Anganyahruta]
Dear wife, for whom your sacred foetus is meant,
for whom the pure and perfect womb of yours is meant,
by that mother — you partner — may I beget a child
with full and perfect limbs of the body through the


30. (Dampati Devata, Atri Rshi)


[Names: West]
minon



[Names: Purudasmo, Ekapadim]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




The man of mighty deeds, who eliminates
suffering and creates joy, of versatile attainments, bright
and honourable, constant and resolute, should wait for
the great new arrival.


Men of the household, cultivate the vaidic culture
of one, two, three, four and eight steps of attainment:
one: Aum; two: worldly fulfilment and the freedom of
moksha; three: the joy of the truth of word and the health
of body and mind; four: the attainment of Dharma,
wealth, fulfilment of desire, and moksha; eight: the joy
of all the four classes and all the four stages of life
(Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra,
Brahmacharya, Grihastha, Vanaprastha and Sanyasa).
Build homes for the people and advance in life.


31. (Dampati Devate, Gotama Rshi)



Married couples, brilliant and great in many ways,
blest with beauty, wealth, yajna and knowledge,
wherever in a home you find superior people of noble
nature, character and action, that family is most
dedicated to mother earth and the Veda.


32. (Dampati Devate, Medhatithi Rshi)




[Names: Haaa, Piprtam]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Married couples, you are like the vast and brilliant
sky and the rich, fertile and forbearing earth. Bless this
home-yajna of our grihastha with all the joys and fill
this home with nourishment and familial support of the


33. (Grihapatis Devata, Gotama Rshi)






[Names: Hurd, Arvacinain]
Man of the household, destroyer of the enemy,
come and sit in this chariot of grihastha in which are
yoked two ‘horses’, Draw and Hold (attraction and
preservation or yoga and kshema). And if your mind
sometime is down, then, with the voice of the Veda bring
it up to peace, stand as a rock, and shower like a cloud
with joy. You are accepted and consecrated in the
matrimonial dharma for the sixteenfold honour and
glory of life. This grihastha is now your haven. You are
given up and dedicated to this sixteenfold programme
of the family life.


34. (Grihapati Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)




[Names: Assa, Agsu]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Yuksva, Somapa]
Indra, hero of the household, man of honour and
protector of your happy home, yoke your horses of
beautiful hair, strong and fast, shooting to the destination
And then listen to our voice and act accordingly.


You are accepted and consecrated in the sacred
discipline of marriage for the sixteenfold honour and
sanctity of life in marriage. This grihastha is now your
haven of existence. You are dedicated and given up to
the sixteenfold programme of family honour.


35. (Grihapati Devata, Gotama Rshi)






[Names: Indramiddhari, Rsinam, Sodasina]
Two horses (yoga and kshema) carry Indra, hero
of inviolable honour and power and head of the nation-
family. Indra, protector of the honour of the land, listen
to the Rishis' songs of the praise of the heroes, go close
to the yajna-assemblies of the people, listen and act


You are anointed and consecrated in the sacred
law and constitution of the land for the sixteenfold
honour and glory of the nation: This honour and glory


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




now is your haven of life, the very purpose and meaning
of your office and existence. The people look up to you
for the sixteen-fold honour and prosperity of the nation.


36. (Parameshwara Devata, Vivaswan Rshi)


[Names: Sardites]
wud a aise nau



[Names: Yasmanna, Prajapatih]
None other ever existent is beyond Him, Him who
pervades and transcends all the worlds of the universe.
Father of His creation, ever rejoicing with His children,
Lord of sixteen powers, full and complete, He
illuminates the three lights of the world and reigns —
the One sole and absolute Lord existent, omniscient and
blissful. (The three lights are fire, electricity and the
sun. The sixteen powers are: will, energy, faith, earth,
austerity, Word, life (jiva) and language).


37. (Samrat & Mandalika Devate, Vivaswan Rshi)


[Names: Fars]
wakeat vet terri areet Seren are aera
[Names: Indrasca, Varunasca, Tayorahamanu]
Indra, the sovereign, reigns supreme over all.
Varuna, the ruler, rules in specific areas. Those two first


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




provide this food for you.


I eat my share of the food after those two. Both
of you, the people and the government, with the sacred
voice of the Veda which reveals the secrets of living
together in love and cooperation, be happy and
prosperous with full vigour.


38. (Raja, Grihapati Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi)




[Names: Grey, Dadhadrayim]
Agni/Ruler, lord of knowledge and power, you
are noble with noble actions, first among all of noble
achievement. Purify us, and bless us with lustre, noble
vitality and prowess, wealth and good health with
nourishments of body and mind.


Noble ruler, accepted you are and consecrated in
the laws and constitution of the nation for the honour
and brilliance of the people and the land. This honour
and prestige, the nation, is now your haven, the reason
and justification of your being. We dedicate you to the
achievement of honour and glory.

Agni, lord of light and brilliance of action, you
are lustrous and honourable among the brilliant and the
generous rulers. I pray I be brilliant and honourable
among the people.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




39. (Raja, Grihapati Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi)

[Names: Prsa, Atase, Uttisthannojasa, Sipre, Somamindra, Indraujisthaujisthastvam]
Indra, ruler of the land, lover and achiever of
honour, rising in lustre (with the strength of body, mind
and soul and the power of the council and the army),
having drunk the soma of victory over the enemies,
shake the visors of your helmet with joy and self-esteem.


Accepted you are by us for the governance and
administration of the nation, and consecrated you are
in the laws and constitution for the achievement of light
and glory like that of the sun. This consecration now is
the home and haven of your life, the very meaning of
your existence. We dedicate you to the light of the world,
the sun, and the glory of the nation.


Lord of the land, brilliant in knowledge and
justice, most shining you are among the noble and the
generous personalities of the country. I pray that I may
be brilliant and most shining among the people.


40. (Grihapati, Raja Devata, Praskanva Rshi)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Adrsramasya, Bhrajanto]
sam.


Just as the bright rays of light (fire, sun, and
electricity) shine on things to show them to the world,
similarly, I pray, I may see the people and other things
in the divine light of the Lord.


Accepted and sanctified you are in the rules and
laws of the land to shine in the business of the nation
like the sun. This is now your haven and home. You are
dedicated to the Sun, Lord Supreme of the universe, to
shine in life.


Ruler of the land, bright and sunny in knowledge
and justice, you are the brightest among the brilliant. I
pray I may shine the brightest among the people.


41. (Surya Devata, Praskanva Rshi)
3g wi adad da deta chad: 1 get farata
Gata vem aat ise




[Names: Drse]
Just as the rays of the sun carry the light of the
sun for the world to see the sun, surely so the lights of
creation and the eyes of the seers reveal the light of the
Lord Creator, refulgent and omniscient of all that is born,
for the world to see.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Lord of the universe, you are acceptable, and
perceiveable through the discipline of yama and niyama
and the inner eye, for the realisation of your glory and
universal presence. This universe is your home of
presence and we dedicate ourselves to you for the
attainment of your glory and the Light of Life.


42. (Patni Devata, Kusuruvindu Rshi)




[Names: Rata, Ajighra, Punarurja]
rayih.

Generous and venerable as mother earth, come,
fill the pitcher and smell it to taste. May sweet juices
come to you in plenty and fill the home. Versatile in
virtue, rich in food and overflowing with milk, come
again and fill us with vigour and energy. And then,
again, with your love and grace, may I be enriched with
the wealth of life.


43. (Patni Devata, Kusuruvindu Rshi)
[Names: Vaiasiea]
fastfa 1 wat dsarea amit Gab at and
SET I3




[Names: Sarasvati]
Blessed woman, mistress of the home: Voice of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the divine worthy of praise, love abiding in the heart,
libation for the gods and fragrance of yajna, love and
desire incarnate, beauty of the moon, brilliance of virtue,
unbreakable and boundless, inexhaustible stream of
knowledge and generosity, forbearance of mother earth,
celebrity of the world: these are your names, dear wife,
inviolable, which describe woman's nature and
character. Speak to me of the good things I ought to do.


44. (Indra Devata, Shasa Rshi)






[Names: Arara]
Indra, commander of the army, destroy our
enemies, keep the enemy hoards down. Him who wants
to beat us into slavery, throw down into the dark.


Accepted you are by the people and consecrated
in the rules and tactics of the army for the defence of
the land and destruction of the enemy. This is now your
haven and home, the sole purpose of your office. We
dedicate you to the defence and security of the land and
to the honour of the nation.


45. (Ishwara, President/Raja Devata, Shasa Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Vacaspatim]
To-day, for our defence and advancement in yajna
(and battles of life), we invoke (call upon) Vishwakarma,
lord of speech and knowledge, lord of all actions and
dharmas, universal benefactor and lord of noble
performance, in action, hitting the mark fast as the mind.
May he listen and accept all our prayers and offerings
and come for our protection and support.


President of the council/commander of the army/
man of yajna/head of the family, accepted and
consecrated you are in the rules and discipline of life in
the service of the lord of action and lord of glory, for
the people and the land. This service, this yajna, this
action, is now your haven and home, the very meaning
and purpose of your life. We dedicate you to the service
of the lord of glory, the lord of action and progress.


46. (Vishvakarma Indra Devate, Shasa Rshi)


Sites cat fayakun «t AAR ata


ver fasach ines




[Names: Visvakarman, Tasmai]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Vishvakarma, lord of all actions and dharmas,
with vitalizing materials of yajna, strengthen the ruler
and make him an invincible protector of the people.
Let him grow mighty with ample means and materials.
To him, the people, as taught by the forefathers, bow in
homage.


Ruler, president of the council, accepted you are
by the people, and consecrated in the laws of the land
for service to the lord of action, Vishwakarma, and
honour of the nation (Indra). This service and this
honour now is your haven and home. You are dedicated
to the lord of action and dharma and the honour and
glory of the nation.


47. (Vishvakarma Indra Devate, Shasa Rshi)








[Names: Isat]
Vishvakarman : Accepted and honoured you are
in reverence as a teacher. Enlightening are your songs
of praise in the Anushtubh metre. Scholar of Gayatri
verses, I come to you to learn the science of fire. Master
of Trishtubh verses, I come to you for the secrets of
life's glory and prosperity. Scholar of Jagati verses, I
come to you to learn the nature, character and actions
of the noble, brilliant and generous leaders of the world.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




48. (Prajapatis Devata, Devas Rshis)








[Names: Asii, Vresinam, Bhandananam, Madhuntamanam]
Dear husband, if amongst the pure and spotless
people, you ever happen to waver, I shake you out of
that fickleness.


If amongst the gentle folk in speech and language,
love and manners, you happen to falter, I shake you out
of that embarrassment.


If amongst the graceful and the beatifying, you
happen to err toward roughness, I shake you out back


If in the company of the rejoicing folks in
festivity, you waver from self-control, I shake you out
back to temperance.


If amongst the sweetest and the most lovable folks
you waver from decency, I shake you back to civility.


You are pure and immaculate. I would always
warn you against going astray and urge upon you to
stay untainted in character as the day in the rays of the
sun.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




49. (Vishvedeva Prajapatis Devata, Devas Rshis)






[Names: Geum, Tart, Kakubham]
The excellence of the man’s image shines
everywhere. Bright and generous, purest of the pure on
top, noblest of the kind and beneficent, first among the
great leaders of men, joyous and gracious, the glory of
your name and reputation is irresistible. It is for that I
accept and elect you. For that dedication of yours to the
Lord of light and grandeur, blessed man, all hail and
success to you! This is the divine voice.


50. (Prajapatis Devata, Devas Rshis)
zarit firi masè uou



[Names: Usik, Somagneh, Somagne]
(Ruler and president of the council), brilliant man
of peace and honour, loving and lovable, be sure you
follow the path of love and greatness shown by the
learned and the wise leaders.


Brilliant man of generosity and grandeur, self-


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




controlled, be sure you follow the path of love and
greatness shown by the leaders of power and prosperity.


Brilliant man of knowledge and grace, friend of
ours, be sure you follow the path of goodness and virtue
loved by the noblest and the wisest men of the world.


51. (Prajapatis Grihasthas Devata, Devas Rshis)


dem wemel uu





[Names: Upasrjan, Rayasposamasmasu]
Here in the home is love and joy. Live and rejoice.

Here is constancy and autonomy. Be here with self-

control and self-dependency in truth of word and deed.


Beget a child for the mother, and may the child
sucking the mother, growing up among us, create wealth
and provide nourishment and hold it for us all in truth
of word and action.


52. (Prajapati Devata, Devas Rshis)





[Names: Satrasya, Divam]
You are the wealth and abundance of yajna-
session. Let us, through this session of yajna, expand


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




over the earth and rise above to reach the lights of
heaven and attain to immortality. Let us arise and reach
the regions of space to get super-terrestrial knowledge
and bring the joys of heaven on earth.


53. (Grihapatis Devata, Devas Rshis)




[Names: Yuvam, Vajrena, Dure]
suposah posaih.


You two, commander and personnel of the forces,
front-line fighters, attacking as lighting and defending
as rock, whosoever attack us with his army, destroy him
with the thunderbolt. And if the enemy force happen to
contact us, arise with force and drive them off. Valiant
hero, all round destroyer of the enemy, eliminate our
enemies totally from the face of the earth. On the earth,
in the sky, in heaven, anywhere, let us be strong in
manpower with brave people, heroic with noble heroes
rich in food, energy and materials, with plenty of good
food, energy and materials. (Let us be well-provided:
justify our existence, defend our self-awareness and
culture, and work for universal happiness.)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




54. (Parameshthi Prajapati Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)


"ferar ten faraha daret gar Aaa% N




[Names: Paramesthyabhidhitah, Somakrayanyam, Somakrayanya]
(What is the secret of happiness?) Prajapati, father
of His creatures, self-existent in eternal bliss, and self-
revealed in the divine voice of the Veda, worshipped in
meditation, good food honestly and amply obtained,
Savita, creator of life realized in truth, Vishwakarma,
maker of the world and lord giver of science and
technology, at heart, through all our commitments to life
and dedication to duty, and Pusha, giver of health and
vitality thanked in herbal treatment, all this with you,
and happiness is assured.


55. (Indra & others Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)






[Names: Sipivista, Mitrah, Mitra]
(Know the powers of nature, what has been
realized or ought to be realized by learned men) for
[Names: Electricity]
and cloud so close, magnetic energy that sustains the
worlds together, universal pranic energy, the unifying
universal soul immanent in humans and other creatures
enveloping the whole creation — all to be researched
and realized with reverence, faith, love, and the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




investment of mind, energy and money — (powers for
power, and soul for value).


56. (Vishvedeva Grihasthas Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)
[Names: Grassi]
Sool tlasitsdatarafeaatar: is N




[Names: Prohyamanah]
Conducted by scientific logic, carried through
special experiments, and seated in special cars, Soma,
wealth of energy, power and prosperity, has arrived.
Varuna, mighty water power, is here. Agni, heat energy,
is come in special fuels. Indra, electricity, is here potent
in yajna materials. Atharva, special energy, has arrived.


57. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)






Learned and wise scholars of the world, the energy
stored in particles and radiated in the sunrays, which is a
preservative power and source of comfort (Vishnu), the
explosion of energy from the sun (Yama), the cosmic
energy being created constantly (Vishnu), the vibrations
of pranic vitality (Vayu), generative particles of matter
and energy (shukra), and the pure seeds of life (shukra),


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




anyone who explores and analyses these is blest with
the secrets of life's existence and nourishment.


58. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)





[Names: Term]
Learned, wise and generous people of the world,
those who raised the libations in the ladles for the fire
and sent up the fragrance to the clouds, who dedicated
and raised their mind's energy for sacrifice and service,
who respected and served life as sacred, who spoke in
praise of the divine omnipresence of the all-seeing eye
of the Lord of existence, who enjoyed the soothing touch
of the air around and received the food sanctified by
yajna, they are the noble and brilliant ‘devas’, learned
and parental seniors, and reverential friends of humanity.


59. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)






[Names: Respeengerarela, Sannah, Savistha]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Hosts and participants of yajna who dig, design
and construct canals for sacramental bath, who launch
upon the sea for voyaging, who fill the sky with yajna
vapour, who stabilize people and their regions with their
power and lustre, who are most heroic with exploits of
their superior prowess, who are men of constancy and
forbearance, who are unostentatiously social and
universally friendly : these venerables are invited and
welcomed by people. Meet them. Those who do so are
happy and fortunate.


60. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)


[Names: Ramaga]
"qr sieve ei ch ot Ceara ea tr Ta ST o N




[Names: Devan]
Yajna rises to the heights of heaven and reaches
the *devas', the powers of light, and may I, from there,
receive the light and wealth of knowledge.


Yajna rises to middle regions of the clouds and
reaches humanity, and may I, from there, receive the
gifts of material wealth.


Yajna goes over across the earth and the seasons
of nature through the year and reaches the senior and
fatherly people, and may I, from there, receive the
comforts of the seasons and the blessings of the seniors.


Whichever region yajna reaches, from there, I


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




pray, I may receive the gifts of the true, the good and
the beautiful.


61. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)






[Names: Catustrim, Tesam, Thirty, Vasus, Rudras]
twelve Adityas, Indra, Prajapati and Nature) join, weave
and extend this yajnic web of creation, and feed it with
materials. And where nature leaves off, there, surely, I
take it on with the truth of word and action. And, I pray,
this yajna reach the devas, the learned and the wise.


62. (Yajna Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)


Carat eeu




[Names: Purutra]
The gifts of yajna spread out in many ways. They
expand in all the eight directions and reach the heights
of heaven.


That same yajna may bless my people with great
wealth and nourishments. And may I, with sacred speech
and good acts of Dharma, enjoy the blessing of a full and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




63. (Yajna Devata, Kashyapa Rshi)






[Names: Vajam]
Soma, man desirous of the honour and joy of life,
man of gold, speed and brave heroes, dedicate yourself
to yajna, treasure-home of universal nourishment, cows
and self-control over mind and senses. Cleanse yourself,
cleanse the environment, and enrich the world.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




1.  (Savita Devata, Indra & Brihaspati Rshis)





[Names: Divyo]
Deva Savita, lord of life, light the yajna (of Raj
Dharma), consecrate and promote yajna, inspire,
consecrate and promote the yajnapati (ruler of the land)
for honour and prosperity. Brilliant sustainer of the earth,
lord of the divine voice, purifier of intelligence, purify
and inspire our intelligence with the divine voice of Veda.
Generous purifier of food, purify and consecrate our
yajnic food and taste it with favour and pleasure.


2. (Indra Devata, Brihaspati Rshi)




[Names: Asah, Teas]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Dhruvasadam, Apsusadam, Prthivisadam]
sadam divisadam devasadam nakasadam-


Ruler of the land, firmly settled (with knowledge,
humility, yoga and Dharma) among the people, in their
heart and awareness, you are accepted and consecrated
in the rules and discipline of the state for the honour
and prosperity of the people. Loved and thus accepted,
I accept and elect you. This office now is your very life
and purpose. Most highly loved and respected, you are
now dedicated to Indra, honour and prosperity of the


Ruler of the country, saddled with the
management of water, food (milk, ghee and other
nourishments), and aviation, you are accepted by the
people by virtue of your discipline and respect for law
and constitution of the nation for the defence and honour
of the people. Loved and respected thus, I accept and
elect you. This office now is your very life and existence.
Most highly loved and respected, you are now
committed to the honour and glory of the nation.


President of the nations of the world, committed
as you are to the earth and its environment, to the skies,
to exploration of space, powers of nature and the brilliant
people, and the freedom and happiness of humanity,
you are accepted and consecrated by the people of the
world in the universal Dharma and nation's law for


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




absolute freedom and prosperity of the people of the
world. Accepted, loved and respected thus, I accept and
elect you. This office and its Dharma now is the very
meaning and purpose of your existence. Most highly
loved, respected and elected, we commit and dedicate
you to the honour and prosperity of humanity and to
the glory of the Lord of the universe.


3. (Indra Devata, Brihaspati Rshi)


a vere at aeaa sata car ud




[Names: Taras]
For the sake of Indra, lord of glory, and for you,
I take the life-giving essence of the waters (juices)
collected and ripened in the sun. And I take the finest
essence of the essences of waters and hold the
quintessence of vitality for the glow of health and life.


By virtue of your discipline and values and the
means at your command, you are accepted and
consecrated for the sake of honour and prosperity of
the nation. Loved and respected as you are, I accept
and elect you. This choice and consecration is now your
haven and home. Most loved and respected, you are
now committed and dedicated to the glory of Indra and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




4. (Raja, Rajadharma Devata, Brihaspati Rshi)




[Names: Graha, Samprcau]
Men and women of the land, who have collected
strength and energy from yajna-ahutis and knowledge
from the Vedas, communicate with the intelligent and
the inspired people and share with them the common
wisdom. For you and the dear members of their
community, I have procured ample food and energy.


With means and materials for the nation, you are
accepted and consecrated in the laws and values of the
nation for the honour and prosperity of the people.
Loved of the people and favourite of the Lord as you
are, I accept and elect you. This nation and this choice
now is your haven and home. Most loved and honoured,
you are now totally committed and dedicated to Indra,
lord of the people, the land and the world.


Ruler and the people, remain united for good
work. Join me to goodness and prosperity. Stay away
from evil, both of you. Keep us away from the evil-


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




5. (Savita Devata, Brihaspati Rshi)
Wee urat adie ara acter eni bif
fave yihad ade at da: dam at




[Names: Sree, Vajasya, Yasyamidam]
You are the thunder-bolt of lightning for the enemy.
This man, the commander/ruler would plan and win the
battle with you, the thunderous hero. In the business of
the battle we sing songs of praise, in noble words, in
honour of the mother, the great earth, one and indivisible.
On the earth where this whole world finds its haven and
home, on that same earth, we pray, Lord Savita, creator
of the world, may establish the rule of universal Dharma
for us.


6.  (Ashva Devata, Brihaspati Rshi)




[Names: Apsvantaramrtamapsu]
vajam set.
There is nectar in the waters, there is vitality of
health and longevity in the pranas. There is magical drug
power in the waters, top efficacy by which horses


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Sacred]
waters, may this man, ruler of the land, by virtue of
your fertile waves, moving fast and lofty, provide the
land and people with wanted food and energy. Men and
women of the land, with your power and prowess, fast,
lofty and tempestuous like the waves of the sea, with
the vitality of your pranic energy, and the fertility and
efficacy of the waters, be fast, passionate and ambitious
for the honour and progress of the land in war and peace


7. (Senapati Devata, Brihaspati Rshi)


[Names: Vato, Svamayunjamste]
Twenty-seven gandharvas (universal wind, the
mind and five main pranas, five subpranas, five organs
of sense, five organs of volition, and five subtle
elements) these possess and operate with speed in nature.
May these bless this man, commander of the forces,
with speed.


8. (Prajapati Devata, Brihaspati Rshi)








[Names: Sarg, Vataramha, Indrasyeva, Yunjantu]
Ruler, swift in response and action, be as fast as


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the speed of wind, be efficient and expert, concentrative
in the service of the nation, move and achieve honour
and glory as that of Indra, lord of the world. May the
Maruts, universal winds (men of encyclopaedic
knowledge), and Twashta, lord of refinement and
sophistication (the specialist) inspire your feet with
instant speed of motion.


9. (Vira Devata, Brihaspati Rshi)




[Names: Javo]
acaracca vate. Tena no vajin balavan balena


[Names: Vajino]
Man of power and speed (Vajin), man of
knowledge and ruler of the land, the speed and passion
that’s deep in your heart, that’s entered in the wings of
the eagle and in the velocity of the wind, by that speed
and passion, man of power and prowess, be the victor
of battles, and through fight and struggle, cross the
sufferings of life and the land.


Warriors of the land, fighting and doing your duty
in the service of the protector of a great people, winning
battles and achieving plenty and prosperity, taste the
fragrance of the sweets of life.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




10. (Indra and Brihaspati Devate, Brihaspati Rshi)
wear na a pee
aeea | gaene: wat uada


[Names: Devasyaham, Devasyaham, Devasyaham, Devasyaham, Indrasyottamam, Indrasyottama]
ruham.


In this yajnic creation of glorious Savita, Lord of
light and life, may I ascend to the highest heaven of
freedom, knowledge and divine realization by the grace
of Brihaspati, great and inviolable lord of truth and


In this yajnic creation of glorious Savita, Lord of
light and life, may I ascend to the highest heaven of
freedom, justice and prosperity by the grace of Indra,
inexorable lord of truth, justice and magnificence.


In this yajnic creation of glorious Savita, Lord of
light and life, I have risen to the highest realization of
freedom, knowledge and divine presence by the grace
of Brihaspati, great and generous lord promoter of truth
and existence.


In this yajnic creation of glorious Savita, Lord of
light and life, I have risen to the highest realization of
freedom, justice and prosperity by the grace of Indra,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




generous and unfailing Lord promoter of truth, justice
and magnificence.


11. (Indra and Brihaspati Devate, Brihaspati Rshi)






[Names: Brhaspate]
Brihaspati, leader and master of knowledge and
enlightenment, fight and win the battle for knowledge
and education. Teachers and scholars, proclaim, speak
and teach the language of knowledge for the ruler, and
help him to fight and win the battle.


Indra, ruler, leader and admirer of knowledge and
enlightenment, fight the battle against ignorance.
Scholars and teachers, proclaim, speak and teach the
language of enlightenment for the ruler and make him
win the battle for education.


12. (Indra and Brihaspati Devate, Brihaspati Rshi)




[Names: Gary]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Men bright as sunbeams, this national language
of yours should be true, good, common and one by
which Brihaspati, ruler of the great land and leader of
education and enlightenment may win the battle of unity
and education. Men of plenty and abundance, cooperate
and help Brihaspati win the battle and free the nation
from ignorance, disunity and suffering.

Men bright as sunbeams, the language of yours
should be true, good, common and one by which Indra,
lord of national glory, may win his battle. Men of plenty
and abundance, cooperate and help Indra win the battle
and free the nation from ignorance and suffering.


13. (Savita Devata, Brihaspati Rshi)



[Names: Ghee]
gacchata.

In the world, the cosmic yajna of Savita, Lord of
light and life, the great lord creator and promoter of
truth, Brihaspati, victor of wars I wish and pray I may
win the battles of life.

Great warriors, winners of battles, stem the routes
of the enemy's advance, and, crossing leagues of virgin
territory, spread over the directions.


14. (Brihaspati Devata, Dadhikrava Rshi)
erature carat ues


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Kratum]
Just as that horse, tied neck, flanks and mouth,
still galloping past the distance-marks and hurdles on
its course, carries the rider to the battle, similarly this
warrior, in spite of all the hurdles in his path, passionate
and impetuous in the business (yajna) of battle,
commands his soldiers in the sacred voice of truth, to
pounce upon the enemy.


15. (Brihaspati Devata, Dadhikrava Rshi)
vated sarga ufi aint: were did:



[Names: Syenasyeva]
The warrior who, like a bird on the wing, eager,
hastening, pressing on, sweeping, and pouncing upon
its prey like an eagle, presses on the flanks of his flying
horse, and sweeping on and closing upon the enemy,
exhorts his cohorts with passion in the true voice, wins
the battle.


16. (Brihaspati Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)




[Names: Sanno, Jambhayanto]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Passionate but controlled, brilliant, esteemed and
well-maintained warriors with their horses, swift in
action, seizing by the neck the serpents, wolves and
demons of the society, be good and auspicious to us,
saving us from social pollution and giving us lasting
peace and security in the noble men's yajnas and battles
of life for development and progress.


17. (Brihaspati Devata, Nabhanedishtha Rshi)






[Names: Asada, Srnvantu, Sahasrasa]
Men of knowledge, wisdom and vision, dynamic
and self-disciplined, expert men of a thousand themes
and subjects, who have heard and meditated on the
shastras, who deserve,desire, offer and receive their
share in the national yajna, may all listen to our
suggestions and prayers in national projects and may
promote and maintain our great wealth and honour.


18. (Brihaspati Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)
am Hed: fuer mada qum ata ufafiida-




[Names: Vaje]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Heroes of the land, defend us in battle after battle.
Men of virtue and wisdom, free and immortal in nature
and character, visionaries of eternal truth and universal
law, protect and promote us in our wealth and honour,
drink of the nectar sweets of this life to your heart's
content, rejoice, and, by the paths of the noble and the
great men of the world, go forward.


19. (Prajapati Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)



[Names: Asera, Tard, Maths, Fast]
May the knowledge of the Vedas and shastras
come to me. May the knowledge and wealth of the
boundless forms of earth and heaven come to me. May
the fatherly and motherly seniors bless me. May the
secrets of soma herb with the gift of health and longevity
open to me. Heroes of the land, victors of wars, tempered
and purified, fight the battles and do your part of service
and honour to Prajapati, great lord and guardian spirit
of this earth.


20. (Prajapati Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)


[Names: Carer]
vera mon


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Apaye]
For comprehensive knowledge, honest work; for
universal happiness, virtuous action ; for sure success,
relentless effort; for creative intelligence, ceaseless
study; for the expression of knowledge, living language;
for lord of the day, sun, astronomy; for the glorious
dawn of the day, science; for the self-deluded fool, words
of warning; for the self-destructive mean, reformative
advice; for the earthly born eternal soul, vision of reality;
for vision of the Lord ofthe universe, divine intelligence;
for honour to the President, language and manners of


21. (Yajna Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)






[Names: Ayuryajnena, Prajapateh]
May your life grow strong and stable by yajna,
obedience to Ishwara; may your vitality grow stronger
by yajna, pursuit of knowledge; may your eye grow in
vision by yajna, right seeing; may your ear grow in


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




hearing by yajna, hearing the sacred voice; may your
faculty of enquiry grow efficient by yajna, mutual
dialogue; may your yajna — reverence, society and
charity — grow by yajna, performance in action.


May we continue to be the children of Prajapati,
father of humanity (and of the ruler of the nation). May
we become noble and virtuous and attain eternal
freedom, happiness and immortality.


22. (Dishah Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)


[Names: Tera]
cat TA car Aaa vem dus



[Names: Krsyai]
May our mind and perception, power and force,
be for you and yours for us; all our wealth, thought and
action, brilliance and achievement be yours, and yours
for us. Reverence to the mother earth. The wealth and
glory of the earth is yours for the mother. You are for
the mother, for farming, for protection and growth, for
production of wealth, for health and nourishment. You
are the leader, disciplined controller, firm and constant,
support of all, for the mother.


23. (Prajapati Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)


[Names: Hrdeireru]
Carat us31


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Vajasyemam]
This illustrious creator of the food of yajna, the
Sun, first generated the shining soma, vitality, in the
herbs and waters. May these waters and herbs be honey-
sweet invigorating for us and we remain wakeful and
watchful in the front ranks of the realm with noble
speech and virtuous acts.


24. (Prajapati Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)







[Names: Paes, Sisriye, Aditsantam]
The illustrious generator of the food of yajna fills
the heavens and all the regions of the world with light
and therein abides. That glorious lord/ruler, knowing
well the evaders of oblations/taxes, makes them give/
pay their share of the yajna/social yajna of the land.


25. (Prajapati Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)




[Names: Caveat, Sanemi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




The illustrious creator of the food of yajna pervades
all the regions of the world/land wholly and from all sides.
That lord/ruler, master of eternal knowledge, increasing
and promoting the material wealth and human resources
(people) of the nation provides total protection all round.








[Names: Brihaspati, Adit, Tapasa, Adityanvisnum, Adityanvisnu]
Let us, in truth of word and deed, follow the ruler,
man of auspicious virtue, sun-like brilliant scholar of
the Vedas, guardian of the noble seniors of wisdom,
and aditya-brahmacharis of 48 years, and, by the grace
of Vishnu, omnipresent lord of the world, let us begin
the action.


27. (Aryama & Others Devata, Tapasa Rshi)


san gerade” «ru eu |



[Names: Aryamanam, Sarasvatim]
O ruler, for the sake of growth with creative
contribution to life and happiness (dana), in truth of
word and deed, and as a matter of principle and policy:
protect, promote and exhort Aryama, the man of justice,
Brihaspati, the man of knowledge, and Indra, the man


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of honour and prowess. Protect and promote the study
of sacred literature and language of knowledge. Advance
the man of universal honour and recognition (Vishnu).
Protect and promote women of knowledge and vision
(Saraswati). Honour the brilliant man of light and
creativity (Savita), and recognize and encourage the man
of instant response and swooping action (vajin).


28. (AgniDevata, Tapasa Rshi)
amiserat ade a: Wid A: Gaal va |




Lord of the land/world, Agni, be kind and generous
to us and, in truth of word and thought, give us the
message of knowledge and wisdom for all. Vanquisher
of a thousand adversaries, you alone are the generous
giver of wealth. Be gracious, lord, and bless us with all
we need for fulfilment.


29. (Aryama & Others Devata, Tapasa Rshi)




May Aryama, man of justice (Kshatriya) give us
justice for all. May Pusha (Vaishya), producer of food
and wealth, give us food and prosperity. May Brihaspati
(Brahmana) man of knowledge, wisdom and virtue, give
us knowledge and the sacred word. And may the pious
and brilliant women of knowledge and vision give us


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




instruction in the meaning of life and conduct. All these
and all this be in truth of word and action.


30. (Samrat Devata, Tapasa Rshi)


mad aret ata eer seeder aA-
mAr arae uo



[Names: Sarasvatyai]
In this world of Lord Savita's creation, with the
arms of the Ashwinis, that is, with the fiery brilliance of
the sun and the soothing serenity of the moon, with the
hands of Pusha, that is, with the nourishment and
sustenance of the vital air, I anoint and consecrate you
as the illustrious ruler of the land for the advancement
of language and literature in the service of Saraswati
(learning), for the promotion of science and technology,
and invest you with the earthly regality of Brihaspati,
the glorious lord of the mighty world.


31. (Agni etc. Devata, Tapasa Rshi)




[Names: Agnirekaksarena, Somascatu]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Agni, with one akshara, syllable, Om and Gayatri
(The ruler, bright as Agni, should win the heart of the
people with good policies and advance them. So should
the people support him).


The Ashwinis, sun and moon, with two-syllabic
Ushnik verse, conquered the bipeds, humans. So should
I win them. (The ruler and his officers should help and
support the people. So should the people support them).


Vishnu, with three-syllabic Ushnik verse,
conquered the three worlds. So should I win them. (The
ruler, like Vishnu, should win and promote the regions
with a name, a history and a location, and so should the


Soma, with four-syllabic Brihati verse conquered
the quadrupeds, animals. So should I win them (the ruler,
eager for honour, should protect and promote the
animals, wild as well as domestic. So should the people).


32. (Pushaetc. Devatas, Tapasa Rshi)




[Names: Pusa, Marutah]
Pusha, the moon, with five-syllable Pankti verse,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




won and sustains the five directions (east, west, north,
south and up and down), so should I win and support
them. (The ruler should maintain and sustain nature in
all directions and so should the people support the ruler
and preserve nature).


Savita, the sun, with six-syllable Trishtup verse,
generates and lights the six seasons, so should I light
and enrich them. (The ruler should keep the seasons of
nature clean and unpolluted, and so should the people.)


The Maruts, winds, with seven-syllable Jagati
verse sustain and support seven domestic animals. So
should I protect and promote them. (The ruler should
protect and promote the domestic animals, and the
people should support the ruler and promote animal life.)


Brihaspati, lord of the divine voice and knowledge,
with eight-syllable yajushi anushtup verse conquered
gayatri. So should I too master and serve that. (The ruler
of the people should honour and preserve value-based
policy of governance and administration and the people
should support the ruler and maintain the policies of value
and the values of right policies.)


33. (Mitra & Others Devatas, Tapasa Rshi)






[Names: Beug]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Mitra, universal friend of all, with nine-syllable
yajushi brihati verse, won the three dimensional yajna
of knowledge, action and worship. I too should
accomplish the same. (The ruler should live an
enlightened life of action and piety, and every citizen
should follow the ruler and support him.)

Varuna, the Supreme, worthy of choice, with the
ten-syllable yajushi pankti verse, conquered the spirit
and content of Virat, policy of sovereignty. I too should
realize the same.

(The ruler should honour the sovereignty of his
office, commit himself to policies of eternal values and
be the guardian of his people. The people should honour
and follow him in his foot-steps.)

Indra, Lord of glory, with eleven-syllable asurya
pankti verse, won the spirit and content of trishtup, and
I should realize the same.

(The ruler should pursue the values and policies
of magnanimity and excellence, and the people should
emulate and support him.)

Vishve-devas, noble spirits of the world, with
twelve-syllable gayatri verse, realized the spirit and
content of jagati, and I should realize the same.

(The ruler should commit himself to the highest
policies of social life and universal good, and the people
should follow and support him.)


34. (Vasus and Others Devatas, Tapasa Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Vasavastrayodasaksarena, Rudrascaturdas, Rudrascaturda]
Vasus, brahmacharis of the 24 year order of study
and training, with 13 syllable asuri-anushtup verse, have
achieved the 13-point programme of life (i.e., ten pranic
and original/virtual nature). So should I achieve the
same.


Rudras, brahmacharis of 44 year order of study
and training, with 14 syllable samniushnik verse, have
achieved the 14 point programme of life (i.e., ten organs
of perception and volition, mind, intellect, memory and
the sense of individual self). So should I achieve the
same.


Adityas, brahmacharis of 48 years of study and
training, with 15 syllable asuri-gayatri verse, have
achieved the 15 point programme of life, (i.e., four
Vedas, four sub-vedas, six auxiliary studies, and
practical expertise). So should I achieve the same.


Aditi, Great-Council of Governance, with 16
syllable samni anushtup verse, has achieved the 16 point
programme of life, (i.e., sixteen steps/constituents of
the science of logic). So should I achieve the same.


Prajapati, ruler of the nation, with 17 syllable
nichrid-arshi gayatri verse, has achieved the 17 point
programme of life (i.e., four varnas, four ashramas, four


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




steps of study, four steps of asset building, and final
freedom. So should I achieve the same.


Note: In the four mantras above, from 31 to 34, a
comprehensive programme of living has been given for
the ruler and the people, of any locality, region, country
or, in fact, of the world. It ranges from a one-point
programme to 17 point programme. The whole
programme is summarized below :-


1. Om (one - syllable Word, the one essential
name of God, Ishwara), the One and Only One Supreme
Lord of the universe who creates, sustains and ultimately
withdraws the world of existence: This is the Word,
Akshara, eternal, imperishable, constant Reality which
is Existent, Omniscient, Omnipresent, Omnipotent, just
and merciful, infinite and of infinite power and bliss.
The one-point programme is: His service and worship
and the service of His creation.


2. The service of humanity, the bipeds.


3. Name, history (birth and the course of life/
existence) and location of any community, nation, or
region, the service of the same.


4. The service, protection and development of
the life of the quadrupeds, the animals, wild and


5. The service, protection, cleaning and
development of the environment in all the five directions
(east, west, north, south and up and down).


6. The service of nature and the environment in
all the six seasons of the year.


7. '[he service, promotion and development of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the seven classes of animals: cow, horse, buffalo, camel,
goat, sheep, and pony.

8. Practice of an eight-point social policy in the
service of the community and the country to be
positively worked out for development, i.e., yajna, and
not for mere power display.

9. Nine orders or qualities of worship, action
and knowledge, three each, the orders being high,
middling and low (noble and saintly, average and
human, and selfish and negative/evil and devilish).


10. Practice of a ten-point political policy of
service and development in a positive and progressive
direction.

11. Practice of an eleven-point policy of service
and development in a positive and progressive direction.

12. Practice of a twelve-point policy of service
and development of the community and the


The points are to be worked out by the
enlightened ruler and the enlightened people in mutual
cooperation in the local context with reference to the
past, present and the future.


13-17 have been explained in mantra no. 34 above.


35. (Vishvedeva Devata, Varuna Rshi)
[Names: Hugs, Assas]
wemel nuu


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Somanetrebhyo]
Man of felicity beyond reproach, this is your share
of Raj Dharma, governance, administration and service
of the republic, your power-and-responsibility, assets-
and-liabilities integrated. Serve it with words and acts
of truth. Serve it with words and acts of Dharma, by the
noble people of the very eyes and leadership of light
and fire sitting in front of you in the council.


Serve it with words and acts of charity, by the
people of the speed and guidance of the wind itself on


Serve it with words and acts of courage, by the
noble people of the eyes and leadership of the world
heroes on your back.


Serve it with words and acts of saints and sages
of knowledge and wisdom, by the noble people of the
eyes and leadership of the best, the friendliest, the wisest
and the most dynamic yajnic souls of the nation on your


Serve it with words and acts of peace and love
under the protective bliss of the noble people of the
light and leadership of the soothing serenity of the moon
itself, servants of knowledge, humility, Dharma and


[Names: Ishwara]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




36. (Vishvedeva Devata, Varuna Rshi)
[Names: Talal, Baar]
Weer: xerer cp car anado at edat
[Names: Aamar]
weder: Cavat sen




[Names: Agninetrah, Agninetra, Somanetra]
Honour and salutations in truth of word and
sincerity of heart to those men of knowledge and nobility
in the eastern quarters of the republic who are dedicated
to light and electricity.


Honour and salutations in truth of word and
sincerity of action to those noble men of justice in the
southern quarters of the republic who are dedicated to
the practice and discipline of the social and personal
ethics of yoga.


Honour and salutations in truth of word and
reason to those noble men of knowledge in the western
quarters of the republic whose science and philosophy
shines in the scholars of the nation.


Honour and salutations in truth of word and
gratitude to those noble men of peace and bliss in the
northern quarters of the republic who deal with everyone
equally and justly as the wind touches all equally and
who guide the nation to Dharma and strength as the
circuit of prana and apana energy strengthens and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




ennobles the body and mind.


Honour and salutations in truth of word and
reverence to those noble men of knowledge and Dharma
in the upper quarters of the republic who bless the nation
with the gift of soma and good health and longevity.


37. (AgniDevata, Devavata Rshi)




[Names: Ntate, Dustarastarannaratirvarco]
Agni, enlightened ruler, face and defeat the enemy,
remove the proud, overcome poverty and selfishness, and,
hero of invincible prowess, fill this land with honour and


38. (Rakshoghna Devata, Devavata Rshi)






[Names: Upamsorviryena]
Ruler of the republic, in this sacred land of Lord
Savita's creation, in truth of word and action, I accept,
consecrate and celebrate you, protected by the arms of
the Ashwinis, the fiery brilliance of the sun and the
soothing serenity of the moon, blest by the generous hands
of Pusha, the powers of health and nourishment, and
supported by the prowess of your close associates, the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




council and the army.


I accept and consecrate you for the destruction
of evil. The evil is destroyed. We must punish the
wicked, destroy him. Yes, he is destroyed.


39. (Rakshoghna Devata, Devavata Rshi)





[Names: Brhaspatirvaca, Jyaisthyaya, Rudrah]
Ruler of the land, may Savita, creator and promoter
of honour and prosperity, inspire you. You are like the
fire of the householders’ yajna, sap and life of the herbs
and trees, truth of the heart of the good, friend and
favourite of the servants and protectors of Dharma. For
the advancement of learning, you are like Brihaspati, lord
of knowledge. For the greatness and glory of the land,
you are like Indra, lord of glory. For the animals, you are
like Rudra, lord protector of the animals.


40. (Yajamana Devata, Devavata Rshi)
[Names: Arat]
Tat nxon




[Names: Imamamusya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Noble people of the land/world, this man (first
among us all), son of a noble father, son of a noble
mother, graceful as the moon and inspiring as soma,
accepted and anointed as he is as the ruler, yours, ours,
and others', Brahmanas, all, cooperate and render him
free from conflict and opposition for the sake of a mighty
republic, supreme sovereignty, the highest government
of the people, the glory of the order of the world.




[Names: Teurssum]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1. (Apah Devata, Varuna Rshi)





[Names: Yabhirmitravarunavabhya]
Noble men of wisdom and virtue obtain waters/
energies, sweet, invigorating, illuminating and
enlightening by which they strengthen, cleanse and
consecrate their prana, udana, and electric vitalities and
ward off all conflicts and negativities of life.


2. (Vrisha Devata, Varuna Rshi)
[Names: Vrsna, Vrsna]
Mighty lord, shower of generosity, bringer of
prosperity wave on wave, maker of the nation and
builder of the republic, give me a sovereign republic of
human values and just policies.


Illustrious lord of generosity, ocean of knowledge
of polity, harbinger of prosperity and comfort to the
people, bless him (bless all of them) with the unity of
the nation and dignity of the republic with truth of word


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and action.


Generous lord of a mighty force, maker of the
republic, give me a world republic of universal values
and universal peace.


Generous lord of universal power of love and
Dharma, maker of the world, give us all a world state of
universal love and universal Dharma.


3. (Apampati Devata, Varuna Rshi)


[Names: Wega]
Tea aa tar wear ue A ad
[Names: Tene]
af usu



[Names: Artheta]
Men of the country striving for wealth, builders
of the nation, keep on striving, build a republic of truth
in word and action for me. Men of wealth, go on striving
for prosperity, contributing to the republic, and give


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




him and all a great republic.


Brilliant women of the republic, maintain your
vigour and brilliance, contributing to the republic, and
build for me a nation of love and justice. Keep up your
genius and vigour contributing to the republic, and give
him and all a great nation.


Married women of the nation, dear as water and
the breath of life to your partners, stay good and faithful
in your love to your home, contributing to the families
of the nation and give me a state of true discipline and
virtue. Keep the channels of the nation flowing,
contributing to the growth of the nation's life, and give
him and all a dynamic state of brilliant leaders.


Lord of the waters of the state, builder of a
progressive state, give me a dynamic state of governance
in truth of word and action. Lord of the national
movements, keep the flow on for the nation and give
him and all a state of clean governance and


Protector of the waters, generous giver of the
republic, give me an affluent state of prosperity with
values of truth and honesty. Protector of national
progress, contributing to management and development,
give him and all a republic, a state and a nation marching
ahead and onward.


4.  (Surya etc. Devata, Varuna Rshi)
[Names: Gears, Cael, Tegal, Teena]
Hal giaa ea wear Teena aa arat et
mear Cee A aod talel Hat ver Teer Teen


—_ A—




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


240










[Names: Tear, Tenet, Vaan, Teast, Treat, Trea, Tega, Tega, Tage, Suryatvacasa, Suryatvacasa, Suryavarcasa, Suryavarcasa, Sakvari, Madhu]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Members of the Council, bright as the sun in your
bearing, makers of the nation, give me a great republic
with the values of truth and justice. Stay firm in your
brilliance of bearing contributing to the nation, and give
the common man a republic of truth and justice.


Leaders of the land, men of learning, illustrious
in character as the sun, makers of the nation, be firm in
your brilliance of learning, and give me a state of
learning and enlightenment in truth of word and values.
Stay firm in your brilliance, contributing to the nation,
and give to the citizen a nation of learning and wisdom.


Men of vision and arts, creating joy in words of
vision and light, be happy makers of the nation and give
me a nation of happy people. Stay firm and strong in
joy contributing to the nation, and create for the common
man a nation of happiness and joy in truth of value and


Farmers, living in your farms with the wealth of
animals, makers of the nation in truth of word and
simplicity of character, give me a nation rich in food
and milk. Farmers and husbandmen, stay firm,
contributing to the nation, and give to the common man
a nation of happy and satisfied people.


Be men of will and ambition, makers of the
nation, and give me a nation of courage and action in
truth of word and deed. Stay firm in your will,
contributing to the nation, and inspire the people to be
a nation with passion for development and progress.


Be men of strength and prowess, makers of the
nation, and give me a nation of power and prestige in
truth of word and sincerity of character. Stay firm in your


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




determination, contributing to the nation, and give to
the citizens a nation of strength and dignity.


Women of the land, makers of the nation, be
strong and powerful, and give me a nation of disciplined
and virtuous young heroes of truth and honesty of word
and action. Stay firm in your strength and dignity,
contributing to the nation, and build up a nation of strong
and heroic people for the citizens.


Be sustainers of the people, makers of the nation
in words of truth and action in discipline, and give me a
nation of happy and disciplined people. Stay firm in
your generosity, supporting the people, contributing to
the nation, and give the citizens a state of happy and


Be sustainers of the world, makers of a world-
state in truth of word and action, and give me a universal
nation of common human values. Stay firm, supporting
the people of the world, contributing to the world state,
and give to humanity one order of governance and
organization of freedom for every citizen of the world.


People of knowledge, Dharma and universal
values, brilliant in your own right of character and
wisdom, makers of a world nation in truth of word and
action, stay brilliant and firm and give to every citizen
of the world a world order of governance and universal


Women of the world, sweet as honey and deeply
loving, meet with others equally sweet and loving, keen
and anxious for a grand world order and conscientiously
working for a supreme sovereign world state, stay fearless
and, holding and sustaining that great world order for


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the sovereign rulers, sit and participate with men of equal
power and brilliance.


5. (Agni & Others Devata, Varuna Rshi)





Ruler of the land, you are the brilliance of Soma,
light of the nation’s glory. May my light of dignity be
like yours. For the knowledge and power of fire and
electricity for the nation, let there be specific and factual
language and study of science. For Soma, life-sciences,
knowledge of biology and medicine; for the sun,
astronomy and cosmology; for Saraswati (Veda and
education), grammar and Vedanga, i.e., auxiliary studies
on the subject; for Pusha (pranic vitality and material
growth), yoga and economics; for Brihaspati (lord of
the universe), spiritual knowledge ; for Indra (lord of
the senses, jivatma, the soul), intelligence and inner
light; for language and communication, effective
teaching and discussion; for poetry and composition,
poetics; for the subtle elements of nature, science of
atoms; for honour and prosperity, industry and dedication;
for Aryama (leader of justice), politics of value and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




6. (Apah Devata, Varuna Rshi)






[Names: Geter, Anibhrstamasi]
Ruler of the land/President of the council, free
from pollution of mind and character, seasoned and
tempered in the discipline of austerity, dedicated as a
brother to the sacred voice of knowledge, you are an
instrument of Soma, nature’s power of health and


Both of you (ruler and people, teachers and
students, boys as well as girls), endowed with universal
virtues of mind and character, stay pure and unsullied.
In this holy world of Lord Savita’s creation, I sanctify
you all with a ceaseless flow of the purest rays of the
sun and the light of higher knowledge. Act in truth of
word and deed and create noble heroes for the nation.


7. (Varuna Devata, Varuna Rshi)




[Names: Sadhamado, Pastyasu, Varunah, Ssisurmatrtamasvantah]
The ruler, best choice of the people, should send
the children of the mothers/nation to residential schools
of the most affectionate and motherly teachers —


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




mothers/nation, free and fearless, intelligent and
educated, cool as water, smart at work, shining in
prosperity, brilliant in achievement, living happy and
together in beautiful homes.


8.  (Yajamana Devata, Varuna Rshi)






[Names: Ksatrasyolvamasi, Varunasyasi, Mitrasyasi, Drva, Patainam]
Ruler of the nation, you are the strength and shield
of the people, first cover of the republic, creator of its
honour and dignity, and centre-pin of its governance.
You are like the thunderbolt of lightning for the clouds
of the enemy. You are friends with the friends and best
with the good. By you and with you the nation would
eliminate the simulators, the evaders and the hypocrites.
You are a destroyer of the forts of evil and a plague
upon the enemy.


Defend him in all directions, from all directions,
front, back and cross-wise.


9. (Prajapati Devata, Varuna Rshi)






All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Avirmarya]
All ye mortals, men and women, if the fire,
sustainer of the home, or the man of knowledge and
wisdom brilliant as agni (light) is well-known, and
beneficent to you, if the man who has heard and attained
the knowledge of all the Shastras is well-known and
beneficent, if Indra, the man of power commanding the
forces is well-known and committed to you, if friends
and noble people dedicated to vows of goodness and
virtue are close to you and kind, if Pusha, versatile man
of medicine, giver of health and longevity is well-known
and kind, if the heavens and electric energy and the earth
are well-known and generous, if the mother and mother
nature, generous givers of abundant love and joy, are
well known, loved with reverence, and generous to you
— if you know, love and respect all these and they are
kind and generous to you, then happiness is assured for
you.


10. (Yajamana Devata, Varuna Rshi)




[Names: Taare, Avesta]
Cross the hurdles on the way, eliminate the deadly
biters, go forward (east) and rise to the heights. And while
you drive on the chariot of life, may the light of Gayatri
lead you on; the music of the Samans inspire you ; the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




triple strength of body, mind and speech empower you;
the three fold voice of the Veda (knowledge, action and
prayer) exhort you; and may the beauty of the spring
season, the vision of the universe and the wealth of
existence bless you on the way.


11. (Yajamana Devata, Varuna Rshi)


Wase: aa gator ues




[Names: Daksinamaroha]
Go forward on the right (south) and rise to the
heights. And while you are on the way, the light of
science contained in the Trishtup verses would reveal
to you; the fifteenfold strength of great Samans (five
pranas, five senses, and five elements) would empower
you; the heat of the summer season would hasten your
speed, and the splendour of governance and the wealth
of existence would bless you.


12. (Yajamana Devata, Varuna Rshi)






[Names: Praticimaroha]
Go forward west, and rise high, and the various
science of wealth contained in the Jagati verses would
reveal to you; the seventeen-fold power of the Samans
(five organs of volition, five objects of volition, five subtle
elements and the science of cause and effect of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




materials) would enrich you; and the showers of the
rainy season and the economic wealth of the world


13. (Yajamana Devata, Varuna Rshi)


[Names: Surerwrenfaesr]
wad: wei feur ues




[Names: Udicimarohanustup]
Go forward north and rise high, and the art of
communication of knowledge contained in Anushtup
verses would reveal to you; the twenty-one-fold various
brilliance of the Samans (sixteen potentials, faculties
of the soul, four-fold effort for fulfilment in life and the
freedom of action) would enlighten you; and the length
of winter years and wealth of the fruits of service would


14. (Yajamana Devata, Varuna Rshi)





[Names: Arora, Urdhvamaroha, Sirah]
Move up and rise high, and the knowledge
contained in the Pankti verses, Shakvara and the Raivata
parts of the Samans, the knowledge of the three divisions
of time (past, present and future), the science of nine
numbers (1-9), and of the thirty-three powers of nature


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Adityas]
energy, and yajna, i.e., cosmic chemistry) would reveal
to you; the lustre of knowledge and discipline and the
wealth of life would bless you. The heads of the sinner,
the thief and the preventer would be down.


15. (Paramatma Devata, Varuna Rshi)






[Names: Mrtyoh]
You are the light of majesty and magnificence. May
your light be mine too. You are the lustre of life, the
constancy of courage, and the immortality of existence.
Save me from mortality.


16. (Mitra-Varuna Devate, Varuna Rshi)




[Names: Gave, Hiranyarupa, Usaso, Arohatam]
varuno 'si.


You are Mitra, friend of all. You are Varuna, the
best of all and subduer of the enemies. Both of you are
bright and powerful like gold, like the sun, like Indra.
And just as the sun and the moon with their light light
up the night and the dawn, so you too, with your
illuminating actions, rise and enlighten the world around
you. Ascend your chariot of knowledge, watch the world


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


of permanence and impermanence, and spread the light.


17. (Kshatrapati Devata, Varuna Rshi)






I anoint and consecrate you as the ruler with the
light and grace of the moon, the brilliance of fire, the
glory of the sun, and the swiftness of sense and mind
like the velocity of electricity. Ascend the throne of the
republic to do more than justice to the seat of
governance. Develop the missiles of defence and protect
and promote knowledge, Dharma and prosperity of the
nation.


18. (Yajamana Devata, Devavata Rshi)



[Names: Jasamu, Seige]
This brilliant man of knowledge and virtuous
character, son of a noble father and of a noble mother is
our ruler, yours, ours and of all others, all Brahmanas,
i.e., the learned community of the land.


Noble and educated men of the land and senior


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




members of the army, all support him for the
establishment of a grand world order of governance,
for a great enlightened and meritorious community, for
a great democracy of the people and for the dignity and
honour of a mighty state. Let us render him universally
acceptable so that he has to face no rival, no adversary,


19. (Yajamana Devata, Devavata Rshi)




[Names: Visnorvikra]
masi.


From the top of the cloud, over the top of clouds,
flying boats, fuelled and driven, roam around in the sky
like boats on the sea. Piloted from down below on earth,
soaring up like clouds into the sky, they pursue the
clouds as Indra pursued Vritra. Master-maker of the
nation, in the wide spaces of Lord Vishnu, you are
capable of creating various kinds of motion. You are
capable of creating special and definite steers of motion
as the wind's. You are the cause and source of motion
and speed by the power of energy.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




20. (Prajapati Devata, Devavata Rshi)






[Names: Walaa, Gena, Prajapate, Yatkamaste]
Prajapati, Lord Supreme, father and protector of
created beings, there is none other than you over, above
and beyond, to be, to know, and to reveal all the forms
of existence in the world.


Whatever the aim, object or desire for which we
worship you, may that be fulfilled for us.

Father and guardian as you are of the seen and
the unseen world, so may we be masters and guardians
of the riches of life in truth of word and action.

Rudra, Lord of justice and punishment, destroyer
as you are of evil, that is the supreme name by which
we worship you and celebrate you in the home in truth
of word with honest action.


21. (Kshatrapati Devata, Devavata Rshi)




[Names: Avyathayai]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Ruler of the land, you are like the thunderbolt of
Indra (lightning) in power, inviolable, clean and
spotless. I appoint you by the advice of the Governor of
the council and the commander of the army for the
exercise of your official powers freely and
constructively without pain or fear or tyranny. Act with
the inspiration, advice and support of the positive yajnic
people of dynamic spirit and win your victories/goals.
We are with you with all our will and power.


22. (Indra Devata, Devavata Rshi)


[Names: Rear]
seta uu




[Names: Tistha]
Indra, Ruler of the land, hero of the thunderbolt in
hand, swift as you are in action and victory over the
enemy, may we, your officers and people, never,
disaffected, fall off from you. May you too never suffer
disaffection from Ishwara and never fall off from your


Hero of the people, thunderbolt in hand, ascend
and ride the chariot, take the reins in hand by which
you drive the steeds and, swift in action, achieve your


23. (Agni & Others Devatas, Devavata Rshi)
TA UR BU


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Marutamcjase, Marutamcjas]
Ruler and chiefs of the nation, provide and
promote for agni, the enlightened householder, a true
policy of value and virtue; for soma, herbs and trees,
forestry and knowledge of Botany; for the strength,
energy and lustre of the most dynamic people (maruts),
yoga and peace-giving words; for the honour of Indra,
ruler, right conduct and good reading; for the working
efficiency of the soul (Indra), good instruction and
[Names: Mother]
you. Mother mine, ruin me not with wrong instruction.


24. (Surya Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)


qUugrHddugdiWHassT is kansansa
sed Il
[Names: Nrsadvarasdrta]
Ishvara, the Supreme Soul of the Universe, is the
maker of forms from elements, present in all forms of
purity, universal abode of all, present in the sky, creator
of the universal yajna, present in and on the earth, holy
as a sacred visitor, present in the homes, humans, the
best of things, eternal nature and its law, and in all space,
creator of the waters, stars and planets, giver of the light
of eternal knowledge of the Veda, creator of the clouds,
mountains and forests, the very Truth and Law Itself,
and the greatest and highest of existence.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




25. (Surya Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)




[Names: Iyadasyayurasyayurmayi]
harami.

You are so vast, so far, so great, wherever my eye
goes. You are life Itself. Give me life and longevity.
You join me with you in samadhi. You are the light and
lustre of existence. Give me that lustre. You are Energy


[Names: Itself, Give]
Ruler and people of the land, you are the arms of
the Lord of Power, creator of virility. I take you both
close to Him.


26. (Asandi Rajapatni Devate, Vamadeva Rshi)


[Names: Tapis, Syonasi, Syonama]
Woman of power: You are the beauty and grace of
life, giver of peace and joy, and mother-maker of the
nation. Come, take up your office of dignity to create
joy and comfort for the people around and do justice to
the judgement seat of the nation.


27. (Varuna Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi)


[Names: Gerd]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Nisasada, Samrajyaya]
The man committed to national vows of Dharma,
dedicated to noble actions, first and best of choice for
justice, should occupy the offices of power and
administration for the governance of the republic.


28. (Yajamana Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi)








[Names: Pease, Abhibhurasyetaste, Panca, Bahukara]
Subduer of the evil and the wicked, you are the
dominant ruler. May all the five directions be favourable
to you. Man of spiritual vision and knowledge, you are
a scholar of the Vedas and creator of all comfort and
joy, light and honour with noble actions of truth. Man
of first and best choice, possessed of excellence, truth
is your real power and lustre. Man of dignity and
majesty, your greatness lies in the strength and support
of the people. Man of justice, destroyer of sin and crime,
harbinger of various kinds of happiness, doer of good
over and over again, you are the thunderbolt of lightning
action. With that instant power, protect me, save me,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




29. (Agni Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi)





[Names: Svahakrtah]
Just as agni (fire), great and expansive, observer
of Dharma, served in yajna, receives the libations and,
sitting in the midst of its associate created materials and
living beings, atomizes the materials and, with the rays
of the sun radiates them into space, so should the ruler,
brilliant, great and expansive like fire, observe his/her
Raj Dharma, and in truth with justice, serve the nation.
So should also the noble and honest members of the
Council, in truth of word and action, observe their
Dharma and try to serve the nation.


30. (Savita & Others Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi)


aa tafe tea ure wat xau: Geo


[Names: Savitra]
Inspired by Lord Savita, the creator of life, for
creativity, enlightened by the sacred word of the Veda
by the grace of Saraswati, the Lord's spirit of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




omniscience, projecting various forms of development
by the grace of Twashta, the Lord's power of art,
breathing the generosity of the earth (Pusha) to nourish
the animals and other living creatures, realizing the
possibilities of growth through electric energy by the
grace of Indra, the Lord's power and force of nature,
with the magnanimity of Brihaspati, the Lord's
immanence in the universe and His eternal wisdom
revealed in the Veda, with a sense of honour and
obligation by the grace of Varuna, the Lord's majesty
and glory, with the heat of fire by the grace of Agni, the
Lord's light and refulgence, with the soothing vitality
and beneficence of mind like the vitality of Soma and
beauty of the moon, and with broadness of mind
inspired by the Lords omnipresence in the universe, the
tenth attribute of the Lord as Vishnu, and finally,
supported by the will and words of our people —
inspired, shaped and committed thus I (the ruler) move
on in the business of governance.


31. (Kshatrapati Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi)


Fa: Tat use




Ruler/officer/citizen, develop and be mature by
the instructions of the teacher and the preceptor. Be
mature for the attainment of knowledge and wisdom,
and for decent communication. Develop yourself and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




prepare for the honour and defence of the nation.
Seasoned and sanctified as the pure wind through noble
conduct and performance, be worthy of respect and
admiration. Rise in knowledge, dignity and grace, be
lovable as soma and the moon, and you would be a
chosen companion of Indra, the ruler, and the Supreme
Lord of life.


32. (Kshatrapati Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi)


HaT use




[Names: Kuvidanga, Ihehaisam]
Ruler/Man of knowledge and honour, seasoned
and sanctified you are in the discipline of education by
teachers and preceptors. We accept you for the sake of
knowledge and effective speech, in the service of the
republic, for the honour and defence of the nation.


Senior men of knowledge sitting around the fire
on seats of grass chant words of homage in praise of
the divine. Treat them to food and liberal hospitality
with reverence.


The farmers harvest barley in a certain order, sift
the grain from the chaff and keep it safe. Protect the
farmers, and, like them, sift the grain of truth from the
chaff of untruth and protect the truth.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




33. (Ashwinau Devate, Shunahshepa Rshi)




[Names: Crbemem, Yuvain, Vipipana, Indram]
President of the council and commander of the
forces, bright and beneficent as the sun and the moon,
dedicated to truth, protectors of the republic, and
promoters of good social developments, both of you
safeguard and advance the man of power and prosperity
(such as the producer or the ruler or the administrator)
who is whole heartedly and unfailingly dedicated to
generous acts of public good (like the cloud showering
rain for humanity).


34. (Ashwinau Devate, Shunahshepa Rshi)




[Names: Putramiva, Yatsuramam, Sactbhih]
Ruler of the land/President of the council, you
have enjoyed the delightful exhilaration of life by virtue
of noble intelligence and wonderful exploits worthy of
celebration in song. May your wife, with the vision and
wisdom of Saraswati, spirit of poetry, serve and
celebrate you in the home.


President of the council, and Commander of the
forces, both of you, with the order and approval of the
ruler, and with actions worthy of song in poetry, defend
the nation and the land as parents guard and promote



All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1.  (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi)
pos: Wer aaa ferar fered:



[Names: Yunjanah, Agnerjyotirnicayya]
The man desirous of spiritual vision and earthly
brilliance in search of the essence of spirit and matter,
should concentrate his senses, mind and memory, direct
itall on the universal energy immanent in nature, collect
the light of Agni, Supreme Spirit and universal power,
and bring that knowledge of experience down to the


2.  (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Tarte, Yuktena, Svargyaya]
We men of yoga, in this world of Lord Savita’s
creation, with all our mind and energy collected,
concentrated and directed on the Spirit/on the object of
our search, bring the light of heaven to the earth to turn


3. (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Yuktvaya, Brhajjyotih]
The yogis, noble people, trying to reach the
regions of light and heavenly bliss with their mind and
sense, refine their faculties as instruments of divination
into the light and mystery of infinity. Savita, Lord of
light and generator of life, inspires their mind and soul
and helps them to join with the object of their love and


4.  (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






Great is the glory and high the praise of Savita,
generous creator of light and life, the one mighty,
infinite, all seeing, all-knowing lord of the universe.
He alone receives all our prayers and sacrifices. Thereon
do yogis, men of wisdom and vision, concentrate their
mind and intelligence — only there and nowhere else.


5. (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi)





[Names: Yuje]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




I join, and join you both, with the eternal lord of
the universe with hymns of praise and prayer as did the
yogis of old. May our song of prayer reach its divine
destination by the sure path of the great and the wise
seers. Listen all ye children of Immortality who inhabit
the holy worlds of the Lord's creation and join to reach
the goal.


6.  (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi)





The great Lord Savita with His own power and
majesty has created all the regions of the earth and
heaven. He is the lord of light omnipresent in this world
whose great path of Dharma and yoga all the noble
people and others have followed with all their power
and potential.


7. (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi)
waq won




Savita, lord of light and glory, light our yajna
and promote our action for the attainment of happiness


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and prosperity. Bless and promote the yajnapati to
achieve honour and wealth. Lord sustainer of the earth,
brilliant and holy, giver and purifier of life and
knowledge, purify our science and consecrate our
pursuit. Lord giver and purifier of speech, purify and
elevate our speech with sweetness and grace.


8.  (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


wea Weare et ue




Savita, lord of life and inspiration, light, promote
and expand this yajna of ours which protects our noble
people and the virtues of our character, favours our
friends, wins our yajnic sessions of truth and gives us
wealth and happiness. Let it prosper with the chants of
Rgvedic hymns and advance into the wealth of Dharma
and knowledge with the truth of word and honesty of
action. Let it rise with the gayatri verses revealing the
paths of progress and prosperity to be covered and won
through the scientific gifts of rathantara, modes of speed
and progress.


9. (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






Man of knowledge and vision, I accept and
welcome you as a man initiated by fire in this world of
Savita's creation alongwith the force and attraction of
the energy of prana and the attraction and retention of
the life-giving air.


Take up the study of agni (heat and electricity)
immanent in the earth and revealed in the gayatri verses,
and discover and develop for us its energy value like
that of prana, the breath of life. Discover the energy-
potential of the waters revealed in the trishtubh verses,
and develop it like the blazing ambers of fire.


10. (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi)
aT 1 SIN SAMER eol




[Names: Abhrirasi, Jagatena]
Man of scholarship and imagination, you are a
tool of discovery and development of yajnic value for
humanity. Living together with you, let us be able to
discover the secrets and then develop the power of agni
(fire and electricity) with the help of the jagati verses
of the Veda — agni which is like the very breath of life.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


266
11.




(Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi)

WA ue?




[Names: Hasta, Agnerjyotirnicayayya]
Savita, the creative man of science, having taken


up and holding a golden spade, should dig out and
collect the light and power of agni (electricity) with the
help of the anushtubh verses of the Veda and bear it on
the earth like the life-breath of humanity.


12.


(Vaji Devata, Nabhanedishta Rshi)






[Names: Rada, Praturtam]
Warlike man of heroic knowledge, come flying


on the wings at top speed, best and well-controlled. You
are a child of the region of the sun, your navel, centre
hold, is in the middle regions of the sky, and your home
and values are on the ground.


13.


(Vaji Devata, Kushri Rshi)






[Names: Yunjatham, Agnim]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Man of science and man of technology, both of
you creators of a shower of wealth, yoke this horse-
power of fire/electricity to this carriage bearing and
taking us to our destination.


14. (Kshatrapati Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi)
PAIS AAAS us




[Names: Yoge, Sakhaya, Indramutaye, Indramutay]
Friends, in project on project, and battle after
battle, we call upon Indra, our powerful ruler, to protect
us and defend the country.




[Names: Ganapati, Shunahshepa, Sarita]
"HE urea


[Names: Praturvannehyavakramannasasti, Rudrasya, Urvantariksam]
saha.


Overpowering the enemies, crushing the
oppositions, go forward and, creating peace and well-
being, come on top of the forces of the lord of justice


Creating fearlessness all round, moving on the
paths of peace and welfare, with strengthening and
supporting comrades, rise to the vast skies.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


16. (Agni Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi)






[Names: Prthivyah]
Man of knowledge and vision, from the surface
of the earth/from the midst of the sky, isolate and collect
heat/magnetic/electric energy, a source of comfort like
the light of the sun. From the surface of the earth/from
admidst the sky, we collect in abundance heat/electric/
magnetic energy, a source of comfort like the breath of
air. From the depths of the earth/heights of the sky, we
shall collect heat/magnetic/electric energy in abundance,
a source of comfort and prosperity like the breath of
life.


17. (Agni Devata, Purodha Rshi)





[Names: Waal, Anvagnirusasamagramakhyadanvahani]
The original agni (fire) is present in every thing
that is born in the universe. It is there before the dawn,
and with the dawn it proclaims the day. It is there before
the sun, and with the sun it pervades the rays of light
across the earth, the skies and the heavens.


(As the original fire pervades the heat and light


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of existence, so should the learned man spread the light
of knowledge everywhere).


18. (Agni Devata, Mayobhu Rshi)


[Names: Agatya]
The war-horse, having come on the course, shakes


the enemy in battle. The house-holder, in his extensive
home, loves to collect, light and watch the fire.


(So should the ruler of the land shake the enemies,
light the fire of yajna and enlighten the people with
education).









[Names: Mayobhu, Rishi, Akramya, Bhumya]
Hero of light, speed and power, having shaken
the enemies and having settled the earth in peace, you
take up agni (power and gold) with interest and
excitement, and ask us to go over the land so that we
may dig out and develop the same.


20. (Kshatrapati Devata, Mayobhu Rshi)


[Names: Gaeta]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Dyauste, Dyaust, Vikhyaya]
Enlightened ruler of the land, your past is as bright
as the sun, your present seat is firm as the earth, your
soul is magnanimous as the vast sky, your origin is as
deep as the ocean. Look round with your eye and be
firm and strong to face the challenges.


21. (Dravinoda Devata, Mayobhu Rshi)






[Names: Wrstararuransmata, Utkrama]
Man of power and action, giver of wealth, rise
up from this place of ours for the sake of great good
fortune so that, digging out the wealth of the earth
hidden in her womb (that is agni, gold and energy), we
may be prosperous and feel secure in our proper mind.


22. (Dravinoda Devata, Mayobhu Rshi)




[Names: Udakramid, Tatah, Agniin, Agnii]
Man of science and technology, producer of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and high on its course, so you rise and advance to win a
beautiful, well-deserved state of joy, the best, a very
paradise on earth. And then we too, desiring and
working for a life of joy, shall dig out and collect from
earth and air a wonderful golden wealth of energy and
create a very heaven for all.


23. (Prajapati Devata, Gritsamada Rshi)




[Names: Prthum]
I take you up, O fire/wind, to study and celebrate
with all my mind, besprinkled with the fragrance of
ghee, co-existent with all things and all regions of the
world, extensive, moving in all directions in waves,
grown powerful with food, and so beautiful to perceive.


24. (Agni Devata, Gritsamada Rshi)






[Names: Rroeizeran, Maryasri, Agnirnabhimrse, Agnirnabhimrs]
I perceive agni (fire and vital air) directly in and
from all directions. It is the beauty and wealth of
humanity, lovely in form and colour, and, vibrating by
and through the body, it is soothing and auspicious to
feel and endure. Just as I take it up for study and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




celebration with an honest mind full of love and
reverence, so you too all take it up and enjoy.


25. (Agni Devata, Somaka Rshi)






[Names: Dadhadratnani]
Agni, creator, producer, preserver and giver of
food and energy, omniscient eye of the universe, holds
and wields the wealth of the world for the generous and
the deserving people. Through the fire, He receives and
universally disperses the materials offered in yajna by
the house-holders.


26. (Agni Devata, Payu Rshi)




[Names: Dhrsadvarnam]
Agni/Commander of the forces, brilliant,
courageous, enduring, awesome, pious and
knowledgeable, defender of the weak and destroyer of
the wicked, day in and day out we honour you, praise
you, thank you in gratitude.


27. (Agni Devata, Gritsamada Rshi)




[Names: Brera]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Suchih]
Agni/Ruler/Yajamana, guardian and protector of
the people, brilliant as daylight, instant in action against
evil and darkness, from the waters and air, herbs, forests
and sunbeams, thunder, cloud and granite, you take the
best and rise pure and purer, strong and stronger among
the people every day every way.


28. (Agni Devata, Gritsamada Rshi)


dena ver fer: tasata t yout Senay




[Names: Garth, Jyotismantam]
In this yajnic world of Lord Savita’s creation, (in
the field of science and technology), with the attraction-
sustenance power of the earth and the sun, and the
positive-negative circuit of universal energy, from the
womb of the earth and the sky, I discover and develop
the heat and light of agni, immanent and beneficent
power of nature present like air everywhere.


Agni, lord of light, by your grace we discover


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and develop the power of agni, electricity from the midst
of the sky, since it is present universally like the breath
of air — agni which is a source of light, bright and
beautiful, blazing by the splendour of the eternal sun,
injuring none, and a means of comfort and happiness
for all the people.


29. (Agni Devata, Gritsamada Rshi)




Were Ren




[Names: Vardhamano]
Agni, universal electric energy, you are the carrier
of the waters and the mother of fire. Expanding the
oceans (on earth and in the sky), yourself expanding on
all sides, go on expanding with the expansive space of
the heavens in the great womb of eternity.


30. (Dampati Devate, Gritsamada Rshi)






[Names: Vyacasvati]
Man and wife, both of you live together in a
comfortable home of peace and plenty, safety and
security, in a state of abundance and uninterrupted
happiness. Live together a long age with yajna which,
well-maintained, is the best guardian-source of conjugal


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




31. (Jayapati Devate, Gritsamada Rshi)




[Names: Samvasathain, Agnimantarbharisyanti]
Man and wife, come together with heart and soul
in unison, fully caring for each other and all, attaining
a state of conjugal bliss, and live in peace and joy a
long age with yajna fire, eternal light immanent in all,
giving life and energy to all — and extended through
the yajna of technology to be a source of new power
and comfort.


32. (Agni Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi)


[Names: Fried]
arad: 3231




[Names: Purisyo, Murdhno]
Agni, fire/electric energy, present in everything,
you are the sustainer of the world. The first man of
highest knowledge of reality, ‘Atharva’, explores you
on top of the world, collects you and brings you down
from the sky.


33. (Agni Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi)




[Names: Yass, Asado]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Tamu, Vrtrahanam]
Then ‘Dadhyang’, man of science and
technology, and son-like disciple of the man of vision
and science, ‘Atharva’, further lights and develops you,
‘Indra’, i.e., electric energy, breaker of the clouds and
shatterer of the hidden sources.


34. (Agni Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi)




eos tot ToT nex




[Names: Dhananjayam]
Agni, energy existing in water and air, shower-
like source of power, winner of wealth in project after
project, destroyer of evil and wickedness, I develop you
in a positive and constructive manner.


35. (Hota Devata, Devashrava & Devavata Rshis)







[Names: Sida, Devavirdevan]
Hota, expert of the science of yajna, take your
seat of bliss on the vedi, light and complete the yajna in
the home of the noble yajamana. Agni, presiding power
of yajna, developed and protected by the noble sages,
feed the devas, powers of nature, with yajna materials
and bless the yajamana with the great gift of health and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




36. (Agni Devata, Gritsamada Rshi)


sifi3: BEN




[Names: Adabdhavratapramatir]
The young disciple, participant in the yajna of
education, sits close to his teacher in the house of
learning. Eager to learn and shine brilliant in virtue and
Dharma, smart and strong in performance, he is
dedicated fearlessly to the vows and values of his own
conscious choice. Blest is he with a thousand virtues of
generosity, with a tongue of purity like fire itself.


37. (Agni Devata, Praskanva Rshi)




Agni, venerable teacher, participating in the yajna
of education, great indeed you are and most eminent of
noble scholars. Shine and burn with the light of
knowledge and purity. Take your preceptorial seat,
remove the dark and create a full human being,
handsome and brilliant as the day.


38. (Apah Devata, Sindhudweepa Rshi)
sot ected nAi wem: i


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Tasamasthanadujjihatamosadhayah]
Man of science and medicine, create excellent
waters of spirituous efficacy and with their use in
horticulture produce medicinal herbs and fruits for
treatment of the people against consumptive diseases.


39. (Vayu Devata, Sindhudweepa Rshi)






[Names: Sart, Vayurmatarisva]
Lady of the home, generous and broadminded,
may the fragrant air of yajna sailing in the mother-sky
support and inspire your liberal heart beaming with joy.


Lord of home, noble and generous, moving in
the company of the blessed and the brilliant people with
spirit and enthusiasm, may all my effort and action be
for your good.


40. (Agni Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi)






[Names: Sujato, Vaso]
Agni/Grihastha, well-arisen with light and lustre,
abide in peace and security in your happy home. Shining
with beauty and prosperity, live decently, enjoy all forms
and modes of dress and ornaments, without vanity.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




41. (Agni Devata, Vishvamana Rshi)
sd fees xesenret at dem ferar i get at are




Agni, worthy house-holder of yajnic work and
conduct of love and non-violence, arise, and, with noble
and virtuous intelligence, advance and protect us.
Brilliant as fire and the sun, go forward with great
splendour and fame, doing laudable work for all to see.


42. (Agni Devata, Kanva Rshi)



[Names: Urdhvo]
Learned teacher, of high quality of mind and
intelligence, brilliant as the sun, stay firm for our
protection and progress. Eminent scholar of science and
technology as you are, you procure for us means of
power and defence. We call upon you and honour you
with the scholars of distinction and penetrative vision
sharp as the beams of sunlight.


43. (Agni Devata, Trita Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Citrah]
Learned teacher, man of knowledge, just as the
morning sun, rising between the heaven and earth,
beautiful, of various wonders, as its warmth is absorbed
in the herbs, dispels the shades of darkness from the
heaven and earth and moves on rising in its glory, so
should the child grow up gaining the light of knowledge
to shine in the life of its parents in the home.


44. (Agni Devata, Trita Rshi)






[Names: Rent, Sthiro, Prthurbhava]
Child, keen for knowledge, be firm in the matter
of education. Strong of body, sharp and smart in action,
fast in learning and doing, gain practical knowledge of
life’s affairs. Bright as fire and light, create a place of
dignity for yourself. Enjoy great prosperity and support
the people around.


45. (Agni Devata, Chitra Rshi)




[Names: Socirma]
Sonny, dear as my breath of life, be good to the
people, to all human creations. Damage not the earth


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and the environment, pollute not the sky, do not
desecrate the heavens. Do not destroy the trees and the


46. (Agni Devata, Trita Rshi)









[Names: Praitu, Bharannagnim, Vrsagnim, Vrsanam]
Dear son, educated and enlightened, vibrating,

fast and fiery with electric energy, rushing, roaring,


giving, shooting to the goal, fall not before the full years
of your life are attained.


Potent, creative, procreative, bearing and using
the versatile energy of electricity, bring the showers of
rain, child of the sea, sky and solar power, down to earth
for the good of all.


47. (Agni Devata, Trita Rshi)






[Names: Rtain, Osadhayah, Vyasyan]
Children of the nation, we know the Divine Law,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




simple, straight, constant and eternal. We observe it in
life and conduct. We know the truth of existence, real
and dynamic. We follow it in thought, word and deed.
We bear and use ‘agni’, the energy of nature, life's mode
of preservation and promotion, and scientific means of
protection and prosperity. It blesses herbs, trees and
other vegetation, and these give us health and energy.


Listen you all, this agni is come, so good and
blissful. Welcome it in response and rejoice.


Be seated, man of science and medicine. Drive
off all that is enervating and infectious. Throw off all
that is stupid and ill-disposed.


48. (Agni Devata, Trita Rshi)





Come would be mothers (in response to the
generosity of nature), take the soothing beauty of the
herbal flowers and the nectar-sweets of fruit so that the
timely arrival of the coming guest to the maternal womb


49. (Agni Devata, Utkeela Rshi)




[Names: Aspat, Susarmano]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Dear husband, blest with various strength and
power, bright and pure as agni (light), great, prosperous
and generous, dedicated to yajna and social life, stop
and remove the jealous, hostile and wicked enemies of
our married life, and I would live happy in your beautiful


home of love and peace, observing your noble values
of life.


50. (Apah Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi)
ae wia eu non




[Names: Mahe]
Women, pure, cool and generous like holy waters,
creators of domestic peace and conjugal joy, stay firm
and constant and hold on with strength and energy to
face the great and memorable battles of life with us.


51. (Apah Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi)




[Names: Radd, Sivatamo]
Women, the most blissful pleasure and happiness
of life that is yours and ours, create and share the same
here in the home with us with the love and passion for


52. (Apah Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Tasma]
Women, cool, pure and generous like holy waters,
be active and happy and create conjugal peace and joy
for a happy home for us and yourselves. And we too
shall be wholly and exclusively with you with all our
heart and soul.


53. (Mitra Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi)




[Names: Sujatam]
Just as Mitra, the sun, joining the earth and the
sky, illumines the two with its light, similarly I join you,
Agni (yajna fire), brilliant and beautiful, and light you
for the health and well-being of the people.


Just as you, husband and dear friend, having
joined the earth and home with the light of your
knowledge and sense of justice, give me love and joy
for the health and happiness of the family and the people,
so do I join and help you, man of noble birth and
education, in the life of the home and the people.


54. (Rudra Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi)
at pasza deu Wed yx




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Rudras (creative energies of the universe) create
the earth and light it with the sun. The sun is the
concentration of their energy and shines among the


Similarly, men and women of knowledge and
justice create the light and joy of life among the people
and shine like the sun.


55. (Sineewalee Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi)


zeai yet enc fu-irereit ehuirq AT uuu t




[Names: Samsrstam, Rudrairdhiraih, Rudrairdhirai, Hastabhyam]
Young man, just as an artist refines and softens
his plastic material with his hands and creates a beautiful
form, so a girl, soft and gentle, dexterous of hand and
efficient in yajna ritual, shaped and refined by serious
teachers of Vasu and Rudra (of twenty-four and thirty-
six years) standing is worthy of your love. Win her love
and take her to wife.


56. (Aditi Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi)


Riar deaat deter citar à
m qetufed weirat ead Sedat: eg UI


[Names: Sinivali]
Aditi, infinite creative power, mother of the


universe, the young woman inspired with love, of
beautiful hair, handsome of body, wearing beautiful


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




ornaments, virtuous in action and expert in food
preparation carries in her hands a tray of delicious foods
and waits on you.


57. (Aditi Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi)






[Names: Ukham, Mata, Makhasya, Siro]
Young householder, you are the head of yajna.

With her power, skill and intelligence, and, with her


own hands, may Aditimake a tray of yajna materials for
you.


Just as a mother holds her baby in her lap, so
may your wife hold agni, a bright and vibrating foetus,
in her womb in grihastha yajna.










[Names: Vasu, Vishvedeva, Sindhudveepa]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Vasavastva]
yajamanaya.


Virgin girl, firm and strong you are like the breath
of vitality, blissful and generous as earth. May the
teachers of the Vasu order of 24 years prepare you with
the inspiring gayatri verses to be my wife and give you


Bachelor youth, unshakeable as the vital air and
tolerant as the earth, may the teachers of the Vasu order
of 24 years prepare you with the inspiring gayatri verses
to be my husband and give you unto me. Bless me with
children, wealth of life, good health, economic
prosperity, and honour and lustre. And the children
would be for the yajamana, the teacher, for study.


Young woman, you are firm like the sky, full of
love like the space between earth and heaven. May the
teachers of the Rudra order of 36 years prepare you with
the trishtup verses to be my wife and give you unto me.


Young man, you are firm like the sky, full of love
like the space between earth and heaven. May the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




teachers of the Rudra order of 36 years prepare you with
the trishtup verses to be my husband and give you unto
me. Get me children, wealth of life, good health,
economic prosperity, and social honour and lustre. And
the children would be for the yajamana, the teacher, for


Young and learned woman, you are inviolable like
the light of the sun, brilliant and enlightening. May the
teachers of the Aditya order of 48 years, with the jagati


Young man of learning, you are firm and
invincible like the light of the sun, brilliant in character
and behaviour. May the teachers of the Aditya order of
48 years, with the jagati verses, give you unto me as
economic prosperity and brilliance of well-being. And
the children would be for the yajamana, a brilliant
teacher, for study.


Blessed girl, you are firm and strong as the
universal spirit of life among living beings, darling of
space in all the directions. May all the learned sages
and brilliant leaders of the world, with the anushtup


Blessed young man, firm and strong as the vital
link of life among living beings, admired of everybody
in all the directions, may all the learned sages and
brilliant leaders of the world, with the anushtup verses,
give you unto me as husband. Bless me with children,
glory, health, economic prosperity and intellectual
brilliance, and the pride of heroic motherhood. And the
children would be for the yajamana, the teacher
preceptor of truth, for study.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


59. (Aditi Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi)


gaaaf usu




[Names: Krtvaya, Putrebhyah]
Mother teacher, you are the giver of knowledge
for the girl-child, your disciple. Let the disciple receive
your body of knowledge with observance of the
discipline of ‘brahmacharya’ (celibacy and austerity).


Let the mother give the big, sacred, earthen
sacrificial tray to the disciples to mix and cook the
materials and prepare these for the fire of yajna.


60. (Vasus and others Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi)






[Names: Indrastva, Varunastva]
Brahmachari/Brahmacharini, may the teachers of
the first order of Vasus of 24 years standing, with gayatri


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




verses, like the vitality of pranas, strengthen you with
nourishing and delicious foods.


May the scholars of the higher order of Rudras
of 36 years standing, with trishtup verses, like science,
enlighten you with scientific method and discriminative


May the scholars of the highest order of Adityas
of 48 years standing, with jagati verses, like the purest
air of the sky, temper you with right conduct and
behaviour.


May the versatile scholars and men of wide
experience of the world, with anushtup verses, like the
vibrations of electric currents, vitalize you with inspiring
advice and discussion.


May Indra, man of power in governance, train
you in the art of management and administration. May
Varuna, man of right choice, give you the right vision
and will in practical ethics and politics of value. May
Vishnu, man of comprehensive knowledge and yoga,
train you in the practice of personal and collective yoga
and yajna of cooperation and common pursuits.


61. (Aditi & others Devata, Sindhudveepa Rshi)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Aditistva, Angirasvat, Angirasvad, Angirasv, Angirasvat]
Innocent child, may the noble teachers,
distinguished among the scholars of the world, at a
settled place on the earth probe and open out your mind
for development like the heat of fire.


Intelligent girl, may the wives of scholars,
distinguished among scholars of the world, at a
distinguished school on the earth, hold you in their care
like the breath of life.


Ambitious girl, may the women of science and
word-power, distinguished among scholars of the world,
light up your will and intelligence like the vitality of


Industrious girl, keen for the wealth of knowledge
like a yajna vessel, may the noble teachers, eminent
among distinguished scholars of the world in the field
of science, in a reputed school of the world, enlighten
you and temper you to perfection like the light of the
sun.


Brilliant girl, may the scholars of Vaidic
knowledge, noble and distinguished among scholars of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the world, in some reputed institution of the world,
enlighten you to fullness of resistance and action like
the currents of electricity.


Dedicated girl, may the noble women of
distinction, eminent among the scholars of the world,
most meritorious and flying high in achievement,
generous as teachers refine you and distil your human
quality to perfection like the nectar of juices in the lap
of mother earth in an ideal institution.


Dear girl, be with them and learn, and grow to


62. (Mitra Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)
fired adog taet arate à




[Names: Dyumnam]
Lady of the house, honour and safeguard the old
and auspicious wealth and reputation of your noble
husband, friend and supporter of all and an admirable
man of generosity and hospitality.


63. (Savita Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)






[Names: Avyathamana]
Lady of the house, your noble husband, brilliant

and generous like the sun, of long arms, beautiful hands


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and lovely fingers, with his strength and potency may
bless you with conjugal joy and children. You too,
without fear or trouble, may fill the earth in all direction
with hope and expectation.


64. (Mitra Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)


were gedt wate fees spem cen d




[Names: Utthaya, Mitraitam, Mitraita]
Enlightened girl, arise, and having risen, be great
and stay firm.


Friend, dear groom, I give unto you this noble
and generous girl for wife wholly and exclusively for a
free and fearless life. Never have any reservations with
her, never entertain any differences with her as a matter
of faith and trust.


65. (Vasus & others Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)




May the scholars of the first order of Vasus, with


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the inspiring gayatri verses, kindle you like fire. May
the scholars of the higher order of Rudras, with the
enlightening trishtup verses, enlighten and firm you up,
like pranic energy, in the triple discipline of knowledge,
action and worship. May the scholars of the highest
order of Adityas, like the sun, brighten you up with the
jagati verses of world vision. May all the noble saints
and sages of the world, with the elevating anushtup
verses, enliven and sanctify you like the distilled
essences of nature's powers.


66. (Agni & others Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)




[Names: Asana, Akitimagnim]
With truth of word and action, light the fire which
inspires to courageous thinking and collective decision.


With truth and honesty of social behaviour, light
up the inner vitality which inspires the mind to will and
the intellect to analyse and understand the problems of
life.


With honest social action, promote the agni,
social will, which inspires chitta, instrument of
knowledge, to think and preserve the knowledge already
gained.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




With truth of word and honesty of commitment,
maintain the fire which inspires you to proclaim the
truth in speech and to safeguard it in memory and


Keep up the fire of inspiration, action and
enthusiasm for the preservation and promotion of agni
(fire and energy, both physical and mental), lighted, used
and applied in personal yoga and collective action in
the service of Prajapati, lord of the created world, Manu,
men of thought, research and meditation, Agni, the
enlightened leaders of the world, and Vaishwanara, the
omnipresent Life of existence — the Supreme.


(Keep up the fire, for the fire, in the service of


[Names: Fire]
67. (Savita Devata, Atreya Rshi)






[Names: Aquat]
Let the people of the world opt for the love and
friendship of the leading Light of the world. Let them
all gird up their loins, take up arms for the wealth of the
world and win the prize of honour and prosperity with
truth of word and deed. This is how you flourish.


68. (Amba Devata, Atreya Rshi)






[Names: Agniscedam, Agnisceda]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Mother, alienate us not from learning. Hurt us
not to ruin. Proud and bold, be valiant and take us to
the end of the job with success. Mother and father/
Mother and child, doing thus bold and fine together
like Agni, fire and the sun, you will accomplish the task


69. (Amba Devata, Atreya Rshi)




[Names: Asgard, Drmhasva, Justam]
Noble woman of knowledge and brilliance,
generous as mother earth, be strong and firm for the
sake of peace and joy. By your own virtue, with food
and water, you have realized the power vibrant in pranic
energy. Pure and unsullied, rise in this home yajna and
help us grow. The food you have prepared for the yajna
and the knowledge you have gathered,may it be a gift
for all the people.


70. (Agni Devata, Somahuti Rshi)




[Names: Drvannah, Sahasasputro]
Noble young man, living on herbs and fruits for
food, and the fragrance of distilled ghee from yajna for
‘drink’ (breathing), a yajnic of long standing, choice of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the good, son of a bold and courageous man, wonderful
of nature, character and performance, rise in this home
yajna of the family for growth in peace and joy.
71. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi)


[Names: Hadisi]
"refi aR seta wee




[Names: Parasya, Yatrahamasmi]
Virgin girl of excellence, on marriage, leave those
you have departed from, and come, join those who are
here on this side. Support and defend those wherever I
am. If there was anything low or mean earlier, give up
that, and adopt and uphold the values of our family.


72. (Agni Devata, Varuni Rshi)




[Names: Paramasyah, Purisyah, Purupriyo]
Agni, young man of excellence, best of social
supporters, most loved of the people, come here from
afar on a chariot of fire for this excellent girl, join her,
and with her overcome the hurdles of your life.


73. (Agni Devata, Jamadagni Rshi)




[Names: Yadagne, Sarvam]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Young]
things are for you, all those we place on the shelf. Accept
and take all that as fire accepts the oblations of ghee.
All that is ours is yours. All that is yours is ours too.


74. (Agni Devata, Jamadagni Rshi)






[Names: Yadattyupajihvika]
Young man/woman of excellence, brilliant as fire,
whatever the woman/man of controlled taste and tongue
eats, and howsoever her/his breath flows in and out, all
that is yours, for you. That is for your love and joy.
Take all that as fire consumes the oblations.


75. (Agni Devata, Nabhanedishtha Rshi)






[Names: Hadise, Aharaharaprayavam, Rayasposena]
Agni, learned man of justice and brilliance, just
as we bear lovely green grass for a horse in the stables
every day, so we bear good and wholesome food and
other things to this fair and just house-holder as his
partners in good deeds of Dharma. May we, enjoying
ourselves with plenty of food and energy, health and
wealth with him, never injure the honour and reputation
of this noble man out of jealousy.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


76. (Agni Devata, Nabhanedishtha Rshi)
[Names: Gahaha]
MARA wos




[Names: Nabha, Irammadam]
When the fire is lit in the vedi in the heart of the
land and the battle is raging for abundance and
prosperity and for high national honour, we call upon
agni, a fiery leader with electric action, victorious in
battle and of tremendous endurance, himself a man of
plenty and prosperity, admirable of character and
adorable in performance. (We call upon such a man to
lead the nation.)


77. (Agni Devata, Nabahanedishtha Rshi)




[Names: Atsain]
There are the forces up against in arms, large,

swift and ready to strike. There are the thieves and the

smugglers. All these that are there, I throw into the

flames of fire. President of the Council, commander of
the army, you do the same.


78. (Agni Devata, Nabhanedishtha Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Damstrabhyam, Hanubhyam]
Ruler of the land, Chief of law and order, tear
the night-walkers and highway men with the fangs of
punishment, crush the robbers and smugglers with the
jaws of justice. Seize and hold the thieves and grabbers
of others' rights and property with the chains of law.


79. (Senapati Devata, Nabhanedishtha Rshi)
a way ufereta Aah eni |




Chief of law and order, those who commit
despicable acts in the public, rob and smuggle in the
forests, and commit crimes in high and hiding places
and live a life of sin and crime, all these I put into the
court of your justice.


80. (Adhyapaka-Upadeshika Devata, Nabhanedishtha Rshi)






[Names: Nindadyo]
Ruler of the land, if a person maligns us out of
hostility, or hates us out of jealousy, or speaks ill of us
out of contempt, or deceives us to injure and destroy
us, reduce all that hate, anger and negativity to ashes.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


81. (Purohita & Yajamana Devata, Nabhanedishtha Rshi)
[Names: Samsitam, Sainsitam]
hitah.

I am the high-priest of the yajamana, foremost in
his creative and constructive projects. May the
yajamana's knowledge of the Veda and mine be
commendable. May his strength and prowess and mine


be admirable. May his power and dominion and mine
be great and praise-worthy.


82. (Sabhapati & Yajamana Devata, Nabhanedishtha Rshi)




[Names: Cate, Udesam, Ksinomi, Mitranunnayami]
aham.

I am the high-priest of the yajamana. With my
knowledge and science of the Veda, I overcome the
strength of arms, power and valour, honour and lustre
of the others, i.e., thieves, robbers and cut-throats, etc.,
reduce their strength to nullity, and raise our honour
and lustre high.


83. (Yajamana & Purohita Devata, Nabhanedishtha Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Annapate]
Lord of food and energy, bless us with food,
nourishing, invigorating, free from pollution and
pleasing to taste. Bless the giver, the yajamana, to
advance and attain fulfilment and prosperity. Give us
energy both for humans and the animals.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1. (Agni Devata, Vatsapri Rshi)






[Names: Drsano, Sriye, Agniramrto]
Agni, Lord of Light, Light Itself, the Sun,
explodes into light and illuminates the earth and reveals
all the objects on the earth. The self-luminous lord,
Himself the immortal seed of life, for His own glory
and joy of the creatures, creates forms of indestructible
life with foods as means and support of life. And He it
is who creates the man of knowledge and vision (to
show the divine path of life to others).


2.  (AgniDevata, Kutsa Rshi)


Tera «rra ferat emat fsreprebs are à



[Names: Natkosasa, Dyavaksama, Agnifa]
The night and the dawn, one dark, the other
luminous, both different in form but of equal mind,
together nurse one child, the sun, like two mothers. The
self-luminous agni, light and life of the universe — of
which the sun is a child — pervades both the earth and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the heavens. All the powers of nature which sustain and
invigorate life hold on to agni, the central life and spirit.


3. (Savita Devata, Shyavashva Rshi)






[Names: Visva]
Savita, lord of light and life, the sun, choice of
all, watches all and inspires all. It lights up the dawn
and illuminates and reveals all the forms of existence.
It creates the means of life and support for the humans
and the animals, and lights up the heavens above.


4. (Garutman Devata, Shyavashva Rshi)






[Names: Suparno, Stoma, Sama, Suparno]
Man of knowledge and of the power of
knowledge, you are like a celestial bird with beautiful
wings and a high-flying soul: threefold virtue of
knowledge, action and divine worship is your head and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




brain by which you ward off the miseries of others. The
knowledge of gayatri verses is your eye and vision.
Brihad-rathantara sama verses are like your wings,
something like a chariot by which you can cross the
rivers of misery. Rigveda is your soul. The chhanda
verses of the Veda are like the limbs of your body. The
verses of Yajurveda are like your name and identity.
Samaveda is like your body. The do's and dont's of the
Vamadevya Samans are like your back bone. The roll
of your voice is like your claws. You are like the divine
eagle, Garuda, majestic and magnanimous. You are the
sun, master of grandeur. Rise to the heavens. Find the
bliss of heaven.


5. (Vishnu Devata, Shyavashva Rshi)




[Names: Fett]
mAs sat eared sasami fasis]
faama ni




Brilliant man of expansive knowledge, you are
an instrument of Vishnu, omnipresent lord of the world,
born to eliminate the jealous rivals. Study the gayatri
verses, use the power revealed in there, go and expand


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




over the earth, cooperate with the earth, work on its
resources, and develop the wealth and prosperity of the


Noble scientist, you are a co-worker with
omnipresent nature, born to defeat the proud and jealous
forces inimical to growth. Study the trishtubh verses
for knowledge and power for threefold comfort of body,
mind and soul and, flying on the wings of that
knowledge, cover the skies to explore and exploit the
resources of the sky.


Tempestuous scientist and astronaut, you are a
friend of agni, universal electric energy, born to
eliminate the failures and adversities of the internal and
external life. Study the jagati verses for the knowledge
of light and space and, on the wings of that knowledge,
reach the heavens. Cooperate with space and light
energy, cooperate with universal energy and conquer
the inner darkness with the light, and external failures
with knowledge.


Steady man of technology, you are an instrument
of eternal energy meant to serve as well as exploit the
natural resources of the environment and eliminate the
enemies who stem your growth. Go forward in and over
all the directions on the earth and around on the wings
of anushtubh verses, work with and on the currents of
wind and energy and dominate over the directions to
create one world on the earth in a healthy environment.


6.  (AgniDevata, Vatsapree Rshi)




[Names: Uest]
WIT: EI


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Akrandadagni, Sadyo]
Agni roars like thunder in the sky and proclaims
itself. Colourfully vitalizing the trees it caresses and
blesses the earth with beauty and fruit. Properly lighted,
it shines bright and immediately makes itself known.
Between the earth and the heavens it blazes with its
own splendour like the sun.


(Just as agni is radiant and benevolent with its
own majesty, so should the ruler/President of the
republic be brilliant with his own qualities of nature,
character and actions and bless the people with his grace
and benevolence. Only a person of benevolence and
brilliance deserves to be the ruler.)


7. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi)




[Names: Sanya]
posena.


Agni, brilliant and blazing presence abiding
before us, generous man of knowledge, come blessing
us with health and longevity, lustre of life, children and
family, wealth and prosperity, acquisition and
fulfilment, discriminative intelligence, beauty and
dignity of life, and all-round growth and progress.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




8.  (AgniDevata, Vatsapree Rshi)


eT en




[Names: Adha]
Agni, lord of light, knowledge and power/Man
of natural and material science, come and visit us a
hundred times with your acts and gifts. And may the
blessings of your visits and gifts be a thousandfold for
us. With the strength and support of your promoters,
recreate and supplement for us whatever we might have
lost in knowledge or natural and material wealth.
Rebuild and regain for us whatever honour and prestige


9.  (AgniDevata, Vatsapree Rshi)






[Names: Gtest]
Agni, brilliant power of light and knowledge/Man
of knowledge and science, come, return your visits with
the gifts of food and energy, health and age. Save us
from sin and evil deeds again and again, and inspire us
to do great things.


10. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Visvapsnya, Enlightened]
with all the wealth, come with gifts of that language
and that intelligence which holds for us all the means
and materials of comfort and prosperity. Come, and help
us grow in all directions of life.


11. (Agni Devata, Dhruva Rshi)


at careret aRar era: i




[Names: Visastva]
Agni/Ruler of the land, we accept you and
conduct you to the council as the ruler. Grace the seat
of your office, be firm and stay inviolable. All the people
accept and honour you. Let the land and the nation,
under your control, never fail and fall to ruin.


12. (Varuna Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi)






[Names: Hees, Uduttamam]
Varuna, lord of freedom and bondage, Ruler of
the land, power of law and liberty, loosen and untie our
chains of bondage of the highest, medium and the lowest
order and let them drop from us. And then O Sun, lord
of majesty, we shall be free from evil, crime and sin


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and, dedicated to the vows of your discipline and law,
we shall serve our land of inviolable freedom and


13. (Agni Devata, Trita Rshi)





[Names: Sota, Fergal, Agre, Agnirbhanuna]
Agni, the sun, great, first and foremost, positioned
over and above the dawn, comes forth from the dark
and rises with all its glory. Resplendent with its
wonderful beams which adorn it like brilliant limbs of
its personality, it expands over the regions of the world,
dispels the darkness and illuminates them all over with
its light. (So should the ruler, first and great among the
brilliant people of the land, come forth with the greatness
of his personality, illuminate the land and glorify all
the people.)


14. (Jiva & Ishwara Devata, Trita Rshi)
wed e




[Names: Hamsah, Nrsad]
Hansa is the great soul that destroys evil. It exists
in purity. It lives in all and all live in it. It fills the skies
and expresses in holy work. It is the giver and receiver


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of oblations in yajna. It sits in the vedi and in the earth.
It is rambling around as a venerable visitor. It stays in
the home and in the sky and all through the seasons. It
rules over people and commands the commanders. It is
with and above the best of people. It lives in truth and
in virtuous conduct. It is in space and in the heart. It is
in the waters and in the vitality of prana, and it creates
the waters and the vitality. It activates the senses, moves
the animals and magnetizes the earth. It creates the
universal law and abides in it. It forms the mountains
and the clouds and it showers with the rain. It is the
truth and dynamic reality of existence, and it is great


(It is the man of such an individual soul, inspired
by the attributes of the great supreme soul, who deserves
to be the ruler.)


15. (Agni Devata, Trita Rshi)






[Names: Mainam, Socirantarasyain]
Agni/Ruler/individual soul, you know all the
ways of the world. Sit in the lap of this mother earth/
mother-land/mother. Don't hurt her with the heat of your
power and passion. Don't dazzle her with the beams of
your knowledge. Light of knowledge and power of
vitality, be in the heart of the mother and shine there
with the light of life.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




16. (Agni Devata, Trita Rshi)
se Ga TAT: wat A |




[Names: Antaragne, Tasyastvam, Omniscient]
of the land, brilliant with your own light in your place
in the world/dominion, blazing with your power and
glory, be good and kind to the people.


17. (Agni Devata, Trita Rshi)




[Names: Pracaq, Sivastvam, Sivah]
Agni, ruler of the land, having been good and
kind to us, the people, sit at peace undisturbed. And
then, having rendered all the regions of the land in all
directions safe and secure in the good life, be
comfortable with satisfaction in your own office of
justice and governance.


18. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi)




[Names: Raan, Taumssrsterftreri, Divaspari, Agnirasmad, Trttyamapsu]
Agni, the sun, first rises over the heavens. Then


[Names: Third]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




emerges in the pranic energies of nature, in the waters
and in the mind of humanity — thus illuminating and
activating everything and every mind from within. The
pious and the devout people invoke, light and worship
Agni, perpetual power, spirit and light of the world.


(Just as Agni is the power, spirit and light of the
world, so should the ruler be. And so should he/she
vitalize and illuminate the people, and so should the


19. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi)
S SEES nee




[Names: Vidma, Vidma]
Agni, light, energy and power of the world, let
us know the three orders of the three powers of yours
(heat, light and electricity). Lord of majesty, love and
favourite of all, let us explore and know the various
forms and places where you exist, which you support
and which support you. Let us know that supreme name
and the thing you are in the essence which is hidden in
a mysterious cave. Let us discover the spring, the water
and the cloud from where you issue forth in formal
existence (so that we may be blest with the power and
prosperity which follows the discovery and the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




20. (AgniDevata, Vatsapree Rshi)




[Names: Trtiye]
Agni, light and life of the world, a leader of
thought among men, as I am, I discover and light you in
the oceans. A visionary of humanity, I discover you in
the foods, in the vapours and in the clouds. In the third
region of the heavens of light, abiding in the solar
sphere, in the dawn and in the heart of steam and flowing
waters, great men discover, light and develop you.


21. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi)




Agni, light and energy of life, roaring as lightning,
reverberates in the skies with an explosion. Lighted well
all-round and immediately blazing, it shines and
illuminates everything. Between the heaven and the
earth it shines with the beams of its own brilliance. The
light reaches the earth, energizes the soil and emerges
in the beauty of vegetation.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




22. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi)






[Names: Haor, Srinamudaro, Vasuh, Somagopah, Somagopa, Usasamidhanah, Usasamidhana]
Generous lord of the light and glory of life, spirit
of the graces of nature, sustainer of wealth and beauty,
source of desire and fulfilment, guardian of the
sweetness, joy and greenery of the earth, haven and
mainstay of the world, child of the very force and victory
of life, brilliant in the dynamics of existence, He blazes
in splendour before the dawns. Such is Agni. (Such
should be the ruler.)


23. (Agni Devata, Vatsapri Rshi)


ere auma urere wem aadA
qs 3N



[Names: Visvasya, Vidum]
Light of the world, going everywhere, seed of
life, rising as the sun, illuminating the earth and heaven,
breaker of the darkest cloud, hallowed and consecrated
by the people and the energies of nature, such is Agni.
(Such should be the ruler in his domain.)


24. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi)


[Names: Nugat]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Iyartti]
Immortal agni, lovely and lovable, pure and
purifier, intelligent and self-conscious, a holy presence,
is existent in men and women. The same throws up the
fiery smoke upward and with instantaneous light
illuminates the sun and heaven.


25. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi)






Agni, immortal light and vitality of existence,
brilliant, golden glorious, explodes in heaven and
illuminates everything with the earth. In love, as if, with
the beauty of the world, it assumes various forms of
self-assertive and inviolable life. And yet that Heavenly
Power which creates this agni and brings it into
existence is another, the Eternal Life of life and Light
of light.


26. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi)
aesa PUT seas de gadan |




Agni, brilliant and blissful lord of light, generous


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and ever youthful, whosoever may well prepare and
faithfully offer for you rich and sumptuous food as
sacrifice to-day, shower on him/her the gift of your light
and take that favourite of the gods across to the world
of joy.


27. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi)






[Names: Aasa, Priyah]
Men of knowledge, wisdom and expertise,
celebrate agni and promote it among the famous and
the prosperous. Sing of it in verses of praise on the
auspicious and admirable occasions of yajna. It is dear
to the men of heat and light and the sun. Promote it
with the hopes and actions of your children. Promote it
with the hopes and aspirations of those who are yet to


28. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi)


fada: mcu



[Names: Tvaya]
Agni, lord of fire and science, the experts of yajna
dedicated to you, with the use of fire and your blessings,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




daily pursue and achieve all the desired objects of the
world. Men of reason, intelligence and will, desirous
of wealth, choose for research and work on the cowshed
and the cloud with the rays of the sun for the realisation
of progress and prosperity.


29. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi)






[Names: Risg, Astavyagnirnaram, Advese]
Agni, worshipped by seers and sages, is the
darling of humanity, auspicious and adorable.
Omnipresent, universal and all-commanding, it is the
guardian and promoter of the means of life, peace and
joy. We invoke the powers of earth and heaven —
powers free of hate and jealousy and sources of bliss.
Great men of the world, brilliant and generous,
guardians of the peace and prosperity of life, generate
and hold for us the wealth and power of life and polity
which creates a great nation and fearless humanity.


30. (Agni Devata, Virupaksha Rshi)






[Names: Samidha]
(Agni is an ‘atithi’, a chance guest, which comes
at its own will whenever it comes. Serve it with the best
of offerings you have.)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Light and serve agni (fire) with fuel and fragrant
materials. Wake it up, raise it with ghee and other
chance visitor. Offer the best of yajna into the fire.


(Like the fire of yajna, serve the man of light and
knowledge with the best you can offer for food and gifts
whenever such a venerable person happens to visit you.)


31. (AgniDevata, Tapasa Rshi)




Agni, of lovely forms of manifestation and lord
of infinite light and wisdom, may all the noble and
generous people of the world serve and celebrate you
with the best of intention, devotion and acts of worship.
May Agni, light of the universe, be good and kind to us
all. (May the man of knowledge and wisdom be good
and kind to us all as such persons are agni in human


32. (Agni Devata, Tapasa Rshi)


Wary Sarita arte for
geen Ar finer» uan: u33u




[Names: Predagne, Sivebhirarcibhistvam, Brhadbhirbhanubhirbhasan]
Agni, lord of light and life, come forth to bless
us with the gracious beams of light and warmth of life.
Burning and blazing with the mighty flames of fire, hurt


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




not our people and our children.


(As Agni, so should the ruler and the commander
of the army be mighty and blazing with splendour,
always protective but never unjust and hurtful.)


33. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi)




[Names: Cassy, Ueet]
MAA: URI




Agni roars and thunders like lightning in the sky
as it proclaims its presence on the earth. Joining every
bit of life and vegetation, it inspires all forms of
existence with passion and vitality and thus manifests
itself, protecting and promoting life. And it goes on
blazing with its mighty splendour from the earth below
to the highest heaven.

(So does the scholar with his knowledge, the ruler
with his power, and the commander with his force, shine
and blaze all round, protecting, promoting and inspiring
the nation and the environment with freedom, passion
and enthusiasm).


34. (Agni Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)


rar 4: nxn




[Names: Purum, Puru]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




This agni, ruler/commander of the forces, attends
to the affairs of the state, and, distinguished with great
knowledge and brilliance of character, shines forth like
the sun. He stands firm every way by the state and the
nation in the battles of life and defence. Dear and favourite
of the good, intelligent and generous people, moving
around among the people like a visitor, may he be good,
kind and beneficent to us and shine.


35. (Apah Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)







Celestial waters, receive this light of agni, this
ray of light, this seed of life. Keep it and nourish it in
some soft, fragrant and beautiful region of freedom.
Wives of the most virtuous order of character, honour
and bow to it to receive it. Bear it in the vapours of
space as a mother bears a child in the womb.


36. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi)
smart area aided were d




[Names: Apsvagne, Garbhe]
Agni, seed of life, the soul with the subtle and
the causal body, your home is in the celestial waters of
space. You love to grow in existence with the herbs,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and thence, placed in the mother's womb, are born
again.


37. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi)


misaeni m asada |g




[Names: Garbho, Garbho]
Agni, light of life, seed with the subtle and the
causal body, you are a child of the herbs. You are a child
of the plants and trees. You are a child of the entire forms
of life in existence. You are a child of the waters of earth
and heaven.


38. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi)
[Names: Prasadya, Sainsrjya]
punara"sadah.

Soul, light of consciousness and seed of life,
through the ashes of the funeral pyre you rise to a new
home in the celestial waters of space. Then you come
down to the earth to be with the forms of herbs. And


then you come in to the mother's womb and are born
again in a new body.


39. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Punarasadya, Sese]
Agni, soul with the desire and will to live in the
forms of existence, again and again you come to find a
place in the celestial waters of space. Again and again
you descend to the earth to attain herbal forms of life.
Then again you enter the mother’s womb and rest there
to grow as a part of her life within. When you are born,
you sleep in her lap in peace and joy. Noble soul, be
good to the mother, be the darling of her love, joy and


40. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi)


[Names: Gates]
Agni, come again with energy, come with food,


come with health and vitality for a long age. Come again
and again, save us from sin and evil.


41. (Agni Devata, Vatsapree Rshi)


fasaceal fasaa wes u




Agni, come with wealth and honour. Come with
a shower of all round nourishment and universal energy
to the point of satisfaction and satiation for all and help
us grow, develop and progress. Come with food for body
and mind.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




42. ((Agni Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)






[Names: Asser, Urea, Bodha, Piyati]
of independent and comfortable means, understand the
sense and meaning of this great word of mine, important,
worthy of attention and expressive of deep meaning with
someone praise you, I am your admirer, and I appreciate
and value your health of body and intelligence of mind.


43. (Agni Devata, Somahuti Rshi)






[Names: Yuyodhyasmad]
Agni, man of wealth and honour, creator and
generous giver of power and prosperity, intelligent lord
of knowledge, know for us the truth of life and existence
and, in truth of word and deed, fight out our negativities
and eliminate our hostilities for the achievement of
success in all the affairs of life.


44. (Agni Devata, Somahuti Rshi)




[Names: Uteasstacen]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Punastva]
Agni, creator and giver of wealth and honour,
may the brahmacharis and scholars of the Vasu, Rudra
and Aditya order light you up in the vedi again and
again. May the devotees of the lord of existence and
masters of the science of yajna promote your gifts with
the performance of yajna. Agni, power of light and life,
grow on in your operations with the oblations of ghee
and fragrant materials so that the plans and ambitions
of the yajamana be fulfilled.


45. (Pitarah Devata, Somahuti Rshi)


AAS ise




[Names: Apeta, Adad]
The teachers who are old and those who are new
and the parents and other seniors who are here on the
earth, all should realise and actualise for young aspirants
the knowledge of this world. The judge of the aspirants’
performance may grant them the certificate of completion
and graduation in achievement. Hence keep away from
Adharma (injustice and untruth), go on firmly with
Dharma (truth and justice), and realise it without delay
here and now.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




46. (Agni Devata, Somahuti Rshi)
dara aaen fub a aen wana |




[Names: Samjnanamasi, Agnerbhasmasyagneh, Srayadhvam]
Agni, man of knowledge, having passed through
the crucibles of fire like ash, you are knowledge itself,
full and complete like the orb of the sun and powerful
like the force of electricity. May your plans, intentions
and aspirations pass on to me as mine.


Be wide-awake, collect knowledge from all round,
go forward and take it to the heights. Be cooperative,
mutually dependent, collectively self-dependent. Take to
knowledge and to the teachers.


47. (Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)


seesaw: ud uum wei aa-
[Names: Gefea]
mAT: wel


[Names: Ayain, Sahasriyam]
jatavedah.

This is that agni, vital heat of life, in which Indra,
the sun, as if in love with life, places the nectar of life,
Soma, like the distilled and delicious food for a thousand
people. Life of life, Jataveda, generous giver as you are,
you are worshipped by the devotees in your own right.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




It is for the love of life that I absorb the same nectar of
life into my body system. It is for the same love of life
that I hold on to my darling wife and I enjoy my food
and drink.


48. (Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)




[Names: Srreafisrqetad, Yenantariksamurvatatantha]
Agni, light of the universe, life of existence,
power and presiding presence of the world, lord of yajna
and friend of the yajniks, the glory that is yours shines
in the heavens, vibrates in the earth, blooms in the herbs
and breathes in the waters. It is the same by which the
skies are pervaded and expanded. It blazes as the sun, it
rolls as the oceans of space, and it watches our human
performance as the universal eye.


(Let the scholar and the teacher attain the
knowledge of the universal spirit, nature and life in
existence and, like agni among human beings, impart the
same to his/her disciples.)


49. (Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)


feasa: seu






All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Agni, man of knowledge and light of the world,
your knowledge reaches unto the waters of heaven and
you proclaim that knowledge to the bold and the best
among intelligent people who impart it to their disciples.
It covers the waters which float in the luminous sphere
of the sun and studies the vapours and energy vibrant on
this side of the sun and beyond.


50. (Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)




[Names: Purisyaso, Jusantam]
All men and women of the world, experts in
knowledge and blest with virtue, brilliant and energetic
like agni (fire and electricity), living together with mutual
love and shared qualities of enlightenment, free from hate,
jealousy, fear and all physical and mental ailments,
dedicate themselves to yajna (creative and constructive
cooperative activities) and enjoy great plenty and
prosperity of high order in life.


51. (Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)




[Names: Idamagne, Purudamsam, Purudamsa, Syannah]
Agni, light of life/brilliant man of knowledge,
may your light, knowledge and intelligence be for our
share. Create for us and help us create wealth of cows,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




plenty of milk, food and energy, divine speech, vision
and wisdom for all time for the sake of yajna and the
yajniks. May we beget children capable of mighty deeds
and achievements. And may the brilliant teacher bless
our children with universal wealth of existence and the
vision of divinity.


52. (Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)




[Names: Afra, Xigren]
Agni, man of pure soul and brilliant character
like light and fire, dear son, this is your place/home of
birth where, born at the right auspicious time, you shine
by your life and conduct. Know this, rise high and help
us advance in wealth, prosperity, honour and happiness.


53. (Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)






[Names: Paricidasi]
Son/Daughter, you are knowledgeable, well
aware and intelligent. Stay firm in this place of yours
sitting close with that noble soul like the breath of life.
Master/Mistress you are all round versatile. Stay firm
in your place sitting close with the noble spirit of your
Dharma and Karma. Be firm with the spirit of
omniscience, giver of all wealth and joy.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




54. (Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)
vire dur fig gone de gat ay d




[Names: Lokam]
Fill up, serve and complete this life. If there is
any loophole, plug it. If there is any short-coming,
overcome it, advance and excel. In this field of
knowledge and action, may Indra and Agni, father and
mother, nurture you with instruction and advice. May
Brihaspati, the teacher, guardian of divine knowledge
and good conduct, guide and confirm you in virtue. Be
strong and stay firm in your place.


55. (Apah Devata, Priyamedha Rshi)






[Names: Uaaled, Mesio, Janmandevanam]
Blooming women of beauty and grace, wives of
noble people, in this wonderful paradisal phase of their
cultured home life, milk the dappled cows and prepare
and season delicious foods with the dressing of soma.
They create sweetness and joy in all the three phases of
time, past, present and future, and are blest with noble
and promising children.


56. (Indra Devata, Sutajetra Madhuchhanda Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








patim.


All the sacred voices of truth inspire and exalt
Indra, man of power and glory, wide and rolling as the
sea, supreme hero of the chariots and battles of life,
protector of truth and Dharma, and promoter of life and

(The brahmacharis and brahmacharinis, who
complete their education with the sacred voice of the
Veda and the words of truth written and spoken by the
Rishis, rise in life, and when they marry in the vaidic
way, they raise families which grow in happiness and

57. (Agni Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)



gutar daa uou



[Names: Samitain, Isamurjamabhi]
Wedded couple, two-in-one joined in love,

brilliant in health and lustre, of equal and enlightened
mind, decent and graceful in clothes and ornaments,
both of you together plan, act and realise your goal in
food, energy, prosperity, honour and glory.


58. (Agni Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Wedded couple, I join you as two-in-one in life
and sanctify you with identical thoughts, intentions and
operations, identical vows of plans, actions and
achievements, and identical memories, values and


Agni, noble teacher, high-priest of yajna, be our
super-guide and guardian. Create, hold and sustain for
the yajamana couple nourishment, energy, honour and


59. (Agni Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)






Agni, Lord of knowledge, light and power of
yajna, rich in spirit, science and materials, and presiding
priest of all round growth, you are dedicated to the earth
and the laws of life. Rise, move abroad and, having
created peace and prosperity in all directions, come and
grace your super-seat of guidance.


60. (Dampati Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)


wed a: aA welaaratual 1 ar aacfexfere

Wedded couple, both of you be of good mind


and thought toward us. Be of noble equanimity and
blissful intention for us. Be free of pride, arrogance and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




negativity. Violate not yajna, nor Dharma, nor the
yajnapati. Reborn as master and mistress of the
knowledge of creation (as children of Agni), be good
and kind to us right now.


61. (Patni Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)



ew vee




[Names: Mateva]
Just as the earth like a mother holds the vital heat

for the nourishment of life in her womb, so does a woman
worthy of love and recognition hold a brilliant soul in
[Names: Vishwakarma]
of the world), father and guardian of His children
(Prajapati), with gifts and nourishment from all the
seasons and powers of nature, deliver her of a noble


62. (Nirriti Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)




[Names: Asunvantamayajamanamiccha, Anyamasmadiccha]
Nir-riti, spirit of adversity, desire to catch the
stingy and the miserly who does not perform the yajna
and does not extract the soma for libations. Pursue the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




thief and the smuggler and catch him on the way. Go to
someone other than me. That is your desired object and
action. Salutations to you, power of justice.


63. (Nirriti Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)






[Names: Namah, Yamena]
Power of eternal law, eternal felicity and
adversity, your splendour is awful. You go with the law
and are one with the law. Salutations to you. Undo the
iron-chains of slavery and take this yajamana to the
heights of heavenly bliss.


64. (Nirriti Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)


[Names: Poeta]
favad: next




[Names: Yasyaste]
Awful spirit of adversity, eternal felicity, ever-
abiding with the law, I offer the oblations into your mouth/
in the yajna vedi for the breaking of the chains of
existence. Ordinary folks play with you in a state of
wanton negligence, feeling that you are the all forbearing
earth. But I know you well for what you are, spirit of
justice, as the mother of felicity as well as the power of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.



65. (Yajamana Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)


[Names: Akera]
ae Tar ec


yedam cakara.


Yajamana, the inexorable chain which the spirit
of adversity, in full justice, had tied round your throat
for want of yajna, I undo from the centre of your life
right away. Regenerated through yajna, eat of this holy
food. The spirit of generosity has done this miracle.
Salutations to the spirit of generosity.


66. (Agni Devata, Vishvavasu Rshi)




[Names: Nivesanah, Sacibhih]
Who is a noble yajamana? A successful house-
holder (grihasthi)? The man of vitality who takes a wife,
makes a home, creates wealth and contributes to life like
Savita, the creator; who watches and illuminates all forms
of life on earth with his eyes like the sun, and manages
various developments with his acts like Indra, the leader;
who is firm in true Dharma and stands inviolable in the
battles of the pathmakers of the world — such a man is
the right yajamana and a noble house-holder.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




67. (Krishivala Kavayah Devata, Vishvavasu Rshi)






[Names: Haat, Sira, Dhira]
Men of vision and intelligence use the plough
and the yoke. The men of constancy among the brilliant
and the generous separately as well as together devoutly
in peace expand the beauty and graces of life and


68. (Krishivala Kavaya Devata, Vishvavasu Rshi)


are drt fa om dae qa art aude sieh i



[Names: Aetasgsequa, Waar, Yunakta, Gira]
Work with the plough and yoke the horses/
bullocks. Expand the agriculture and its methods, tools
and knowledge. Prepare the soil and sow the seed. In
accordance with the knowledge of agriculture develop
many kinds of produce of the richest order. And when
the grains are ripe for harvesting, reap and bring the
harvest home for all of us.


69. (Krishivala Devata, Kumaraharita Rshi)


SAAT use


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Sunam, Sunasira]
Let the plough-shares turn the soil well. Let the
farmers merrily follow the bullocks while they till the
land and sow the seeds. May the sun and the air
supplemented by the oblations of rich materials bless the
herbs and plants with delicious fruit and nourishing


70. (Krishivala Devata, Kumaraharita Rshi)


AeA eon




[Names: Marudbhih, Urjasvati]
Let the furrow in the field, made by the plough-
share and levelled and refined by the leveller, accepted
and approved by all the noble and generous people and
vitalized by winds and rain, be enriched with water, ghee,
sugar and honey. Energized and enriched thus with food,
the field may yield for us a wealth of delicious


71. (Krishivala Devata, Kumaraharita Rshi)




[Names: Wael, Langalam, Somapitsaru, Tadudvapati]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




The plough, fitted with the share, symbol of peace
and joy, a tool of soma— plenty, prosperity and happiness
— drawn by horses or bullocks and held firmly by the
hilt, turns up the crust of the kind and generous earth to
make it ready for sowing.


72. (Mitra & others Devata, Kumaraharita Rshi)




[Names: Kamam, Varunaya, Mitraya, Indrayasvibhyam, Indrayasvibhya]
Mother of fulfilment and source of satisfaction,
generous earth/furrow of the field/holy cow, let the desires
be fulfilled for friends, noble scholars and guests,
persons of power and glory, the people, powers of health
and pranic energies, and for the growth of herbs and


73. (Aghnya Devata, Kumaraharita Rshi)





[Names: Genmanssnier, Vimucyadhvamaghnya, Jyotirapama]
Be free from poverty, ill-health and ignorance.

Let us be rich with the holy inviolable cows for


nourishment and prosperity. May we cross this darkness
and attain to the light of the sun and the glory of life.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




74. (Ashvins Devata, Kumaraharita Rshi)


gaa wemel Wow




[Names: Sajurabdo, Sajosasavasvina]
The year goes with the divisions of time, the dawn
is one with the ruddy morning, the pranic energies
express themselves in the actions of nature and of living
beings, the sun shines and radiates light with its rays,
the vital heat loves the earth, the libations of yajna and
the voice of the Veda.


(So should the people live together with one
another. So should the husband and wife live a common
shared life, complementing and supplementing each other
in an integrated life.)


75. (Vaidya Devata, Bhishak Rshi)






[Names: Manai]
Earlier, three years before in the three seasons,
whatever herbs such as soma etc. grew out of the earth
with other natural powers such as water, air and sunlight,
I should know: the hundred and seven varieties of these
brown ones for the treatment of hundred and seven
ailments which affect hundred and seven vital spots in
the body.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


76. (Vaidya Devata, Bhishak Rshi)






[Names: Asam]
Mother earth, mother of herbs, hundreds are the
places where the herbs grow, and thousands are the roots
by which they grow into innumerable varieties. Then, O
physicians of a hundred specialities of ailments and
scholars of a hundred varieties of herbs, come you all
and render this body and community of mine free from


77. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi)

[Names: Osadhih]
All of you men and women, herbs, creepers and
plants such as soma, in full bloom, rich in fruit and
medicine, fast and victorious over disease take you across
all ailments and sorrow. Use them, be healthy and strong
and, like the victorious men of horse, rejoice and be
grateful to them.


78. (Chikitsu Devata, Bhishak Rshi)






[Names: Osadhiriti, Saneyamasvam]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Herbs and medicinal plants, as mothers, are of
divine efficacy. They nourish and save like mothers.
Hence I pray for you all: Lord of Life, Supreme Soul,
may I by divine grace have the gift of horses, cows,
clothes and home, and a healthy body.


79. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi)
sat at Redi usi at qafacpar |




[Names: Gobhaja, Purusam]
Men and women of the earth, you reside in a body
which may or may not last till to morrow. Your life rests
like a drop of dew on the leaf. Take the gifts of the earth
and look after the soul in the body with herbs and
medicines to live a full life.


80. (Oshadhaya Devata, Bhishak Rshi)






[Names: Gama, Yatrausadhih, Viprah, Wherever]
there go as brave warriors go to the battlefield against
the enemy. That person of intelligence and expertise who
fights disease and destroys the anti-life forces is called
the physician, the person who cures.


81. (Vaidya Devata, Bhishak Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






Medicinal herb is that which is powerfully
efficacious, nourishing and rejuvenating, strengthening
and lustrously invigorating. Physician, know and find all
such herbs for the health and immunity of the sick and
the needy.


82. (Oshadhaya Devata, Bhishak Rshi)






[Names: Ucchusma, Dhanain]
O man, the invigorating power and fragrance of
vitality of the herbs which are ever keen to give health
and lustre to your body and soul issues forth from them
just as cows issue forth from the cow-shed (anxious to


83. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi)
[Names: Prep, Preheat, Iskrtirnama]
Know the medicine which, as mother, serves your
life with healing and, like the flowing streams, repay the
debt by completing the development of the science of


healing by herbs. Whatever causes disease and loss of
health, remove from the paths of life.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




84. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi)




When a thief attacks a cowpen, he is challenged
and warded off by the master. So do medicinal herbs,
universal in their growth and presence, challenge
whatever ailment attacks the body like sin and destroy
the ailments.


85. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi)






[Names: Asafa, Yadima, Atma]
When I refine and strengthen these medicines and
hold them in my hand, the very root of the consumptive


ailment grabbing the vitality of the sick person is


86. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi)


[Names: Yasyausadhih, Tato]
When the medicines spread over every part and
every joint of the sick person, then, mighty and powerful,
present in every cell of the body, they drive away the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




consumptive forces of disease, eliminating, as if, the
enemy intruders of the body.


87. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi)


[Names: Sakam, Sakam]
Physician, let the consumptive disease go off with
every dose of medicine, with every new prescription,


with every motion of the breath, and let it be eliminated
along with the last trace of pain.


88. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi)
are elssrcmdercerm-emumssuled i


[Names: Anya]
Physicians, of your medicines, let one supplement
and protect the other and let the other in turn support and
protect the former. Let all of them be thus mutually
agreeable in proper proportion. Keep this word of mine
as true and hold on to it.


89. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi)




[Names: Brhaspatiprasutasta]
All the medicinal herbs which are rich in fruit


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and those which are without fruit, those which are rich
in flowers and those which are without flowers, all of
them are created by the Lord Creator. Let all of them,
with proper treatment and preparation by the physician,
protect us and free us from disease and pain.


90. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi)






[Names: Muncantu]
May the physicians and the medicines protect us
against ill-will, anathema and self-guilt. May they free
us from water-borne diseases and those which are
peculiar to the prosperous and the distinguished persons.
May they release us from ailments caused by acts of
indiscipline and breach of the rules of health and the good
life. May they save us from all diseases caused by neglect
or indulgence of the senses and the mind and those caused
by frustration of the intellectuals.


91. (Vaidyas Devata, Bhishak Rshi)




[Names: Avapatantiravadan, Purusah]
The medicinal herbs come from heaven, the
region of light and life. So say the wise. The person
who feeds upon them never comes to any suffering.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




92. (Vaidyas Devata, Varuna Rshi)





[Names: Tasamasi]
Physician, of the many herbal medicines which

are efficacious with a hundred properties and of which


soma is the chief on top, you are the best judge for the
peace of mind and achievement of the desired result.


93. (Vaidyas Devata, Varuna Rshi)






[Names: Brhaspatiprasuta]
The many herbal medicines with life-giving
properties like soma, specially grown on the earth, are
the blessed gifts of the Lord-giver of life, Brihaspati.
Refined and vitalized by the physician, they may, we
wish and pray, give health and vigour to this woman/
man.


94. (Bhishaja Devata, Varuna Rshi)


wel: age Aes AÀ H su idu uen




[Names: Yascedamupasrnvanti, Sarvah]
Men and women of medicine, these herbs of
which you and others hear around us, or which are close
by, or those which come from afar, all these herbs,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




plants, creepers and trees together, we wish and pray,
may give her/him the gift of health and vitality.


95. (Vaidyas Devata, Varuna Rshi)
m at faq aia at cure eal a:




[Names: Herren, Dvipaccatuspadasmakarn, Whoever]
she never injure/destroy you, nor should he/she come to
any harm. Nor should the person for whom I (the
physician) dig you out come to any harm. May all the
bi-peds (humans) and all the quadrupeds (animals) of
ours be free from suffering and disease.


96. (Vaidyas Devata, Varuna Rshi)


sida: Hee ae we wal d




[Names: Yasmai]
Herbs and medicines alongwith their chief, soma,
power of vitality, say: O Soma, king of herbs, whoever
the patient for whom the learned physician has prepared
the cure, let us take the person across the pain of


97. (Bhishagvara Devata, Varuna Rshi)






[Names: Nasayitri, Satasya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Herbal medicine is a destroyer, sure cure, of
chronic sores and numerous types of pulmonary disease.


98. (Vaidyas Devata, Varuna Rshi)






[Names: Tvamosadhe]
O Gandharva, herbal medicine, the singer and
artist searches for and discovers you. So does Indra,
man of power and virility, Brihaspati, man of universal
Vaidic lore, Soma, man of peace and blessed virtue, the
ruler and the scholar. They all search for, discover, use
and benefit from herbal medicines and free themselves
from consumptive ailments.


99. (Oshadhi Devata, Varuna Rshi)




[Names: Beet, Sahasva, Sahasva]
Herbal medicine challenges disease. It resists the
anti-life forces and overthrows the enemies of good health
: Let the medicine resist all that causes sin and disease.
It resists, fights out, defeats and eliminates the negativities
and builds up the vitality and invincibility of the system
for longevity.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


100. (Vaidyas Devata, Varuna Rshi)






[Names: Dirghayusta, Satavalsa]
Medicinal herb, may the person who searches,
discovers, digs out and prepares the medicine be of long
life. May the patient for whom I, the physician, prescribe,
prepare and administer the medicine be of long life. May
you (the herb) too be of long life and grow to rise into a
hundred roots, shoots and branches.


101. (Bhishaja Devata, Varuna Rshi)






[Names: Tvamuttamasyosadhe, Upastirastu]
Herbal medicine/Physician, you are supreme. All
the trees (such as peepal and banyan) are subordinate to
you as sources of medicine. Anyone who tries to suppress
us, any disease that might weaken us, let that be under
our control. (Strengthen us with health, vitality and
courage of spirit.)


102. (Kah Devata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi)


femi feri got


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Yascapascandrah]
The Lord who is the creator of the earth, who is
the lord of the universal law of truth, who is the first of
all and creator of the air, waters and the moons, and
who pervades the heavens, whom we worship with the
best homage of fragrant oblations, that lord of life may
never hurt us with disease and ill-health.


103. (Agni Devata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi)






[Names: Abhyavartasva, Vapam, Agnirisito]
Come earth, revolving with yajna and water, milk
and food, again and again, continuously. And may agni,
vital life-generating heat of nature, activated by the Lord
creator of life, bless your fertility and increase your power
of production.


104. (Agni Devata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi)


wed was dox!




[Names: Taddevebhyo]
Agni, vital energy of the universe, may we imbibe
and internalize that power of your nature, character and
function which is immaculate and generative, beautiful
and blissful, pure and sacred, and worthy of service and
worship through yajna for growth and development.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


105. (Vidvan Devata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi)






[Names: Rasam, Sale, Isamurjamahamita]
From Lord Agni and the fire of yajna (spiritual,
mental and physical) I receive and imbibe food for life
and energy for action. I receive and internalize the fluent
voice of the mother of truth and Dharma. May all this
food, energy and spirit enter, vitalize and strengthen my
body, mind and sense, and may it invigorate my cows
with fertility.


With all this food, energy and vitality I’d fight
out and eliminate all pain, suffering, disease and debility.


106. (Agni Devata, Pavakagni Rshi)




[Names: Asare, Wart, Brhadbhano]
Agni, lord of lustre, light of universal knowledge,
man of supernal vision, let the adorable message of yours,
youthful brilliance and splendid beams of light shine and
radiate across the world. Whosoever celebrates you in
yajna, you bless the yajamana giver with holistic
nourishments and fullness of energy and vitality with
additional food for yajna.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




107. (Vidvan Devata, Pavakagni Rshi)






[Names: Wrerenel, Terent, Pavakavarcah, Anunavarca, Putro]
Agni, lord of light and splendour, pure as fire,
clear and bright as sunbeams, full and complete, rising
to the heights with the sun and pervading the spaces
protects the heaven and earth like the son protecting
the father and mother.


(Similarly the young brahmachari or
brahmacharini, roaming around the sacred premises of
his/her institute, grows high in the light and lustre of
knowledge, pure as fire, clear as sunbeams, full and
complete, and rises high like the sun. He/she protects
his/her father and mother as the sun protects the heaven
and earth.)


108. (Agni Devata, Pavakagni Rshi)




[Names: Sail, Geka, Urjo]
Agni, child and protector of energy, lord of wealth
and intelligence, lover and well-wisher of all, invoked,
lighted and raised with devotion and hymns of praise,
receive the libations, rejoice and grow. People of various
hue, wonderfully favoured and secure in life, children of
love and beauty, and sweet and dear by nature, offer food


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


to you for growth and development.


(As fire is invoked with love and devotion and
fed with libations, so should the child be fed, nourished
and helped to grow by parents and teachers with all the
love and faith at their command so that the child not
only lives and learns but also rejoices while he/she lives
and learns.)


109. (Agni Devata, Pavakagni Rshi)






[Names: Beas, Irajyannagne]
Immortal Agni/man of action, invoked/inspired
and rising in glory, rejoicing with people, create and
expand the wealth of life for us all. Shining in the beauty
and grace of your form in life, protect, promote and
perfect the yajna of life which brings happiness,
prosperity and all the blessings of existence.


110. (Vidvan Devata, Pavakagni Rshi)






[Names: Iskartarmadhvarasya, Ratim]
Agni, lord of power and sustenance, you uphold
who performs and promotes the yajnic programmes of
creation, construction and development. You sustain the
person who is intelligent and wide-awake. You protect


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the person who is settled in a peaceful home. You
maintain the person who gives liberal amounts in
charity. You are the preserver of the great and generous
earth and its environment. You maintain a steady supply
of food and energy. And it is you who protect and
promote the ancient and traditional wealth of existence.


111. (Agni Devata, Pavakagni Rshi)




[Names: Rtavanam, Srutkarnain]
For the sake of peace, prosperity and joy, the
people of former times have honoured and followed the
human traditions of ages and you, Agni, lord of light
and life, man of vision and excellence dedicated to Truth
and Dharma, great, possessed of universal knowledge
and experience, discreet listener and practical achiever
and master of divine qualities of character.


112. (Soma Devata, Gotama Rshi)






[Names: Vrsnyam, Bhava]
Soma, ruler, man of grace and blessedness, rise
and grow to excellence to win the glory of life. May the
vitality, virility and grandeur of life come to you from all
sides, and, in the battles of life and the nation, be great.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




113. (Soma Devata, Gotama Rshi)


firer Vai




[Names: Vrsnyanyabhimatisahah, Apyayamano]
Soma, man of peace, power and joy, may all
delicious waters, milk and juices come to you. May all
vigour, virility and vitality come to you. May all food,
energy and means of speedy and powerful defence be
yours to break down the pride of the enemy forces.
Growing mighty and mightier, and rising towards heaven
and immortality, hold on to the highest words, thoughts
and visions as food for the mind and soul.


114. (Soma Devata, Gotama Rshi)






[Names: Subhih]
Soma, man of widest fame and highest honour,
happiest at heart and creator of joy all round, rise and
shine with the beams of your excellence and be friends
so that we all together may rise and advance in all


115. (Agni Devata, Vatsara Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





Agni, lord of life, light and love, the devoted
yajamana as a child of yours would divert his mind even
from the most exciting places and, with the sweetest
words of praise, come to concentrate on you as a calf
runs to the mother cow even from the richest pasture.


116. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi)






[Names: Tubhyam, Angirastama]
Agni, most brilliant power of the universe, the
placed in life, converge on you, each for the fulfilment
of his/her own special desire.


(Just as the children of the Lord creator approach
Him with prayers for the fulfilment of their desires, so
do the people of the land, even though well-placed in life
otherwise, approach the ruler for the fulfilment of their


117. (Agni Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Samradeko]
Agni, sole and sovereign lord of the world, loved
and worshipped by all that is born and all that is yet to be


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




born, rules and blazes in his glory across the dearest
and most beautiful regions of the universe.


(Just as Agni, bright and blazing with His glory,
is the lord of the universe, so that person alone is worthy
of being the ruler of a country who is brilliant by virtue
of his/her mind and character, unique in performance,
loved and respected by all and shining across the present
and the possible future in all regions of the land.)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1. (Agni Devata, Vatsara Rshi)






[Names: Mamu]
First of all I dedicate my mind and soul to the
Lord Almighty, Agni, lord of light and life, power and
prosperity, and I instal the yajna-fire in my home for
the gifts of vigour and valour, wealth and prosperity
and a noble family. May all the divine powers, for sure,
favour and bless me.


(Just as a house-holder or a student is dedicated
to Agni, the Lord Almighty, and to agni, the yajna-fire,
so too should he/she be dedicated to the agnis among
the community, leading men and women of knowledge,
wisdom and virtue who have specialised in various
fields of knowledge and development.)


2.  (AgniDevata, Vatsara Rshi)
Wen us




Lord Almighty, infinite spirit and life of the
universe, you are the centre-hold of waters and energy.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




You are the original cause of heat and light. Surrounding
and feeding the expansive oceans on earth and in space
from all sides, you are great and ever greater in the
intervening spaces between earth and heaven. And you
reveal your glory by the measure and immensity of the
light of heaven.


3. (Aditya Devata, Vatsara Rshi)


[Names: Adara]
fad: usu




Brahma, infinite spirit of the universe, all-creator
and omniscient, is the first and greatest reality of
existence. Worthy of love and adoration, It is the highest
object of desire for the wise. The great and glorious
objects (such as the sun, the moon, the earth) which fill
the skies in various regions of space are exemplary
revelations of Its creative power.


In the beginning of creation, that Brahma, from
the potential and law of Its own existence, invokes
Prakriti, the original Nature which is the cause of all
that is come into existence and also that which is yet to


4. (Prajapati Devata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi)


[Names: Roat]
faa iri


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Hiranyagarbhah]
The One Lord of Light and the sole creator of
lights such as the sun existed before creation (as He
ever exists). He alone was and is the lord and sustainer
of all forms of created being. He holds and sustains the
earth and heaven and supports this whole universe. We
worship the same one lord and offer Him homage with
libations of fragrant materials.


5.  (Ishwara Devata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi)






[Names: Drapsascaskanda, Samanam]
That eternal, perfect and primordial joy (Ananda)
which blesses and coexists with the earth, the heaven
and the original cause of existence, Prakriti, the same
joy which universally subsists with its origin, the sole
creator, I adore with all my breath of life (five pranas),
mind and soul.


6.  (Hiranyagarbha Devata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi)






[Names: Xrsaredfisr]
For all those that move in space, and those which
move on the earth, which move in the regions of heaven


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and those which move about in the sky between earth
and heaven, for all these moving forms of existence
Nature has provided food, the means of sustenance.


7. (Hiranyagarbha Devata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi)




For all the arrows of the enemies of life, and those
who damage the herbs and trees, being poachers and
parasites, and those who sleep and wait in the obscure


paths for victims, for all these surreptitious forms of
moving life, a challenge and a thunderbolt!


8.  (SuryaDevata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi)


a art that feat a at wv eae d
satay ade eet: Ese AA: en


[Names: Yesamapsu]
namah.


Or those negative forces that are in the heat of
the solar region, or those in the rays of the sun, or those
which have taken abode in the waters, to these moving
forms of existence, a challenge to counter, overpower


9. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Krnusva, Trsvimanu]
Agni, ruler, your influence is fast, far and wide.
Increase your strength and power and make it felt. Go
like a shot over the earth as a king with his attendant
forces. Cast your net of law instantly against the
destructive elements and punish them with inescapable


10. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)



[Names: Tapuinsyagne]
Agni (ruler, commander of the forces, lord of
justice), the flames of your fire blaze with awe. Pure
and purifying with might and daring, fall upon the forces
which burn and destroy life and society, and with
libations unrestrained, release a rain of lightning terror
striking in all directions.


11. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)
aina aa ue 9




Agni, instant in action, bold and inviolable, if


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




there is a tormentor or a wicked maligner or a supporter
of sin and crime far or near against you or against us,
release the forces to seize him and remove the obstacles.
Be the protector and guardian of this people/community.
Let none bully or terrorize you and us.


12. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)


[Names: Assaia]
IRA ue




[Names: Udagne]
Agni, lord of heat and light, leader of an
advancing humanity, rise and grow. Let the light spread
around. Wielder of the sharpest weapons and inviolable
power, burn the enemies of life and human values.
Blazing lord of fire and justice, if someone creates,
supports or advances the selfish, ungenerous and
ungracious forces, scorch him like a patch of dry shrubs.


13. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)


[Names: Agnestva]
sadayami.
Agni, lord of light and power, leader of humanity,
rise and stay on top. Counter and ward off the enemies


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of mankind. Develop the best things which our saints
and scholars have discovered and invented. Resist and
reduce the strength of the opponents to nil. Eliminate
the natural, traditional and customary enemies of
society. I instal you in your seat with the baptism of
light and fire.


14. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)





[Names: Yatesfa]
This Agni, the sun, is the chief and summit of
heaven. It is the father and sustainer of the earth and its
life. It vitalizes and refreshes the waters of life for the
earth and her children. So should you be, Ruler of the
land. I anoint and consecrate you with the radiant power
of Indra, the sun.


15. (Agni Devata, Trishira Rshi)
[Names: Tasa]
fafa ya afe vef ferie: ru wem
TA lul



[Names: Bhuvo, Sivabhih]
Agni is the leader and mover of the earth and its

life, of the motions of wind and energy in the middle


sphere, and of the cosmic yajna of creation. And there
everywhere it is one with the blissful dynamics of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




existence. As it sends up its flames of fire bearing the
light and fragrance of yajna, it holds its head high and
wields the light of the sun in heaven.


(Similarly, O king, be the leader of the nation's
life on earth and the dignity and dynamics of the polity.
Be the path-maker of the policies of peace, justice and
happiness and hold your head high with words of
enlightenment, creativity and joy for the people.)


16. (Agni Devata, Trishira Rshi)






[Names: Seger]
Spirit of the human nation, polity of the world,
you are the centre-hold of dharma, enlightenment and
peace, created, completed and blest by the Lord-maker
of the world, Vishvakarma. Let not the seas hurt you.
Let not the sky, sun and moon and the clouds hurt you.
Unhurt, free and peaceful, develop, beautify and beatify
the earth.


17. (Prajapati Devata, Trishira Rshi)





[Names: Prajapatistva, Vyacasvatun]
Spirit of humanity, mother of the common-
wealth, lady of the polity, be open, free and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




accommodative, be expansive and celebrated. And may
the creator of life, father of humanity, Prajapati, establish
you with His blessings on the currents of rivers, on the
paths of the seas, and over the currents of air in the sky.


18. (Agni Devata, Trishira Rshi)





[Names: Bhurasi, Prthivim]
Agni, light of the universe, vitality of nature, you
are the being and existence, you are the mother-support,
whole, inviolable, all sustaining and all-nourishing,
centre-hold and wielder of all the regions of the world.
Sustain, guide and raise the world, develop and expand
the life on earth. Do not hurt the earth nor violate the
life of her children. (As Agni is the life and support of
the earth, so is the woman the mother of the home.)


19. (Agni Devata, Trishira Rshi)




[Names: Wederfgresa, Agnistva]
Lady of the home, may Agni, lord of light and
life/your husband, the presiding presence of the home,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




fully protect and support you in every way for all the
energy of life, prevention of suffering, best manners
and behaviour, inner strength, dignity and recognition
and virtuous conduct. In a state of perfect peace and
well-being, with all the joys of life in a good home, stay
firm and secure with Agni, the lord of life, and your
husband, like Prakriti with Purusha and the light of the
dawn with the day.


20. (Patni Devata, Agni Rshi)






[Names: Beau, Kandat]
Lady of the home, delicate and graceful as the
durva grass, just as the grass grows from one section of
the stalk to another, from one knot of joint to another,
so you too, grow in life, and let us grow and help us
advance in life a hundred-fold and from thereon a


21. (Patni Devata, Agni Rshi)






Lady light of the home, root and foundation of
the yajna of family life, as you grow a hundred-fold
and then you rise a thousand-fold, O noble and generous
mother, we offer you love and reverence in homage with
the best fragrant offerings.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




22. (Agni Devata, Indragani Rshis)






[Names: Tabhirno]
Agni, those lights of yours which, in the solar
region, illuminate the heavenly spaces with the sun-
beams, with all those lights to-day bless us with
enlightenment for the sake of our people.


(As Agni illuminates the heavens with the light
of the sun, so should the teachers of men and women
enlighten them with the light of their knowledge. What
is the secret of Agni turning into light, and into light of
the sun?)


23. (Brihaspati Devata, Indragani Rshis)






[Names: Xeno]
Divine powers of nature, your energy and vitality
illuminates the sun and vitalizes the lives of animals
like cows and horses. It also works in the motions of
objects and the perceptions of the senses.


O Brihaspati, Lord omniscient of this mighty
universe, may the heat and light of natural energy in-
vest our vitality with all that power and energy.


Brihaspati, noble teacher and master of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




knowledge and education, may our teachers like Indra
and Agni in-form and in-vest our deep interest in life
and nature with the hidden secrets of light, power and
sensation as expressions of one universal natural energy


[Names: Prakriti]
24. (Prajapati Devata, Indragani Rshis)


fee waited. we, afer




[Names: Virad, Agniste, Agnist]
The cosmic forms of the universe bear the light
of the Lord. Self-luminant stars such as the sun bear the


O lady of light and knowledge, noble teacher and
torch-bearer, may the father of created beings, Prajapati,
instal you in your seat on the face of the earth. Give full
light of knowledge to others for the sake of full energy,
safeguard against suffering, and all good qualities of
nature, character and action. Agni, lord of light and life,
is your master and guardian. Stay firm and secure with
that noble and gracious lord as the soul with the body,
Prakriti with Purusha and the light of dawn with the
day.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




25. (Ritava Devata, Indragani Rshis)






[Names: Asara, Vasanti, Indramiva]
sidatam.


Chaitra is a honey-sweet month. Vaishakha is a
month of honey-sweets. These are the months of spring.
Both these, born of agni, are closely connected to
summer. May the earth and heaven be favourable to us
for the gift of excellence, may the waters be favourable,
may the herbs and trees be favourable, may all the orders
of agni (heat and light each), committed to its own law
and function, be favourable to us. May all the forms of
vital fire in earth and heaven, integrated and mutually
harmonious, supporting and energizing the two spring
months like all the powers of nature serving and working
for the omnipotent lord Indra, bless and vitalize us in

Just as the earth and heaven abide firm and secure
with the Supreme Lord of the universe, just as the spring
months abide by the vital fire of earth and heaven, so
should we all abide firm and secure by the lord of the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




universe, nature and spring, as breath abides by life, as
Prakriti abides by Purusha, and as part abides by the


26. (Kshatrapati Devata, Savita Rshi)


[Names: Asadha, Sahasravirya]
Ruling power, Shakti, you are tolerant,
challenging and invincible. Challenge the mean, the
ungenerous and the destructive forces. Face, fight and
defeat those who are bent upon violence. You have the
strength and prowess of a thousand powers. Be good to
me, be good and gracious to all.


27. (Vishvedeva Devata, Gotama Rshi)

[Names: Reta, Madhvirnah]
The winds blow cool and sweet as honey. The
streams and ocean-currents flow cool and sweet as
honey. May the herbs and trees be as sweet and pleasant
as honey. (Let us too be good and sweet in our conduct
as the winds, the streams and the herbs and trees,
observing the law and ethics of value.)


28. (Vishvedeva Devata, Gotama Rshi)






All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




May the nights and the dawn be honey-sweet,
soothing and inspiring. May the dust of mother-earth
be sweet and fragrant. And may the light of the sun be
honey-sweet and kind as father for us all. (Let us too
follow the honey-sweets of nature in life.)


29. (Vishvedeva Devata, Gotama Rshi)


meia waq A: d$




[Names: Madhumanno, Madhvirgavo]
May the herbs with their juices and the trees with
their fruit be honey-sweet for us. May the sun be kind,
sweet and invigorating. May the cows be sweet and
rejuvenating as honey with their milk. May the saints,
scholars, seniors and teachers be kind and affectionate
as the sun, the mother earth and the mother cow.


30. (Prajapati Devata, Gotama Rshi)
WAAL !i3o!l


[Names: Acchinnapatrah, Anuviksasvanu]
Be in the centre of the waters deep as in the clouds
so that the heat of the sun may not injure you nor the
earthly heat, Vaishwanara, hurt you. Look round so that
the people, free and fully protected from heat, are
favourable to you. May the showers of celestial rain


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




31. (Varuna Devata, Gotama Rshi)


atte aata: Weed eiie d res aa ga war us e u



[Names: Trintsamudrantsamasrpat, Purisam]
The master controller of pranic energies of life,
through karma, crosses the three oceans of time and
space leading to the paradisal abode of the blessed in
the sphere of the sun. Abiding with the Spirit of the
universe he/she brightens up the earth and showers it
with all the objects of sweetness and desire.


Man/Woman on earth, go thither to the region of
the blessed where your noble ancestors have gone. (And
that is the spring of the life of supernal joy.)


32. (Dyavaprithivi Devatas, Gotama Rshi)






May the great earth and high heaven bless and
promote this yajna of our life. So may they and our
parents join and bless our yajna of the household with


33. (Vishnu Devata, Gotama Rshi)






All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Behold the great acts of the omnipresent lord of
the universe, Vishnu, acts like the creation, sustenance
and dissolution of the world. Therein I see the essence,
the ultimate blueprint of the discipline and actions for
living. He is the great friend and lover of the human
soul. He is the giver of bliss.


34. (Jataveda Devata, Gotama Rshi)

gait ereurdr stat were atest Sa-
[Names: Breed]
WET MIEXTI


Mother of the universe, Prakriti, firm and
inviolable power, bearer of the world's forms in
existence as you are, it was through your oceanic womb
that Agni, the omniscient creative consciousness first
manifested Itself. And He, knowing and manifesting
through everything born, moved the materials of the
cosmic yajna to the evolutionary powers of nature and
communicated the cosmic knowledge through gayatri,
trishtup and anushtup verses to the visionary sages.


(In the context of the home, grihastha, the wife is
the Prakriti-like centre-hold of the organisation and the
mother of the familial creation. The husband is agni,
jataveda, father and yajamana of the home-yajna.)


35. (Jataveda Devata, Gotama Rshi)


EH wa Wea weed gasade |


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Samradasi]
Master/Mistress of the home, you are the ruler,
brilliant, self-enlightened and self-disciplined. Be stead-
fast, live well and abide in the home for the sake of
food, energy, courage, wealth, honour and children. May
the noble and gracious Brahmanas and the learned and
eloquent scholars guide and protect you in your homely


36. (Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)






[Names: Aram]
Agni, lord of power and science, those horses of
yours which are swift and accurate to carry you to the
target of your ardour and ambition like an arrow and
thunder bolt, are wonderful. Lord of speed, rise and yoke
the horses to your chariot.


37. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi)




Agni, lord of light and power, veteran leader and
generous man of yajna, rise and yoke to the chariot of
your mission the horses/powers trained by the gods and,
like a glorious ruler and expert master, take your seat


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


on the chariot.
38. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi)


[Names: Gata]
aT: UBEN




[Names: Samyak]
Like streams, soft, sweet and ceaseless glides the
flow of words distilled and purified by the heart and
mind within. And I, wrapped in gold, in the midst of
the light and fire of Agni, turned to a flute of reed, hear
the murmur of the showers of benediction.


39. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi)






[Names: Asda, Abhiudidam]
To you Agni, lord of knowledge and speech,
thanks and salutations for the knowledge of truth, love
and lustre of life, light of science, and brilliance of
justice and rectitude! By virtue of you alone, this soul
has become aware of the entire world and of the
universal presence of agni, the vital energy of life and
nature active in the earthly sphere. By virtue of Agni
alone this scholar and teacher can propagate this
knowledge of reality among the people around.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


40. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi)




[Names: Gels, Agnirjyotisa, Sahasrada]
Agni, Lord of light and life, agni, man of science,
is brilliant with the light of knowledge, illustrious with
the lustre and splendour of power, golden lovable and
blissful, and giver of a thousand gifts. We do homage
to you for the innumerable gifts of prosperity, comfort
and happiness.


41. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi)
[Names: Hesen]
AAA: neseg
[Names: Adityarh, Adityar, Parivrndhi]
With oblations of milk, honour the rising sun
which holds in its womb and reveals innumerable forms
and images of the world. With the heat, light and
fragrance of the fire, ward off a host of ailments and


grow. Growing in health and knowledge, help people
to live a hundred years. Never never be proud.


42. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi)


[Names: Amserau]
elu US


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Vatasya]
Agni, universal power, man of knowledge and
power, hurt not the velocity of the wind and the centre
of the water and vapours. Hurt not anything that is
creative and procurative in the midst of the world. Injure
not the produce of rivers, the clouds and anything grown
on the mountains. Kill not the birds and aquatic
creatures. Kill not anything that saves from suffering
and evil.


43. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi)






[Names: Ajasramindumarusam]
I worship Agni, eternal power, bright and fiery,

lord of peace and bliss, and giver of health and vigour.


With all means and materials I study and develop
the power of fire and electricity collected and developed
by the ancients. I proceed season by season, planning
and achieving stage by stage.


Agni, man of science and power, do not kill,
destroy or injure the productive cow, the creative earth
so bright and unviolated, and the restorative


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


44. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi)
eju wee




[Names: Varutrim, Mahim]
Agni, man of knowledge and power, do not
injure, do not destroy, the protective power of the sun,
the binding power of water, the lightning energy of the
cloud born of regions beyond the sky, and the great,
generous and regenerative earth, giver of a thousand


45. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi)




Agni, man of science and power, the vital fire
and creative energy that was born of the flames of the
cosmic yajna of Agni, Lord of life and light, illuminates
the wide world and heaven, and with it Vishwakarma,
the Lord Maker of all forms, makes the various forms
of life in existence. May your passion for knowledge
and power spare that creative energy from hurt and
damage.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




46. (Surya Devata, Virupa Rshi)






[Names: Sata]
The Lord Supreme Creator is the wonderful life
and splendour of the gods, universal powers of nature.
He is the Eye, light and vitality, of the sun, the oceans
of waters, and agni, the vital fire. He pervades and fills
the heaven, the earth and the middle regions of the
universe. He is the sole universal sun, the soul of the
moving and the unmoving world and, like the sun,


47. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi)






[Names: Aata, Mayum, Mayum, Sugrcchatu]
Agni/Ruler/Noble man or woman, growing and
progressing in happiness, watchful with the vision of a
thousand eyes, hurt not the humans, kill not the animals.
Love and look after the wild as well as the domestic
animals, both holy and serviceable. Working and
progressing by that animal wealth, feel settled, be at


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




peace with yourself. Let your concern address the wild
animals, or let it be directed to those who hurt us.


48. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi)




[Names: Gauramaranyamanu, Gauram]
Do not kill this one-hoofed animal, fastest among
the fast, roaring in the battles. I advise you, turn your
attention to the white, yellow and brown animals, the
wild ones, and growing by this animal wealth, sit at
peace with yourself. Let your concern address the wild
animals. Let it be directed to those who hurt us.


49. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi)


setae maA oar feed aa aie |




[Names: Aditim, Aditi, Gavayamaranyamanu, Gavayam]
Agni, enlightened ruler, in the world even in the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




best of places, do not kill the cow and the bull, infinitely
useful, and spring of a hundred streams and showers of
milk and ghee for the people. It is holy and worthy of
protection and development. I advise you, turn your
attention to the wild cow and the bull and other animals.
Growing and developing the economy with animal and
forest wealth, feel settled with yourself and your land.
Let your attention be directed to the wild cow and the
forest wealth. Let your concern take on those who hurt
us.


50. (AgniDevata, Virupa Rshi)
wate: Gat uer rini ur feet: ur edu




[Names: Imamurnayum, Tvastuh, Ustramaranyamanu, Ustram]
Agni, noble ruler, in the wonderful world of the
Supreme Lord, do not hurt, do not kill the sheep and
other such animals, one of the first creations of Twashta,
the maker of the world, and source of comfort and
providers of woollen cover to the human beings and
the animals. I point out to the wild camel and other wild
animals. Growing and developing the economy with
that animal wealth, be at peace with yourself in your
land. Let your concern turn to the camel. Let it be
directed to those who hurt us.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


51. (Agni Devata, Virupa Rshi)






[Names: Asatte, Fate, Sarabhamaranya, Sarabham]
The unborn individual soul was born in this world
from the flame of the Supreme Lord's cosmic yajna of
creation. It grew conscious and had a vision of the
creator right there. By virtue of the vision and grace of
the Lord, the pious souls, purified by the vision, realise
the divine powers and rise to the heights of existence.
Agni, noble ruler/noble man, I point out to the wild
sharabha (fabulous antelope of the snowy forest,
mightier than the lion and the elephant). Like that,
defend yourself and grow, and growing thereby, be
happy and feel satisfied and settled by yourself. Let your
concern address the sharabha. Let your concern be
directed to those who hurt us.


52. (Agni Devata, Ushana Rshi)


Tat Aaa AAT gu




Young man/woman of superlative energy and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




character, listen to the voice of Divinity. Protect and
promote the people who give with faith and generosity.
With your very heart and soul, protect and promote the
child — human, animal and all.


53. (Apah Devata, Ushana Rshi)

maae a Wat aaah a I He
meat | at cer at wear ver aa
saa Weare feo er ear areas mias
[Names: Wests]
US A Saal ASA dug




[Names: Sarire]
For the protection of life and the production and
management of energy, I place/initiate you:


in the waterways management, and study of the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




source of water, the spatial wind;
in the movement of water into the herbs;
in the concentration of energy in ash;
in the flash of light in lightning;


in the currents of energy in the sky, and the orbits
of the stars and planets;


in the source and centre of pranic energy, and
concentrations of air in space;


in the secret motions of the mind, and the depths
of the sea;


in the power and source of speech, and storms of
heaving oceans in space;


in the faculty of vision and the science of light;


in the faculty of hearing and the transmission of


in the science of radiation and the solar region,
the source of energy;


in the sources of energy in the middle regions;


in the original sources of energy, the universal
ocean of motion of the Rajas mode of Nature (Prakriti);


in the sands of earth and rivers and the waste


in water, air and food, the sources of vital energy.


I initiate you with the visions of nature and spirit
contained in the gayatri verses, I initiate you with the
pure knowledge contained in the trishtup verses,

I initiate you with the knowledge contained in
the inspiring jagati verses,

I initiate you with the knowledge contained in


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the enlightening anushtup verses,


I initiate you with the knowledge contained in
the clear exhilarating pankti verses of the Veda.


54. (Pranas Devatas, Ushana Rshi)


— cC— oc


verat uror Ga wem: uw




This Agni, universal spirit, is the first and
foremost in existence, the eastern horizon of the world.
Its offspring is prana, vital energy, life-breath of
existence. The offspring of prana is spring. The song of
spring is gayatri, joy. Joy is the music of spring from
gayatri, the gayatra saman, soft, sweet and low. From
gayatra, the upanshu, the receiver of soma, ladle for
libation. And from the upanshu, creation of trivrit, the
person dedicated to trivrit, threefold integrated Dharma
of knowledge, action and prayer. From trivrit, the
successful man, sociable, visionary and saviour.


Woman of knowledge, virtue and love, blest by
Prajapati, lord of creation, alongwith you I receive the
vital energy of prana for the sake of children and family.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




55. (Prajapati Devata, Ushana Rshi)


[Names: Ayao]
naka fad: vere | cae Taras




[Names: Svaradantaryamo, Bharadvaja]
On the right (south) is the spirit and power of the
divine, Vishwakarma, like vayu, wind and electric
energy, the divine agency by which is accomplished
every action and movement of the world. The offspring
of Vishwakarma is the mind, desire and action. The
offspring of mind is summer. Trishtup meter is the
expression of summer. From trishtup is born swara-sama
of heat and lustre as the mid-day. From swara comes
the antaryama, the silent libation of soma with self-
control. From antaryama comes/is born the fifteen-phase
stoma (pancha-dasha-stoma), expression of joy and
hilarity. From pancha-dasha stoma comes Brihat-saman,
the great saman song of jubilation and celebration. The
seer expert of Brihat-saman is Bharadwaja, man of full
knowledge and prosperity.


Woman of knowledge, virtue and love, blest by
Prajapati, alongwith you I receive mana, mind, that is,
love and desire for the sake of family and community.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




56. (Prajapati Devata, Ushana Rshi)



[Names: Sphredurasr, Rksamacchukrah]
In the west (on the back) this sun is the divine
power that illuminates and covers the whole world with
light. The offspring of the sun is the light and the vision
of the eye. The product of light and heat is the rain. The
joy of rain is expressed in the jagati verse. In jagati metre
are composed the Rik-samans. From the joy of Rik-
Samans is born ‘shukra’, the lustre and vitality of life.
From shukra is born the sapta-dasha (seventeen) stoma
and the seventeen faculty subtle body. From this
seventeen-element living life is born the diversity of
living forms, of which the seer and visionary expert is
jamadagni, man of light and lustre.


Woman of knowledge, virtue and love blest by
Prajapati, along with you I receive light and vision for
family and the people.


57. (Prajapati Devata, Ushana Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Idamuttarat]
On the north is this spirit of bliss and joy. The
instrument of joy is the ear, and sharad, autumn, is the
season for ear and music. The metre for sharad is
anushtup. In anushtup is composed the aida-saman
which is the song of beauty and sweetness. From aida
is the *manthi', churner, who churns out hilarity and
virility. From manthis comes the twenty-one part stoma
which constitutes an integrated programme of twenty
one branches of learning. From twenty one stoma comes
vairaja saman, a body of knowledge, of which the seer-
master is Vishwamitra, friend of the whole world.

Woman of knowledge, virtue and love, blest by
Prajapati, alongwith you I receive the ear and the voice
that gives me the songs of joy and virility for the sake
of the family and the community.


58. (Prajapati Devata, Ushana Rshi)


n: wsmdferéraur crar aret srgrfar vismzd: to u




[Names: Iyamupari]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Up above is this intelligence. From intelligence
and for it is speech. With speech goes the season of
‘hemanta’, winter, and pankti is the metre for hemanta.
Nidhanavat, the choric finale of a saman about hemanta,
winter-song, is composed in pankti metre. From
nidhanavat, the finale, is born the agrayana, first soma
libation in agnishtoma yajna for the attainment of plenty
of wealth and knowledge. From agrayana, there are
twelve and thirty three saman hymns of praise. From
these twelve and thirty three, we have shakvara and
rewata, means to wealth, honour and power. The person
who is an expert visionary of these hymns is a master
of all arts and actions leading to wealth, power and
honour.


Woman of knowledge, virtue and love, blest by
Prajapati, alongwith you I receive the gift of speech
(knowledge, wisdom and expertise) for the sake of
children, family and the community.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1.  (Ashvinis Devata, Ushana Rshi)






[Names: Dhruvaksitirdhruvayonirdhruva, Ukhyasya]
— o




Lady of the house, your family and community
is settled and strong. Your home is settled and secure.
You yourself are firm and inviolable. Settle in peace
and security firmly in your home, observing the duties
of the household and tasting the first flavours of the
heart. May the Ashwins (guides of the day) and the
adhvaryus (guides of the familial yajna), teachers and


2.  (Ashvinis Devata, Ushana Rshi)







[Names: Kulayini]
Gentle lady, sweet and decent, blest with a noble
family, abundance of milk and honey, and the wealth
of a generous mind, take your abode in a beautiful
comfortable home on the earth. May the scholars and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




men of justice and generosity appreciate and praise you
without reservation. Be generous and kind to these
people of knowledge and wisdom for the sake of
conjugal bliss and prosperity. May the Ashwinis
(guiding stars of the day) and adhvaryus (guides of the
home yajna) bless you with a happy and prosperous
home and family life.


3. (Ashvinis Devata, Ushana Rshi)



[Names: Adfer, Svairdaksairdaksapiteha, Pitevaidhi]
Noble woman, like a master controller of his
personal powers and expertise and guardian of his
people, settle here in this noble family for the great joys
and battles of life. As a father protects and promotes
his child, so, happy with your self and serving your
family, live and advance in your life's mission.

Master controller and promoter of faculties of
intelligence, settle here with all your virtues and
expertise for the peace and joy of the noble people.
Noble woman, come like a father to the child and live
in peace and comfort, comely and graceful, happy with
yourself and serving the family.






[Names: Ushana]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Stomaprstha]
Noble lady of the house, you are the protector of
the earth (fulfilment of this earthly home). You are sweet
and liquid as the waters of life. May all the noble and
enlightened people appraise, approve and honour you
whole heartedly. Blest with plenty and prosperity of
means and materials, keen lover of ritual hymns and
yajna sessions, take your rightful place here. Blest with
progeny, wealth and honour, win for us the best of life
and joy. May the saints and sages of light and the guides
of yajna consecrate you here in this home.


5.  (Ashvinis Devata, Ushana Rshi)






[Names: Sdan, Adityastva, Urmirdrapso]
On the floor of this earth (in this home) I seat
and consecrate you, lady of the inner world of the heart,
firm support of the home-life in all directions, mistress
and presiding presence of all the residences. You are
the ripples of joy on the streams of life. Indeed you are
conceived and created by Vishwakarma, the cosmic
artist. May the Ashwinis, torch bearers of life, and the
adhvaryus, experts of yajnic life, guide and sanctify you
here.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.












[Names: Grishma, Ritu, Seuiqqssreii, Assara, Sukrasca, Graismavrtu]
Jyeshtha and Ashadha are the two months of
summer. Two-month summer, you are a temporal
offspring of the internal (essential) power of agni,
universal fire. May all the modes of agni, each with its
natural power, be favourable to me toward honour and
excellence. May the earth and heaven be favourable and
make it (honour and excellence) possible. May the
waters be favourable. May the herbs and trees make it
possible. May all the forms of agni, heat, light,
electricity, etc., working in earth and the heaven toward
one end and maturing the summer season, be firm and
steady in nature. Just as all the devas, powers of nature,
subserve Indra, the essential and central energy of nature
and life, so should the two months of summer faithfully
and inviolably serve the power of agni as part subserves
the whole.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




7.  (Vasus & Others Devata, Vishvedeva Rshis)


ver àsa Rata ataare cat akat:


icai de mon


[Names: Sajurrtubhih]
Noble man, gentle lady, be in tune with the
seasons and the waters, receiving the blessings of nature


and breathing the generous vitalities of pranic energy.
May the leading lights of life and the guides of the yajna


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of home life establish you in this home and consecrate
you to Agni, the Spirit of life pervasive in and on the


Noble man, gentle lady, love the seasons, love
the waters of the earth and sky, love all the eight Vasus
(supports of life), and love all the heavenly gifts of life's
vitality. May the path-makers of life and the geniuses
of the advancement of humanity establish you in this
home for the service of Agni, Lord of life who blesses
all his creatures with all they need for total fulfilment.


Noble man, gentle lady, favourite of the seasons,
blest with the vitalities of mind and energy, favoured
by all the eleven Rudra supports of life-breath, and
supported by all the enlightened people of divine
knowledge, may the torch-bearers of the day and the
experts of yajna establish and bless you here in this home
in the service of Agni, lord of light and knowledge, for
the happiness and prosperity of humanity.


Noble man, gentle lady, friend of the seasons,
master of mind and intellect, favourite of the sun round
the year, friend and associate of the scholars and teachers
of science, may the leading lights of the day and the
specialists of the constructive projects consecrate you
here in this life in the service of Agni, Lord of light and
prosperity, for the enlightenment and advancement of


Noble man of knowledge and education,
generous lady of enlightenment, be friends with the
seasons, support the creative and constructive
programmes, join all the brilliant and generous leaders,
cooperate with the powers that promote life and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




happiness. May the leading lights of knowledge and
progress and the leaders of social yajna consecrate you
in this home and dedicate you to Agni, Lord of life and
light, for the well-being of all the earth's children and
the environment.


8.  (DampatiDevate, Vishvadeva Rshi)


adaa feat qe uz



[Names: Pranam, Slokaya, Apah, Vrstimeraya]
With the earth and the environment, protect and
strengthen my pranic energy, protect and strengthen the
apana air going down and out, protect and strengthen
my vyana air circulating in the body-system. Give the
divine light to my eye, the divine voice to my ear. Protect
and promote the waters. Refresh and promote the
greenery. Protect the bipeds (humans and birds). Protect
the four-footed (animals). Bring the showers of rain
from heaven.


9.  (Prajapati & Others Devata, Vishvedeva Rshis)


[Names: Hepy]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Murdha]
Like Prajapati, protector and sustainer of His
children, try to attain the holiest qualities of knowledge,
Dharma and peace of mind.


Get to the Kshatriya class of regal virtues, justice,
honour, magnanimity and courtesy.


Like the guardian and supporter of the people,
cultivate the economic values of freedom, justice,
liberality and humility.


Like Vishwakarma, maker of the world and lord
of His creatures, try to be free and win the love of the


Like a master of social and political activities,
try to be a strong and independent expert of all socio-


[Names: Like]
harbinger of freedom, joy and prosperity.


Like a great man of action and endeavour, take
initiative in lovable action, family bonding and strong


Like a tiger among men, be a man of invincible
force and inviolable protection.


Like the royal lord of excellence, be a man of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




light, regality, prowess and prosperity.


Like a carrier of historic burdens, be a man of
strength, greatness and endurance.


Like the cloud laden with vapours, be strong and
generous, go round in all the quarters and bring showers
of joy.

Like a flood of life-giving waters, come with a
living message of freedom, holiness, fertility and


10. (Vidvans Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi)




[Names: Sadar, Anadvan]
Like the bull, be a man of strength, open, free
and productive.

Like the cow, be generous and create joy and

Like the trinity of life-support and the cow, sheep
and goat, be generous, a man of knowledge, action and
worship, and be blest with progeny.

Like the carrier of harvested grain, be a man of
plenty and joy unbounded.


Like a master controller of the five senses, sing


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




ecstatic songs of yajna and have the joy of scientific

Like a holy man of knowledge, action and
worship, find the blessings of strength with freedom
from suffering.

Like a visionary of the four Vedas and master of
the four states of consciousness, be blest with
knowledge, worship and divine communion.


11. (Indragni Devate, Vishvedeva Rshis)




[Names: Prsthena]
May Indra and Agni (the sun and universal
electric energy), both of you, firm up the unshaken
foundation of the yajna of earthly life. And may the
heaven and the earth between themselves bind and hold
the middle regions of the sky.

(The husband and wife both should strengthen
the foundations of home-life-yajna beyond disturbance
and, with their intelligence and character, bind their love
and yajnic life in stability.)

12. (Vayu Devata, Vishvakarma Rshi)


[Names: Seta]
waite moraa aeaa ar feet: 1 faved
gadair gat dis exu


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Visvasmai, Vayustva, Santamena]
May Vishwakarma, lord maker of the world/your
husband, seat you firmly on top of the sky. Do not
pollute, do not injure, the sky. Growing expansive,
encompassing, enrich the sky, strengthen the sky for
the sake of prana, apana, vyana and udana energy, and
for honour and strength of character.


May Vayu, wind and universal energy/your
husband, protect and promote you in all ways with great
good fortune, light, peace and well-being. Stay firm with
that divine power like the breath of life.


13. (Dishah Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi)


A esi


[Names: Rajnyasi]
You are the mistress of the rising light of the east.
You are the lady of universal light of the south direction.
You are the noble and peaceful power of light in the
west. You are the self-refulgent light of the north. You
are the great lady of the top and foundation of the home-
land, the great sustaining mother earth of the family.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


402
14.




(Vayu Devata, Vishvedeva Rshis)







[Names: Arada, Visvakarma, Vayuste, Vayust]
Lady of light (mistress of the house), may


Vishwakarma, lord of noble actions/your husband
consecrate you on top of the sky for the sake of total
prana, apana and vyana energy (of family life). Receive
universal light and radiate the light of joy and peace.
Vayu/your husband, is your lord sustainer. Stay firm
with that divine power, dear as the breath of life, and be
steadfast as the light of the sun.


15.


(Ritava Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi)




[Names: Rreh, Sleso, Varsikavrtu]
Cloudy Shravana and misty humid Bhadra, two


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




months of the rainy season, you are touched at heart by
the passion of Agni. May heaven and earth be favourable
to us for the gift of excellence, may the waters be
favourable, may the herbs and trees be favourable, may
all the orders of agni (heat and light), each committed
to its own law and function, be favourable to us. May
all the vital fires in earth and heaven, integrated and
harmonious, supporting and energizing the months of
rains, like the power of nature serving the omnipotent
lord, Indra, bless and vitalize us in all ways.


Just as earth and heaven abide by God, as rains
abide by vital fire, so should we abide by the Lord,
nature, and the rains like life and breath, Prakriti and
Purusha, and part and the whole.


16. (Ritava Devata, Vishvedeva Rshis)






[Names: Jjyaisthyaya, Saradavrtu]
The lovely Ashwin and vigorous Kartika are
months of the autumn season. You have the warmth of
agni at heart. May the earth and heaven, the waters, the
herbs and trees, and all the orders of agni (heat and light),


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




each according to its own law and function, be
favourable to us for the gift of excellence. May all the
vital fires in earth and heaven, integrated and
harmonious, energizing the months of autumn like
powers of nature serving the Lord, Indra, bless and
vitalize us in all ways.


Just as heaven and earth abide by God, as autumn
abides by agni, so should we abide by the Lord, nature
and autumn like life with breath, Prakriti with Purusha
and part with the whole.


17. (Rtavo Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi)


wat urfz srt a of adm fra m Ñ




[Names: Ayurme]
Light and Law of the Universe, protect my life.
Energize my breath. Clear and strengthen my cleansing
system and eliminate the wastes. Strengthen the
circulation of energy in my body. Protect and sharpen
my eye. Protect and sensitize my ear. Guard and enliven
my speech. Regenerate and broaden my mind. Save and
strengthen my soul. Give me light, give me the light to
see and realize.


18. (Chhandans Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






Measure is the secret of happiness. Reason is the
measure of intelligence. Freedom is the condition of
truth incarnate. Practical science is the means of
strength, prosperity and brightness. Five-fold yoga is
the giver of light. Nature is the sustenance of life.
Attachment to pleasure is bhoga (sufferance). The light
of knowledge is science. The protector of gayatri is its
realization. The well-being of body, mind and soul is
happiness. The dynamics of existence lies in


And these are the themes of Vaidic verses.


19. (Prithivi & Others Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi)






[Names: Huge, Hlaysa, Scahndah]
Earth is the seat of freedom. Sky is the symbol of
joy. Light is knowledge and science. Year is the
understanding and measure of time. Stars are free in
their orbits. Speech is the medium of truth. Mind is the
seat of honesty. Farming is the source of production.
Gold leads to pleasure. Cow is the mother of joy and
plenty. Goat gives joy. Horse loves freedom. Know this
and follow.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


And these are the themes of Vaidic verses.


20. (Agni & Others Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi)


ada laat eer aatan aet neat gaar fava
ear aar agada «ear aeo eaat Maon




[Names: Agnirdevata, Varuno]
Agni (fire) is a divine power and value. It is a
god. Vayu (air) is god. Sun is god. Moon is god. Vasus
(sustainers of life) are divine. Rudras (powers of law
and justice) are divine. The winds are divine.
Vishwedevas, the great, brilliant and generous powers
of the world, are divine. Lord of the great universe is
God. Indra (universal energy) is divine. Varuna
(universal waters) are divine.


Know the divine powers and inculcate their
qualities in your character and conduct.


21. (Vidushi Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi)






[Names: Ayuse]
Noble woman of knowledge and virtue, you are
brilliant on top and firm, the support, sustenance and
foundation of life like the earth. I accept and honour
you for the sake of life and health, light and lustre, food


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


and farming, and protection and presence of the home.


22. (Vidushi Devata, Vishvadeva Rshis)


— LI —






[Names: Yantri]
Gentle lady, faultlessly disciplineOd and brilliant,

going by rule and leading others to rule, you are firm


and sustaining like the earth. I accept and honour you
for food and energy and for wealth and nourishment.


23. (Yajna Devata, Vishvedeva Rshis)


aera af Maer: R3




[Names: Asustrivrd]
In the year round of yajna there is the spontaneous
hymn (song) of the threefold stoma sacred for the purity
of body, mind and speech. There is the fifteen part song


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of light and the moon, the seventeen part song for the
sky and the year. There is the twenty-one part stoma for
stability, eighteen part song of fast motion, nineteen
part song of austerity and discipline, twenty part song
of open conduct, twentytwo part song of brilliance,
twentythree part song of sustenance, twentyfour part
song of union and discussion, twentyfive part song of
procreation, twentyseven part song of prowess and
lustre, thirtyone part song of karma and intelligence,
thirtythree part song of stability, thirtyfour part song of
the height of heaven and divinity, thirtysix part song of
paradisal bliss, fortyeight part song of the modes of
existence, and four stage song of celebration in
chatushtoma yajna in the year.


24. (Medhavinah Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi)






[Names: Ataras, Preq, Tagai, Agnerbhago, Nrcaksasam]
You are a part of Agni, lord giver of life and
protection, wholly under the direction and control of
your dedication to the lord. With the observance of
Trivrit (three part) stoma, you inculcate, protect and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




promote the Brahmana character of society.


You are a part of Indra, lord of energy and power,
wholly under the direction and control of Vishnu, the
omnipresent lord of the world. With the observance of
[Names: Panchadasha]
and promote the power and prowess (Kshatriya
character) of the community.


You are a part of the intelligent and wide-awake
observers of the people, totally under the direction and
control of the lord and ruler of humanity. With the
observance of Saptadasha (seventeen part) stoma, you
inculcate, protect and promote the economic power of
the people.


You are a part of Mitra, sun and universal energy,
totally under the direction and control of Varuna, the
universal water power. With the observance of
Ekavinsha (twenty-one part) stoma, you attract and
promote the wind and rain from the region of the sun.


25. (Vasus & Others Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi)




[Names: Vasunam, Adityanam, Adityana]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




You are a part of the Vasus, eight sustaining
abodes of life, under care and control of the Rudras,
protectors of life. With the observance of Chaturvinsha
(twenty four part) stoma you love and protect the animal
wealth of the world.


You are a part of the Adityas, the suns and stars
of the universe, under care and favour of the Maruts,
powers of wind and sky. With the observance of
Panchavinsha (twenty five part) stoma, you protect and
promote the maternal power of women.


You are a part of Aditi, earth and sky, under
control and favour of the powers of health and nutrition
in nature. With the observance of Trinava (twenty seven
part) stoma you protect and advance the lustre and glory
of the people.


You are a part of Savita, Lord creator and sustainer
of life, under care and control of Brihaspati, lord and
master of the wide world. With the observance of
Chatushtoma yajna you protect, develop and safeguard
all the directions of space.


26. (Ribhavah Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi)



[Names: Yavanam, Rbhunam, Rbhuna]
You are a part and master of mixed materials with
full power over the separate materials for consumption


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




in the cold season. With observance of the
and promote all the species of life.


You are a part of the intelligent and wise experts
of art and technology with full power and love over all
the brilliant and generous nobles of the world. With
observance of the Trayastrinsha (thirtythree part) stoma,
protect and promote all the living beings.


27. (Ritavah Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi)




[Names: Uere, Stars, Sahasca, Haimantika]
sidatam.


The stimulating Margashirsha and invigorating
Pausha are the months of Hemanta (winter).


You are the innermost love and power of Agni,
universal fire of life. May the heaven and earth be
favourable, may the waters invigorate, may the herbs
rejuvenate, and may all the modes of vital fire, each
true to its nature and function, strengthen us for honour
and excellence. Just as the powers of nature join to serve


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Indra, universal divine energy, so may all the orders of
agni in heaven and earth, integrated and cooperative,
strengthening the winter months, join to bless us in the
search and endeavour for excellence.


May the winter months of nature and humanity
stay firm with that universal power of Agni like the
breath of life with Spirit.


28. (Ishvara Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi)


[Names: Smarfitufa]
Tet UR



[Names: Ekaya]
The Lord of the universe, creator and protector
of His children is Ishwara. Worship Him with one,
sincere voice of the heart and soul. He created and
revealed the universal knowledge of the Vedas for His
children, and He is the Lord and protector of that
knowledge too. Worship Him with three, reason, will
and emotion. He created the five elements of nature.
He is the Lord and protector of these elements. Worship
Him with five, body, mind, intellect, memory and
consciousness. Saptarshis (five currents of primary
pranic energy, mahat tattva, i.e., creative nature, and
ahankara, self-consciousness) were created by Him. He


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




is the ruler and sustainer of the seven. Worship Him
with seven, five currents of secondary pranas (energy)
and your will and endeavour.


29. (Ishvara Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi)






[Names: Hadas, Tuve, Navabhirastuvata, Ekadasabhirastuvata, Trayodasabhirastuvata, Pafcadasabhirastuvata, Saptadasabhirastuvata]
Worship Him with nine faculties of prana and
mind who created the paternal and protective forces of
nature and the earth which is the supreme mother of


Worship with eleven faculties (ten pranic energies
and the soul) Him who created the seasons with their


Worship with thirteen faculties (ten pranas, two
commitments-one for values and one against disvalues
— and the soul) Him who created the twelve months
with their presiding year.


Worship with fifteen faculties (five pranas, five
senses, two commitments one soul, mind and reason/


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




intellect) Him who created the socio-political order of
governance with Indra, the supreme ruler of the order.


Worship with seventeen faculties (five pranas,
intellect, hands and feet) Him who created the domestic
animals and the economic order with Brihaspati as the
head of the economic (Vaishya) class.


30. (Jagadishvara Devata, Vishvadeva Rshi)


[Names: Usreisuperd]
were yfai wselfarcsreamqeanus:






[Names: Tourdeas, Navadasabhirastuvata, Ekavimsatyastu, Trayoviin, Pancaviin, Satya, Saptaviin, Anuvyayansta]
With nineteen (ten pranas, five elements, mind,
reason/intellect, memory and self-consciousness),
worship Him who created the educated and the
uneducated all, with the day-and-night cycle of time
for work and rest as the power of control over work and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




With twenty one (functions and faculties of the
human body, mind and soul), worship Him who created
the undivided hoofed animals with Varuna, water and
the night, being the presiding power for the animals.


With twenty three (parts of animals' bodies),
worship Him who created the little animals and insects
with the natural sources of nutriment as the presiding
power.


With twenty five (parts of small animals' bodies)
worship Him who created the wild animals of the forest
with wind and speed as the presiding power.


With twenty-seven (qualities of the wild animals),
worship Him who created the heaven and the earth
which are universal, and who also created the eight
Vasus, eleven Rudras and the twelve Adityas existent
within the heaven and earth and presiding over the life
and nature in heaven and earth.


31. (Prajapati Devata, Vishvadeva Rshis)






[Names: Navavimsatya, Ekatriinsata, Trayastrimsata]
With twenty nine properties of the herbs and trees,
worship Him who created the herbs and trees with Soma
as their chief and presiding power.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




With thirtyone parts and properties of the created
world of nature, worship Him who created the elemental
and the compound materials of nature and life with these
very elements and forms being the presiding presences
of existence.


With thirty three properties of the elements of
nature, worship Him in whose creation Prajapati, the
father of His creatures, is the Supreme Lord, and into
whom all the forms and elements of existence recede in
peace and silence for the night of annihilation.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)






[Names: Huemd, Wemtarae]
Agni, Lord omniscient and protector of life and
society, throw out the adversaries arisen against our life.
Keep off the negative forces not yet arisen but
impending against us all. Kind at heart and favourable,
speak to us from above and grant our prayer so that,
secure from triple suffering, happy and advancing under
your care and love, all may live in a home of triple bliss.


2.  (AgniDevata, Parameshthi Rshi)






[Names: Sahasa]
Agni, Lord omniscient of the life of existence,
throw off the enemies of humanity come up with force.
Counter the negative forces lying and waiting in
ambush, not coming up openly. Kind at heart and
generous of thought for us, speak to us from above so


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




that we may be able every way to repulse the open as
well as the covert enemies of life and humanity.


3. (Dampati Devate, Parameshthi Rshi)
Meri was gfi erqyercenfesyr HAA eret
[Names: Uttara]
gao xm 1311




[Names: Sodasi, Agneh]
Gentle lord of the home, and charming lady of
the house far from greed and grabbing, generously
cooperative with the rejuvenating forces of nature, you
are dedicated and loyal servants of Agni. May all the
generous saints and scholars appreciate and praise you
for your noble work. Dedicated to hymns of divinity
and yajna, generous in prosperity and charity, settle in
this sweet home. Give us the wealth of life and the gift
of a blessed family.


4.  (Vidvans Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)


[Names: Uyeda]
— Si — ]—— "—€—
feveredizve-d: QII UAT: ne


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Evaschando, Schandah, Schando]
Movement is life. Knowledge is thrill. Excellence
is great, truth is excellence. Peace is great. Self mastery
is sovereignty. Industry is prosperity. Protection against
evil is security. Mind and thought is light. Generosity
is exhilarating. Fluidity is majesty. Magnanimity,
liquidity and transparency is gentleness. Universal
reputation is honour. Divine knowledge, noble
performance and honest prayer is glory. Poetry is
ecstasy. Straight behaviour like liquid movement is
satisfaction. The path to eternity is bliss. The way of
the world is joy. The directions of space are exciting.
The razor’s edge is the challenge of life. The splendour
of existence is rapture.


5.  (Vidvansa Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)


[Names: Wesusd, Teel, Talspeq, Sats, Salssigs]
wed: GI




[Names: Acchacchandah]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






Prevention of evil is light. Fight against evil is
courage. Self-control is bravery. Variety of choice is
versatility. Ascendancy to the heavens is freedom. The
path to success is the right choice. The windfalls of
attainment are lovely. Meditation on the sky reveals the
bonds of piety. Voice is revelation. Light is illumination.
Speech is expression of word, meaning and reality.
Thought is reflection on meaning and reality. Effort and
achievement on earth is meaningful. Excellence is
valuable. Life is a boon. The life-force is irresistible.
Emulation and competition is legitimate. Great action
is glory. Cover and protection is nobility. Rising against
difficulty is perseverance. Freedom is the breath of life.
Faith and ascertainment is inviolable joy.


6.  (Vidvan Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)






[Names: Amaga, Sija, Adityanjinva]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Love truth for the sake of truth with the light of
truth in action.


Protect Dharma for the promotion of Dharma with
the observance of Dharma in practice.


With research and advancement into knowledge
of the nature of light, advance the knowledge of the
regions of the sun.


With research into the sky as the conjunction of
earth and heaven, advance the knowledge of the sky
for the sustenance of life.


With knowledge of the earth and its relation with
life, advance the knowledge of earth science for life.


With the knowledge of rain and the sustenance
of life by rain, advance the knowledge of water,
evaporation and rain and promote rain for the sake of
life.


With the knowledge of the light of the day, know
the light and day and advance the knowledge of


With the knowledge of night following the day,
advance the knowledge of the day and night cycle.


With the desire for the beauty of living, advance
the knowledge of the Vasus (abodes of the sustenance
of life) for the sake of the Vasus and better sustenance.


With the knowledge of the planets and the sun in
their respective orbits in the galaxy, advance the
knowledge of the sun and stars in relation to planets
and life.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




7. (Vidvansa Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)




[Names: Resident, Tantuna, Jinva]
By health, wealth and prosperity, increase health,
wealth and prosperity in an ascending order.


By a continuous process promote communication
and knowledge for the development of communication,
information and vaidic knowledge.


By the development of food, herbs and trees,
develop the science of medicine.


By the observance of good conduct and Dharma,
develop smart bodies and by smart bodies develop
strong bodies and better health.


By health and vigour and by life-sustaining
reading, promote life-sustaining knowledge and
education.


By victorious prowess and lustre, advance and
promote life-protecting courage, prowess and lustrous


8.  (Prajapati Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Pratipadasi]
You are the first find on the homeward journey. I
love and accept you for constant companionship at every
step. You are the support and confirmation of every step
I take. I honour you for support and self-assurance. You
are the real wealth of life, I love you as the prize of
earthly existence. You are the light and lustre of life. I
honour and prize you for light and glory.


9.  (Prajapati Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)







[Names: Pennie, Senn, Parente, Trivrdasi]
You know the threefold world of matter (tamas),
motion (rajas) and mind (sattva). I love and respect you
for the threefold world of nature. You are the power of
initiative. I follow you for the sake of initiative. You are
the versatile man of all-round action. I accept you for
the variety of action. You are the man of constant
Dharma. I dedicate myself to you for the observance of
Dharma. You are the great leap forward in life. I follow
you for the great leap forward. You are the man of
balanced and comprehensive progress. I dedicate myself
to you for balanced and comprehensive progress. You
are the man of onward advance. I follow you for the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




advance upward. You are for change and ascendance in
life. I admire and follow you for growth in the higher
direction.


Lady of the house, dedicate yourself to the head
of the family and with vigour and enthusiasm, advance
the power and excellence of the family.


10. (Vasavah Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)


teat fora eit: qire saagama-
HÀ Sard vendre are ufdfescmssrafisrs-




You are the queen refulgent like the East direction.
All the Vasu havens of life are your divine protectors.
Agni, Lord of flames and wielder of the thunderbolt,
wards off your adversities. May the Trivrit stoma hymns
settle you on the earth. May the yajna libations of ghee
and Uktha hymns firmly stabilise you against
disturbance. May the Rathantara Sama hymns expand
your honour to the skies. May the foremost Rishis, saints
and scholars spread your honour and reputation with
the measure of your heavenly excellence among the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






May this lord of yours and the Lord sustainer of
the world and all those powers who know, together in
unison, establish you and the yajamana on the heights
of the heavenly regions of bliss.


11. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)






[Names: Saas, Teens, Viradasi, Rudraste, Rudrast]
You are the reigning lady of light like the South
direction. All the Rudra powers of love and justice are
your divine protectors. Indra, lord of power and the
thunderbolt, keeps off your adversaries. May the
Panchadasha (fifteen part) stoma of Rks settle you on
the earth. May the Pre-uga Uktha hymns firmly secure
you against fear and disturbance. May the Brihat-Sama
hymns and karma extend your honour to the skies. May
the foremost Rshis, saints and scholars spread your
honour and fame with the measure of your heavenly
excellence among the noblest people.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




May this lord of yours and the Lord sustainer of
the world and all those powers who know, together in
unison, establish you and the yajamana on the heights
of the heavenly regions of bliss.


12. (Adityas Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)






[Names: Ngan, Adityaste, Adityast, Marutvatiyam, Marutvatiya]
You are the lady of brilliance and bliss like the
soothing light of the Western direction. All the twelve
Adityas, stars of light and powers of energy, are your
divine protectors. Varuna, Lord of waters and controller
of evil, wards off your suffering. May the Saptadasha
(seventeen part) stoma settle you on the earth. May the
Marutvatiya Uktha and the libations firmly stabilize you
against doubt and disturbance. May the Vairupa Sama
hymns extend your honour to the skies. May the
foremost Rshis, saints and scholars spread your honour
and fame with the measure of your heavenly excellence


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


among the noblest people.


May this lord of yours and the Lord sustainer of
the world and all those powers that know, together in
unison, establish you and the yajamana on the heights
of the heavenly regions of bliss.


13. (Maruts Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)






[Names: Brat, Wicerichfacercar, Preka, Ufdfscmssrfiss, Svarddasyudici]
You are self-refulgent like the light of the North.
The Maruts, powers of wind and storm, are your divine
protectors. Soma, moon, lord of peace and beauty, is
your saviour against violence and evil. May the
Ekavinsha (twentyone part) stoma settle you on the
earth. May the Nishkevalya Uktha firmly stabilize you
in love and faith against disturbance. May the Vairaja
Sama hymns and related Karma carry your honour and
fame to the skies. May the foremost Rishis, saints and
sages spread your honour and reputation with the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




measure of your heavenly excellence among the noblest


May this lord of yours and the Lord sustainer of
the world and all those powers that know, together in
unison, establish you and the yajamana on the heights
of the heavenly regions of bliss.


14. (Vishvedevah Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)






[Names: Waast, Adhipatnyasi, Sakvararaivate]
You are the supreme mistress of the home like
great directions in the upper spaces. All the divine
powers and nobilities are your protectors. Brihaspati,
lord of the wide world, is your guardian against all pain
and suffering. May the Trinava (twentyseven part) and
[Names: Trayastrinsha]
on the earth. May the Vaishvadevagni and Maruta Uktha


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




hymns firmly stabilize you against doubt and
disturbance. May the Shakvara and Raivata Sama hymns
extend your honour and fame to the skies. May the
foremost Rishis, saints and sages spread your honour
and reputation with the measure of your heavenly
excellence among the noblest people.


May this lord of yours and the Lord sustainer of
the world and all those powers that know well, together
in unison, establish you and the yajamana on the heights
of the heavenly regions of bliss.


15. (Vasanta Ritu Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)






[Names: Sarina, Punjikasthala, Danksnavah]
Yonder front in the east rises the sun like a king
investing everything with green by its rays. Like the
king’s commander of his forces and the chief of his city,
are the two months of spring, Chaitra and Baisakha,
months of enlightened joy and joyful glory. The rays of
the sun collectively for all and separately for specific
ritual are currents of energy for life on the earth.


The mordacious creatures and animals are


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




weapons of wild nature against which human weapons
of defence ought to be made and used.


May the rays of the sun in spring and the powers
of defence save us. May they be good and efficacious
to us. Thanks and salutations to them. All those cruel
forces which violate our life and all such forces which
we oppose, all these we deliver unto the judgement of
the powers and the spirit of nature.


16. (Grishma Ritu Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)



[Names: Amma]
ase a a fuer age A sie aaa mH aT Us!




[Names: Menaka]
On the right from the south rides in his chariot
this Summer Wind, Vishwakarma, versatile power for
all activities. Like the king’s commander of the forces
and the chief of his city, with the roar of the chariot
wheels and the variegated colour of his banner, are the
summer months of Jyeshtha and Ashadha. The special
guests of the wind and the general currents of it are
double waves of energy for life on the earth.


Mordacious forces are the danger to life.
Watchful defence is the counteraction. Thanks and
salutations to the powers of defence. May they be kind
and efficacious to us. All those that violate our life and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




all those we oppose, we deliver unto the judgement of
the powers of defence and the Spirit of nature.


17. (Varsha Ritu Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)








[Names: Sari, Atsarg, Pramlocanti]
At the back in the West is this rain power of Agni,
universal electric energy. Like a king’s commander of
the forces and the chief of his city, are the two months
of rain, Shravana and Bhadrapada, with the charming
beauty of the clouds and the awful majesty of lightning.
The power to nourish the vegetation and the ripening
touch to the crops are the two currents of its energy.


Mordacious animals such as the tiger are
dangerous. Creatures such as the snake are still more
dangerous. Against them the thunderbolt for defence
and man-made plans.


May the powers of safety and defence save us.
May they be good and kind to us. All those that violate
our life and all those we oppose, we deliver unto the
judgement of the powers of defence and the spirit of
nature.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




18. (Sharad Ritu Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)






[Names: Teva, Sarit, Wefan, Ayamuttarat]
On the North side is this season of autumn,
generous associate of yajna. Like a king’s commander
of his forces and the chief of his city, are the months of
Ashwin and Kartik, one the sharpest stimulant of
intelligence, the other an antidote to pain and disease.
The peace that pervades everywhere in nature and the
power that blesses all with cool and soothing waters,
milk and butter are two modes of its power.


Waters are the boon. Breezes are the greater boon.
Thanks and salutations to the powers. May they save
us. May they be kind and blissful to us.


All those that violate our life and all those that
we oppose, we deliver unto the judgement of the powers
of defence and the spirit of nature.


19. (Hemanta Ritu Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)


i. Sai iai, behaved



All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Ayamuparyarvagvasustasya, Urvasi]
This on top, after rains and autumn, is the winter
season, treasure-giver of wealth. Like a king's
commander of the forces and the chief of his city, are
the two months of Marga-Shirsha and Pausha, one like
a lord of the hosts, the other victorious. The spirit of
great love and freedom and the spirit of winsome beauty
of the heart are two powers of the season. The roar of
thunder is the weapon and lightning is another and


Salutations to the winter months and their gifts
and powers. May they save us. May they be good and
auspicious. Whoever violates our life and whoever we
oppose in defence, we deliver unto the judgement of
the powers of defence and the spirit of nature.


20. (AgniDevata, Parameshthi Rshi)


[Names: Rrafa]
In winter, this Agni, shining supreme as the lord
of space between the earth and heaven like the sun, rules


and illuminates the directions and inspires the vitalities
of life with new energy.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




21. (AgniDevata, Parameshthi Rshi)
"pe ener Verum usu
[Names: Satinaspatih]
This Agni, Lord of eternal vision, rules the world
on top of everything. Possessed of infinite virtues, giver


of countless joys, He is the lord of food, energy and the
wealth of the world.


22. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)



[Names: Friar]
Agni (heat and electricity), Atharva, scholar high-
priest of scientific yajna of energy, churns you out of
the sky on top of the world to bring down the energy to
the earth.


23. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)






Agni, leading power of yajna, the earth and the
sky, you raise your tongue of flames bearing the
fragrance of yajna libations over there and, one with


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the blissful catalytic process of consumption and
creation, you hold in heaven the top light of the world,
the sun, which rains the showers of joy on the earth.


24. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)




[Names: Aree]
"u$ USI


[Names: Abodhyagnih, Yahva]
nakamaccha.


The fire wakes up and rises by the samits (fuel)
offered by the devotees, and, just as a restless calf runs
to the mother cow coming in the twilight of the dawn
(or evening), so do the flames eagerly rise to the heaven
(emanating peace, prosperity and happiness).


25. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)
sata aa Were aal aare uu qu |




[Names: Avocama, Gavisthiro]
Just as the man established in the Word offers
hymns of praise with libations to the holyfire, just as
the light in the sun-rays does homage to the splendour
of the all-illuminant sun in heaven, so do we offer words
of praise in celebration to Agni, lord of light and vision,
worthy of reverence and worship, lord of strength and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




power, who showers rains of bliss over the earth and


26. (AgniDevata, Parameshthi Rshi)




This agni here, first and foremost power of nature,
lighted and established in the vedi by dedicated saints
and sages, is worthiest of reverence and esteem. It is
most valuable for development through creative and
constructive acts of yajna. Present as it is, wonderful
and universal, in the rays of the sun and currents of
energy, the most intelligent and versatile men of genius
develop it for the general good of the people.


27. (AgniDevata, Parameshthi Rshi)
wea Maseke miana: gaat: gaara




[Names: Janasya, Ghrtapratiko]
Agni (fire and electricity), pure and sacred,
protector of the people, ever wakeful, versatile and
generous, source and symbol of plenty and prosperity,
came into existence for new and newer good and
excellence of the people, and shines brilliant with


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


28. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)


a a alee aaa: wel Wed ware: WéUUIT-





[Names: Angiraso, Sriyanam]
Agni, fire, universal light of life, saints and
scholars search for you and discover your presence
hidden in the heart, abiding in every current of energy.
Such as you are, churned out of nature you rise, and
they find you mighty, great and awful child of the Wind,
dear as the very breath of life.


29. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)




[Names: Sakhayah, Varsisthaya]
Friends, offer properly and accurately the exact
homage and libations to the darling of your people and
and the dearest child of omnipotence.


30. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)






[Names: Idaspade]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Agni, powerful lord of light and wealth, you join
with all in love wholly and completely. You rise and
shine in your rightful holy place on the earth. Generous
lord, shower on us the wealth of the world from all sides.


31. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)
ver haara weder fep ade: |




[Names: Gefrarst, Sociskesam, Purupriyagne, Purupriyagn]
Agni, most wondrous lord of food and energy,
dearest to all, blazing with light like the sun, people in
all nations from all walks of life invoke you and offer
libations for the attainment of food, energy and comfort
in life.


32. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)






[Names: Ades, Priyam]
For your sake, I invoke, explore and worship
(develop) with the offering of this holy food
(investment) Agni, creative and illuminative power of
the world, universal energy, inviolable, dear and
active, guardian power of non-violent constructive acts
of love, and immortal lord of the dynamics of existence.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




33. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)






[Names: Rede]
I invoke the immortal Agni, universal power of
light (in the form of the sun); I invoke the immortal
Agni, universal power of fire (in the form of vitality); it
joins with universal creative generosity for total
nourishment, it unites with love overcoming all hate
and anger, and, piously called upon, it responds and
hastens to help and bless us.


34. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)



[Names: Saad, Subrahma]
jananam.

That Agni, faithfully invoked in yajna,
immediately stirs and rises. That same Agni, called up
with love and sacrifice, responds spontaneously, it
comes and blesses through the yajna.

Attended by noble devotees, yajna is a great
karmic act which is a divine embodiment of the wealth
of humanity and the mother earth.


35. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)




[Names: Ndassa]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





Agni, light of omniscience, child of omnipotence,
witness of all that is born, lord of food and energy,
controller of the masters of cows, earth and all that
moves, bless us with all that is great and glorious.


36. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)




[Names: Revadasmabhyam]
That same Agni, bright and blazing, home of
existence, visionary of the universe, celebrated with the
divine Word, manifesting in infinite forms, shines and
reveals the light for us as the wealth of the world.


37. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)






[Names: Sara, Ksapo]
That same Agni, bright and blazing, thunderous
force of relentless justice, power operative with your
essential light and spirit in the day, in the night and at
the dawn, burn with the same fiery essence the evil, the
night walkers, daylight robbers and the darkness at


38. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Agnirahuto, Bhadra]
Man of grace and yajna, may the Agni, invoked
and raised, be gracious. May the oblations, charities and
investments be positive and productive. May our yajna
and creative ventures be constructive and fruitful. May
our appreciations and appraisals be valuable and


39. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)






[Names: Weissa]
Man of knowledge, expertise and grace, may all
our projects and appraisals be favourable. Do your best
so that in our battles against covers of darkness and
evil our mind be firm and undisturbed, and then in our
battles of life we may endure and be victorious at the


40. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)






[Names: Sardhatam, Vanema]
The spirit by which the forces endure in battles
and win, with that spirit strengthen and expand to the
full our forces and powers so that we grow firm and
inviolable. May we benefit from your gracious gifts,
win our battles and enjoy in life.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.



41. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)
wha q Ha at agqrd a afd ae: | mud AS-




[Names: Astamarvanta]
I know the Agni that is the hearth and home of
existence. Homeward go the cows. The fastest coursers
betake to home. The hero, the chariot, the feathered
eagle, the stallion, all go home to rest without fail, all
by nature. That is the home for me.


That same Agni, mother of the home for all, is
the ultimate haven. Mother mine, keep for the yajnic
children food for life, energy for action, and light for
the life divine.


42. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)




[Names: Agniryo, Samarvanto]
Agni is that who is the treasure, home and haven
for all in existence. Him I celebrate in song. In Him the
words of song find their meaning. Saints of wisdom,
geniuses of science most responsive, men of vision most
fortunately born, all have their recourse there. Lord of
light and life, bear and bring the food, release the energy,
and reveal the light of divinity for the celebrants.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




43. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)




[Names: Ubhe]
Graceful power of heat, light and knowledge, you
burn two ladles of ghee in the mouth (vedi of yajna)
and diffuse the light and fragrance in the air through
the cross currents of the wind. Lord of strength and
power of creation, fill the stores of food with grain for
us and the minds with knowledge for those who offer
oblations and chant the hymns of praise in yajna.


Brilliant holy Sire of knowledge and power, just
as the holy fire burns two ladlefuls of ghee in the vedi
to diffuse the light and fragrance in the air, similarly
you hold for us the two-fold knowledge of nature and
spirit to disseminate it among the disciples who come
to the school of yajna for education and sing the songs
of the Vedas in praise of Agni, omniscient Lord of light
and knowledge. Fill our minds with knowledge and the
power of knowledge.


44. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)






[Names: Rdhyama]
Agni, lord of light and knowledge, like the horse
broke in to perfection by training, like the holy yajna
completed and perfected with the hymns of divine


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




worship, may we now receive that knowledge and virtue
which touches the heart and, with you close by us and
revelations of that sacred knowledge, come to prosperity
and perfection.


45. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)
Tae Teal AYA Use i




[Names: Rathirrtasya]
Agni, lord of light and knowledge, be the sure
and unfailing pioneer of noble and creative yajnic work.
Be the guide, guardian, defender and leader of the good,
efficient and pious people, and prophet of the great truth
and universal law of existence.


46. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)




[Names: Ebhirno]
Agni, lord of the golden light of omniscience, in
response to these songs of ours in praise of divinity, be
pleased at heart and, with all your glory and majesty,
come and reveal yourself before us.


47. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Socisa]
I know Agni, lord of yajna, receiver and dispenser
of libations, generous, treasure home of wealth and the
world, child of omnipotence, existent with all that is. I
know It as intimately as I know an inspired sage of all
knowledge standing face to face.


I know the kind and brilliant lord of love and
yajna who, with high blazing activity worthy of
celebration in divine speech, illuminates and
disseminates the splendour of ghrta and the fragrance
of vapours through the flames arising from oblations
into the fire.


48. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)
and vd atsdussa mar f$rer tat nes: |






[Names: Wife, Socistha]
Agni, closest you are at hand, most intimate. Be
good and kind, redeemer and protector, a very home of
supersecurity for all of us.


Agni is the omnipresent home of all, treasure of
peace and wealth, brilliant leader and pioneer, most
refulgent of all, generous giver of prosperity. Here I


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




attain to the lord.

Lord most blazing, power of splendour and
majesty as you are, we pray to you, in faith, for peace
and prosperity for ourselves and all our friends.


49. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)
[Names: Gaarafaretarsathtaesedated]
AET seu




[Names: Tasminnaham]
By the austerity of discipline and action the seers
come to the sessions of yajna and, lighting and exploring
the agni, attain to ages of joy and happiness. By the
same discipline, in similar session, at the same level of
blissful existence, I commit myself to the pursuit of the
same agni which people say pervades the skies.


50. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)


[Names: Apae]
fea: non




[Names: Nakam]
Powers of light and joy, dedicating ourselves in
prayer and action to the same Agni, may we attain to
the highest and most beloved region of the beautiful
world of bliss and noble pursuits with our wives,
children, brothers and all our wealth and prosperity.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


51. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)


dac: wee


e




[Names: Prsthe]
This Agni, power of knowledge, active and wide-
awake, supporter and protector of the true and the good
life, well-established on the face of the earth, lighted
and raised, blazes and, in the middle of the chant,
ascends to the heights of the skies.


If there be any forces that wish to fight the true
and the good in life, may the same Agni keep them down
and out.


52. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)


at i31




[Names: Ayamagnirviratamo, Vibhrajamanah]
This Agni, power of fire and manliness, bravest
of all, young and fresh lord of health and age, mighty a
Glorious on the earth and in the midst of the sky, he
inspires and graces wonderful places and positions.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


53. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)


waaay Taare wem Aaa eure |
T dud




[Names: Sampracyavadhvamupa, Punah]
Ye men and women all, move together, go close
to Agni by the paths of divinity for light and knowledge.
Create new paths for the future.


Agni, light the paths for humanity. Only in your
parents follow Dharma under the discipline of piety and
continue the yajna and the life-line.


54. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)


ied ul




[Names: Udbudhyasvagne, Asmintsadhasthe]
Agni, lord of light and yajna, wake up and arise
in response to the invocation and, in return, awaken
and guard the yajamana. Create, together, the desire and
will to do the acts necessary as duty and the acts
desirable by choice for the sake of complete self-
fulfilment. May all the powers of divinity, all the noble
people and the yajamana dwell in this auspicious house
in this life and after, ever rising higher and higher.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




55. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)






[Names: Saba, Tenemam]
Agni, leading power of light and action, by
knowledge and karma you bear a hundred burdens of
the business of existence through the whole range of
duties set out in the Vedas. Carry us too in this yajna of
life and lead us into the state of bliss among the noblest
souls of the world.


56. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)
[Names: Akfa, Ceret]
Agni, fire and power of life, this home of yajna
is your seat of action in accordance with the time and
season. From here emerging, you shine and illuminate


the world around. Knowing this, proceed and rise, and
develop the wealth of life for us.


57. (Shishirartu Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)






[Names: Vesa]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Tapasca, Saisiravrtu, Saisiravrtu]
Margashirsha and Phalguna (January-February
and February-March) are the months of winter season,
cold, cool and pleasant. You are the lovely warmth of
the inner-most heart of Agni's fire.


May the heaven and earth be auspicious, may the
waters be fresh and invigorating, may the herbs and trees
be revitalized and rejuvenating, may all the modes of
fire, heat, light, lightning, etc., each committed and
constant in its quality and character, be favourable and
blissful to me for growth in excellence.


May all the vital fires abiding in earth and heaven,
integrated and harmonious, supporting and energizing
the months of the winter season like the powers of nature
serving the omnipotent lord, Indra, bless and vitalize
us in all ways.


Man of yajna and lady of the house of yajna, both
of you joining the months of the season be firm and
stay fast with the lord of nature as breath and life


58. (Learned Woman Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Paramesthi, Suryaste, Suryast]
Lady of knowledge and vision, may the Lord
Supreme establish you on top of celestial light for the
attainment of full and complete energy of prana, apana
and vyana, cross-currents of energy and universal
vitality. Spread the universal light of knowledge around
for others. Your husband like the sun, brilliant and
refulgent, is your lord and protector. Stay firm and secure,
steadfast with that noble man like the breath of life.


59. (Indragni Devate, Parameshthi Rshi)




[Names: Sarasa]
Noble lady of the house, fulfil this life. Fill up
the holes, complete and perfect the life and stay firm
and stead-fast in this home. May Indra, lord of
excellence, Agni, lord of light, and Brihaspati, lord of
knowledge, establish you happily in this family home.


60. (Apah, Devata, Priyamedha Rshi)






The people of this land, intelligent, varied,
pursuing the origin of life and the powers of nature,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and dedicated to the light of heaven in threefold activity
of knowledge, action and meditation proclaim the glory
and magnanimity of this creator of peace and prosperity
who presides over the community.


61. (Indra Devata, Madhucchhanda Rshi)






patim.


May all the voices exhort and strengthen Indra,
leader and president of the land, great and deep as the
ocean, bravest of the brave warriors in the battles of
progress, promoter of truth and goodness, and protector
of life and the human nation.


62. (Agni Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)






[Names: Gatungueale, Prothadasvo, Adasya, Anuvati, Sociradha]
Agni, ruler of the land, just as a horse arises eager
for the grass, so whenever you are challenged, you arise
from a state of deep peace and, determined for the
protection of your people, stand firm and unshakable.
Your clarion call and your brilliance rallies the people
round and, electrified, they follow you in every


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




63. (Vidushi Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)






[Names: Ayostva, Rasmivatim]
Learned woman, lady light of the home, mistress
of sunbeams shining in heaven, illuminate the earth and
fill the wide skies with brilliance. I place you in the
house of your husband — long live he ! I set you in the
soothing shade of your protective man, in the very core
of his heart deep in love as the bottomless sea.


64. (Paramatma Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)




[Names: Suryastvabhipatu]
sidatam.


Lady light of the home, growing in generosity as
the earth, rising in virtue as the sky, may the Lord
Supreme establish you firmly in your heavenly home
for full realisation of the joy of living, freedom from


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




suffering, attainment of knowledge, noble strength of
character, honour and dignity and high performance of
duty. Emanate the light of love and justice. Promote
Dharma and piety. And do not pollute the heavens, do
not damage the light of learning.


May the Sun, supreme light of the world, wholly
protect you and bless you with great good fortune, peace
of mind and the light of truth.


Noble man and virtuous wife, may both of you
stay firm and steadfast with that supreme God of life
and the universe as with the breath of life.


65. (Vidwan Devata, Madhucchhanda Rshi)


mees weal car neg




[Names: Sahasrasya]
Learned man, you are the master of a thousand
facts of life and nature. You are the measure of a
thousand confirmations of knowledge. You are the
reference and judge for a thousand doubts and questions.
You are the lord and authority over a thousand problems
of science and existence. May the Lord Omniscient of
existence grant you your rightful place in the world for




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1. (Rudra Devata, Parameshthi Kutsa Rshi)




[Names: Saga, Namaste, Bahubhyamuta]
Rudra, lord of justice and retribution /Ruler of
the land, salutations to you for your righteous passion
against the evil and the wicked. And salutations to you
for your arrows and armaments. Salutations to you for
your mighty arms (that wield the armaments).


Thunderbolt to your enemies for their anger
against you! Food and support for you! Salutations to
your mighty arms to wield the thunderbolt!


2. (Rudra Devata, Parameshthi Kutsa Rshi)






[Names: Siva]
Rudra, lord of justice, love and peace, lord
sublime of the clouds and the mountains, commanding
veneration and admiration, the manifestation of your
presence is auspicious and blissful, free from fear and
magnificent without a shade of sin and darkness. With
that same gracious manifestation of your divinity,
emanate the blessings of peace and mercy for us.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




3. (Rudra Devata, Parameshthi Kutsa Rshi)






[Names: Yamisum]
Lord of the showers of clouds, master of

mountains of the challenges of existence, the arrow
(arm) you hold in hand to shoot upon the enemy, make
that an instrument of peace, benevolence and liberation.


Saviour of showers and protector of knowledge,
do not damage the living world of nature nor hit the
world of humanity.


4. (Rudra Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)








[Names: Sivena]
Rudra, life of the clouds and spirit of the mountain
breeze, we praise you and pray to you in words of faith
and fidelity so that by your gifts and grace we may be at
peace in the heart and this whole world be free from
depression and consumptive diseases.


5.  (Ekarudra Devata, Brihaspati Rshi)


[Names: Brae]
ya nui




[Names: Ahinsca]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Rudra, lord of life, chief advisor and divine
physician, speak to us on matters of health and,
destroying all the snake-like deadly germs and viruses,
root out all the debilitating and fatal diseases.


6. (Rudra Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Asau]
vaisain heda’imahe.


And the sun which is copper red, bright red and
reddish brown (in the morning, in the day and toward
the evening) is auspicious and efficacious. And the
thousands of heavenly bodies, planets and satellites, etc.,
sustained around in all the directions, we pray, be good
and protective for all of us.


7. (Rudra Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Utainam]
And the sun which is descending dark-necked
behind the clouds like a peacock and reddish toward
the evening is auspicious and efficacious. The cowherds
see it, the water-carriers see it, and seen thus it acts as a
healing power for us.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




8. (Rudra Devata, Prajapati Rshi)



[Names: Aiea, Arse]
namah.

Salutations to the blue-necked power of the
healing sun. Salutations to the lord of the light of a
thousand eyes. Salutation to the lord of the rain showers
of health. And to those powers, too, which are floating
around as planets and satellites bearing the essence of
its healing power, we offer our salutations in homage.


9. (Rudra Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Wises, Pramunca, Yasca]
Glorious lord of power and defence, stretch and
release the string at the two ends of the bow and shoot
the arrows which are in your hand at the target yonder.


10. (Rudra Devata, Prajapati Rshi)
[Names: Fraga, Ngon, Vijyam]
May the awful bow of the lord of braided hair
never be without the string. May his arrows never be


without the point. May his arms be never destroyed.
May his armoury never be void of arms.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




11. (Rudra Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


"ur d Reigen get aya ow seii




Lord of the richest showers of health and joy, the
thunderbolt that is in your hand and the mighty bow,
with these weapons of defence against suffering, protect
us all round and promote our health and prosperity.


12. (Rudra Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






Lord of the bow, may the strike of your missile
spare us and protect us from all sides. And your armoury
in which you keep the missiles, keep it far from us to
direct it on the enemy.


13. (Rudra Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Avatatya, Nisirya, Salyanam]
Lord of a thousand eyes, wielder of a hundred
arms, having sharpened the points of the arrows, having
bent the bow and stretched the string, pleased and kind
at heart, be good and gracious to us.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


460
14.




(Rudra Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


maserar gor |d




[Names: Namasta]
Salutations to the warrior. Salutations to the force


at rest in readiness. Salutations to the determined
commander. Salutations to you, man of the bow, for
both your arms of valour.


15.


(Rudra Devata, Kutsa Rshi)





Rudra, commander of the army, strike not our


nor the nation in the womb. Kill not our father, nor
mother, nor our dear ones. Strike not our women, the
sick, the delicate and the weak. They must not suffer


16.


(Rudra Devata, Kutsa Rshi)


[Names: Assay]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






Rudra, strike not the babies, nor the children,
damage not life, kill not our cows, nor our horses. Kill
not our darling young people, handsome and so brave
are they. Carrying libations of love and faith we always
invoke you and pray.


17. (Rudra Devata, Kutsa Rshi)




[Names: Gert, Saspinjaraya]
Salutations to Rudra, warrior of the golden arms
of steel. Salutations to the lord protector of the nation
in all directions. Love and care for the trees of green
foliage. All hail to the lord protector and promoter of
animals. All reverence and faith for the light of justice
and controller of wild passion. Salutations to the
protector of travellers, and promoter of the highways.
Love and reverence for the golden-haired wearer of the
sacred thread initiated in learning. Salutations to the
protector and promoter of the young and strong rising
generation.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


462
18.




(Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi)




[Names: Gatare, Rudrayatatayine, Rudrayatatayin]
namah.


Salutations to Rudra, brown breaker of the


enemies. Salutations to the protector and promoter of
food. Salutations to the saviour warrior of existence.
Salutations to the lord of the moving worlds.
Exhortations to the warrior up in arms. Salutations to
the regions of the world. Salutations to the pioneer of
love and leader of humanity. Salutations to the lord
protector of the forests.


19.


(Rudra Devata, Kutsa Rshi)


[Names: Uieara]
mA: ues




Salutations to Rudra, red-haired lover and


promoter of art and architecture. All hail to the lord
protector of trees. Salutations to the lord of the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




expanding world and creator of wealth. Salutations to
the lord of herbs and medicine. Salutations to the
thoughtful planner, and the powers of commerce and
industry. Salutations to the lord of woods and
plantations. Salutations to the mighty roar against the
enemies of life. Salutations to the lord protector of the
pedestrians, wayfarers and the foot-soldiers.


20. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi)


[Names: Frafect, Praca]
uda mA: mon




Salutations to the lord industrious of total growth.
Salutations to the lord protector of assets. Salutations
to the lord of challenge, endurance and victory.
Salutations to the supersessor of challenging
emergencies. Salutations to the lord of full armour in
readiness. Salutations to the lord of hope and optimism.
Salutations to the controller of thieves and corruption.
Salutations to the lord of relentless work and
development. Salutations to the lord of love and service
of life and humanity. Salutations to the lord of forests
and forest life.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


464
21.




(Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi)


[Names: Cufresed, Trafgulszufzr]
ut fag ada ad: duse




Salutations to the controller of thugs, superthugs


and clandestine robbers. Salutations to the lord of
constant watch and deployment of missiles. Salutations
to the lord eliminater of smugglers. Constant watch over
the killer men of the lance and thunderbolt to them.
Salutations to the controller of swindlers. Watch and
punishment to the swordsmen night walkers. All hail to
the challenger and controller of national disunity,
division and defilement.


22.


(Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi)

[Names: Miia, Asse]
at AA: een




[Names: Nama]
Salutations to the village chief of the turban of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




distinction. Salutations to the chief of the mountainers.
Salutations to the controller of the antisocial mischief.
Salutations to the men of the arrow and the missile.
Salutations to the men of the bow and the carrier rocket.
Salutations to you again and again. Salutations to those
who advance the line of defence and security.
Salutations to the forces of offence in defence.
Salutations to the keepers of law and order. Salutations
to the marksmen who take on the target.


23. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi)


AH TARAS sat sey at AA: RIN


Salutations to those who shoot at evil. Salutations
to those who strike down the evil. Salutations to you
all. Care and caution for those who sleep. Exhortation
to those who wake. Salutations to all of you. Care for
those who rest. Appreciation for those who sit in
position. Salutations to those who stand fast. Cheers
for those who run for humanity.


24. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi)
TH: aurea: Gardez et THE THESyanszrssd-


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






Salutations to the councils of governance and
administration. Salutations to the heads of councils.
Salutations to you all. Salutations to the cavalry.
Salutations to the cavalry commanders. Salutations to
you all. Salutations to the forces of defence. Salutations
to the forces in action. Salutations to you all. Salutations
to the forces in reserve for reinforcement. Salutations to
the advancing and routing forces. Salutations to you all.


25. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi)






Salutations to autonomous communities.
Salutations to the heads of autonomous communities.
Salutations to you all. Salutations to the dominions.
Salutations to the heads of dominions. Salutations to
you all. Salutations to the guilds of expert professionals.
Salutations to the heads of expert associations.
Salutations to the mixed and multiform communities.
Salutations to the heads of multicultural communities.
Salutations to you all. Salutations to the international
associations. Salutations to the heads of world
associations. Salutations to you all.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




26. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi)




[Names: Gaba]
Salutations to the armies. Salutations to the
commanders of the armies. Salutations to the fighters
on rathas, tanks and warplanes. Salutations to the
warriors without the rathas (warriors on foot).
Salutations to you all. Salutations to the warriors and
the administrators. Salutations to the supply corps.
Salutations to you all. Salutations to the seniors, veterans
and the great. Salutations to the small, the young and
the recruits. Salutations to you all.


27. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi)


[Names: Freres]
at THE aa: seb unge at ad: ud




[Names: Namastaksabhyo]
Salutations to the wood carvers and craftsmen.
Salutations to the manufacturers of vehicles. Salutations
to you all. Salutations to the manufacturers of ceramics.
Salutations to the metallurgists. Salutations to you all.
Salutations to the hill and forest rangers. Salutations to


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the fishermen and pisciculturists. Salutations to you all.
Salutations to the dog-squads and the canine experts.
Salutations to the hunters and the experts of wild
animals. Salutations to you all.


28. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi)


[Names: Aeta, Rrota, Sitikanthaya]
ca.


Food for the dogs, recognition and incentive for
the breeders and trainers of dogs. Salutations to you
all. Salutations to the lord creator of the world. Homage
to the lord of maintenance with justice and retribution.
Salutations to the ultimate destroyer. Salutations to the
lord protector of the animals. Salutations to the lord of
the blue clouds. Salutations to the lord of the mighty
voice of thunder.


29. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi)


[Names: Weel, Agena, Vasa, Satadhanvane, Sipivistaya]
cesumate ca.


Homage to the lord of braided hair. Salutations


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




to the sage of shaven hair. Salutations to the lord of
vision of a thousand eyes. Salutations to the wielder of
a hundred bows. Homage to the sagely mountain
dweller. Salutations to the protector and promoter of
the animal wealth. Salutations to the lord supreme of
showers for life. Salutations to the lord of arrows.


30. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi)






[Names: Esau]
Food and support for the child and the little
darling. Salutations for the great and for the generous
man of years. Reverence for the old and love for the
youth growing together. Exhortation for the pathmaker
and for the first among pioneers of initiative.


31. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi)




[Names: Hsairrel, Ssighryaya, Sibhyaya]
All hail to men of instant response and to the men
of spontaneous action. Cheers for the fast worker and
incentive for the modes of speedy motion. Exhortation
to the powers of rapid progress and to men of roaring
business. All hail to the river projects and to the island


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


470
32.




(Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi)

Waal wear Sareea Sl THE ATA ST SIMA
A URI

ca.


All hail to the oldest and the youngest. Honour


and respect to the traditional and the modern. Full
recognition and support for the average medium and
the simple novice. All support for the lowest worker
and reverence for the wise and generous.


33.


(Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi)




[Names: Greate, Sede]
Salutations to the prosperous and the virtuous.


Salutations to the dispensers of justice and the preservers
of happiness and welfare. Salutations to the scholar of
vaidic voice and to the competent man of
accomplishment. Salutations to the man commanding
respect among the nobles, and to the master of creating
means and materials for good living.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




34. (Rudras Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Surathaya]
Food and protection for the forest habitations and
those living close thereby. Salutations to the reputed
man of the Veda and to his listener disciple. Salutations
to the warrior of the army on the fastest move and the
commander on the fastest vehicle. Salutations to the
brave soldier who breaks through the defences of the


35. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi)






Salutations to the warrior with the helmet.
Salutations to the knight in armour. Salutations to the
soldier in the bunker. Salutations to the force manning
the fort of defence. Salutations to the reputed hero.
Salutations to commander of the famous army.
Exhortation to the drummer. Bravo to the martial man
of music.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




36. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi)




[Names: Paigo, Tzdiaurdar]
ca.


Salutations to the bold and fearless. Salutations to
the shrewd and reflective man of thought and deliber-
ation, and to the kind and the courteous. Salutations to
the man of the sword and to the hero of the pointed arrow
and quiver. Salutations to the man of mighty warriors of
invincible arms. Salutations to the wielder of super-
weapons and to the man of the mighty bow.


37. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi)






All hail and support for those who live by the
side-walks, springs and trails. Welcome and hospitality
for the travellers on the high roads and all support for
the keepers of the roads. Care and caution for the
mountain pass and the foot-hills and all support for those
who live thereby. All love and care and reverence for
streams and lakes, rivers and rivulets, pools and tanks,
and all hail and hospitality for the users and keepers of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




these. Salutations, exhortations and cheers to those who
love and live by these !


38. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi)


"TH: pale wae ep THE divas aaa a
[Names: Tender]
aT Ben




Salutations to the specialist of well construction.
Salutations to the drilling geologist. Salutations to the
scientist explorer of the clear blue sky in the sunlight.
Salutations to the expert of solar heat and energy.
Salutations to the technologist of cloud formation.
Salutations to the scientist and technologist of lightning
and electricity. Salutations to the scholar and scientist
of rain and water management. Salutations to the
scientist of drought and drought management.


39. (Rudras Devata, Kutsa Rshi)
a Us




Salutations to the expert of wind and storm.
Salutations to the scientist of cloud burst and thunder.
Salutations to the specialist of surplus and waste
management. Salutations to the man of housing and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




architecture. Salutations to the expert of health and
power. Salutations to the minister of justice and equity.
Salutations to the powers of security against violence
and crime. Salutations to the promoters of Dharma and
the good life.


40. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)






[Names: Staal, Sangave]
Salutations to the lord of peace and protector of
living beings. Salutations to the lord of power and awe.
Salutations to the powers of preventive strike and
consequent elimination. Punishment to the killer and
the destructive terrorist. Water and care for the trees of
green foliage. Salutations to the saviour from suffering.


41. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)






[Names: Pard, Brada, Sankaraya, Sivataraya]
Salutations to the lord of peace, and to the lord
giver of peace and joy in life. Salutations to the lord of
prosperity, and to the lord giver of prosperity.
Salutations to the lord of peace, prosperity and grace,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and to the lord giver of peace, prosperity and grace more
and ever more.


42. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)






Salutations to the lord across the river, and to
him this side of the flow. And salutations to the captain
who steers all across the seas, and to him who steers
across and above. And salutations to him who is both
the guide and the goal and to him who awaits us on the
shore. And salutations to him who shines green in
vegetation, and to him who floats with the foam.


43. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)






[Names: Rara]
Homage to the gold in the sand, and to him who
flows with the flow. And homage to him who plays with
the pebbles, and to him who dwells in the tranquil
harbour. Homage to the lord of the braided hair and to
him who shines with glossy hair. Homage to the lord of
the desert and to the protector of the wandering sages.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


476
44.




(Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)



Homage to the lord of the meadow and to the


warmth of the cow-shed. Homage to the angels of the
bed and to the inmates of the home. Homage to the spirit
in the heart and to the lord of human settlements.
Homage to the mountain mysteries and to the spirit of
the darkest caves.


45.


(Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)



[Names: Vera, Suskyaya]
Homage to the spirit of the desert breeze and


vibrations of the greens. Homage to the life of the dust
and atoms of fragrance in the flowers. Homage to the
spirit of the invisible and the softness of the grass.
Homage to the lord of ocean fire and the fire of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




46. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)
[Names: Shera]
mA faferacesan anal fafaroneeat asen-




Homage to the spirit of the green leaves and to
the fall of the leaves. Homage to the clarion call of action
and to the destroyer of evil. All help and sustenance to
the wearied and the oppressed. Homage to the makers
of arrows and missiles and to the makers of bows and
firing rockets. Homage to the noble hearts and the
sparkling showers of their grace. Homage to the powers
of discrimination between good and evil. Homage to
the destroyers of oppression and to the upliftment and
redemption of the fallen and the destitute.


47. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)
[Names: Drape]
nah kincanamamat.


Redeemer of the fallen, lord of food and
sustenance, saviour of the poor and down-trodden, lord


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of growth and greenery, cause no fear to these people
and these animals. Cause no ailment or injury. Let none
of us suffer any disease or damage.


48. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)


TA sen


naturam.


All our thoughts and intentions, all our songs and
devotion, and all our man-power we hold and dedicate
to Rudra, awful lord of the knotted hair, commander of
our young and brave heroes, so that there may be peace
and well-being among our people and our animals
(bipeds and quadrupeds), and life in this whole habitable
world may be healthy, strong and free from want and


49. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)




[Names: Sasi, Vast]
Rudra, lord of health and well-being, your
auspicious presence in body and mind, your knowledge
and approach is gracious, a panacea for all ailments,
universal antidote to suffering and disease. With that
healing touch bless us with good health and happiness
for life.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




50. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)






[Names: Here]
May the thunderbolt of Rudra spare us. May the
evil disposition of the sinful and the angry keep off from
us. May the generous lord giver of life and prosperity
elevate the intelligence and constancy of the munificent
yajnics and be kind and gracious to our children and


51. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)


tÈ egu


[Names: Midhustama, Sivatama, Parame, Most]
heart and kind toward us all. Taking up the arms,
wearing the corslet, holding the great bow, come and
take on the mighty force of the enemies of life.


52. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)






[Names: Vikiridra]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Salutations to you, Rudras, lords lustrous and
glorious, shooting arrows to destroy evil. And the
thousand thunderbolts you wield, they may spare us and
fall elsewhere on mischief far away from us.


53. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)




[Names: Area, Sahasrani, Tasamisano]
Lord of majesty and ruler of the world, hundreds
and thousands are the arms and powers in your hands.
Turn their shaft and direction away and elsewhere far
from us.


54. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Asamkhyata]
Thousands are the Rudras (life-sustaining

powers) and countless are the Rudras (pranis, living
forms) which are on the earth. We use their powers and
properties in a thousand ways and, (in cyclic order)
extend their powers and properties a thousand fold over
vast areas of space.


55. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)


wales were erat athe uuu




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Countless are the Rudra powers in this great
ocean of the sky between the earth and heaven. We use
their powers and properties in a thousand applications
and in cyclic order, extend their powers and properties
a thousand-fold over vast areas in space.


56. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)


wule$ measa eat deu esi


[Names: Nilagrivah]
Blue-necked and white-throated, countless are the
Rudra powers of life and sustenance which abide in
heaven and the light of the sun. We use their energies
and powers in a thousand ways for a thousand purposes
and, in a positive circle, extend their powers and
properties a thousand-fold over vast areas of space.


57. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)






[Names: Sitikanthah]
Blue-necked, white-throated are the violent powers

and ferocious creatures which roam around on the earth.
We counter and throw off their powers and forces
countless leagues away from us with the bows we stretch
to shoot the arrows.


58. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)




[Names: Geese]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Saspinjara]
We counter the Rudra powers, blue-necked, white
throated, yellowish red, bright and green like blades of
grass, which grow on trees as parasites, and, stretching
our bows for the arrows (with insecticides etc.,) render
their deadly action ineffective over vast areas of the


59. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)


wales Geese erat aeu nee




The powers who are protectors, promoters and
guardians of living beings, sanyasis and brahmacharis
with shaven heads or wearing unshorn hair, we help
and serve, and, with all our power and means, we extend
their activities over vast areas of the earth.


60. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)






The Rudras, noble people, who guard and
promote the moral and spiritual highways of life, who
maintain and develop the national highways and protect
the travellers, who develop the resources of the earth,
and who struggle for the betterment of life and age, we
support and serve with all our might and extend their


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


powers a thousand fold over vast areas of the earth.


61. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)




We do homage to the Rudras, sacred presences
who cleanse the mind and sanctify the soul, heroes who
go round wielding the thunderbolt and the bow and
quiver in defence of humanity. We support and serve
them with all our might and extend their power a
thousand fold over vast areas of the earth.


62. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)


tz azea eat aaa nee




The infectious germs and viruses in food and
drink and in the cooking and dining ware which, in
various ways, afflict the people through eating and
drinking, we fight with all our might, and we eliminate
their deadly power and presence over a vast area of the
earth and the environment.


63. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)


wales mesa atA aA ie an


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Tesain]
And Rudra powers (of beneficence, affliction and
retribution in nature) conceived and realized so far and
even more exist variously in all the directions (on the
earth, in the sky and in heaven). We deal with their arms
and armaments appropriately with all our might and
mind in faith (worshipping, extending, negating or
fighting and eliminating) in a thousand ways over vast
areas of time and space.


64. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)




[Names: Tebhyo, Tebhyo]
Homage to the Rudras that abide in heaven. Rain
is their power and gift to life. To them our salutations
with folded hands with ten fingers joined, with ten
senses and ten pranas. For them the ten directions east,
north, and ten directions above; all these for them to
pervade and operate. Salutations to them! May they
[Names: Whosoever]
whosoever hate us, him we deliver unto their power for
judgement and redress.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




65. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)






[Names: Aart]
Homage to the Rudras that abide in the skies.
Wind and air is their power and gift to life. To them our
salutations with folded hands with the fingers joined,
with ten senses and the pranas. For them the ten
ten directions north, and ten directions above; all these
for them to pervade and operate. Salutations to them!
for judgement and redress.


66. (Rudras Devata, Parameshthi Prajapati Va Deva Rshi)




[Names: Gurus]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Homage to the Rudras that abide on the earth.
Food and energy is their power and gift to life. To them
our salutations with folded hands with ten fingers joined,
with ten senses and ten pranas. For them the ten
ten directions north, and ten directions above; all these
for them to pervade and operate. Salutations to them!
for judgement and redress.




[Names: Neyse]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1.  (Maruts Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)





[Names: Tons, Asmannurjam]
O Maruts (men and women), kind and generous
powers, hold for us the energy and power contained in
the mountain ranges of the clouds and the sky, and hold
for us that energy and juices distilled from waters, herbs
and trees, and bless us with that food and energy.
Voracious eater, fire of yajna, may your hunger and
energy be in me too, and may your displeasure reach
someone we hate (i.e., none).


2.  (AgniDevata, Medhatithi Rshi)
wad ot wd ot oes a ace rad mad e frat
a fad a wad ured a ade cr Wave ue




[Names: Asarasseat, Wargfedeees]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Scaita]
Agni, fire-lord of yajna, may these bricks of my
altar (vedi), wanted values of life, one and all, be
generous and productive and grow ten times in
geometrical progression : May one grow to ten, and ten
to one hundred (shatam), and one hundred to one
thousand (sahasram), and one thousand to ten thousand
(ayutam), and ten thousand to hundred thousand (one
lac, niyutam), and hundred thousand to a million
(prayutam), and one million to hundred million
(arbudam), and hundred million to a billion (arba,
nyarbudam), and one billion to ten billion (one kharba),
and ten billion to a hundred billion (one nikharba), and
hundred billion to a trillion (mahapadma), and one
trillion to ten trillion (one shanku), and ten trillion to
hundred trillion (one samudra), and hundred trillion to
quadrillion (one madhyam), and one madhyam to ten
madhyam (anta, ten quadrillion), and one anta to ten
anta (hundred quadrillion), parardha. And these bricks,
wanted values, be, like cows, the givers of fulfilment to
me in this life and beyond, in this world and beyond.


3. (Agni Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)




[Names: Rtava, Ghrtas]
Ladies of the home brilliant as yajna fire, holy as
truth and universal law, reflecting the plenty and purity


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of distilled ghee and overflowing with the sweetness of
honey, you are surely treasures of fulfilment beyond
decay. Be vibrant as spring, stay inviolable as the cycle
of the seasons and add to the sanctity of the laws of life.


4. (Agni Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)






[Names: Samudrasya, Pavako]
Agni, brilliant power, we stand round and cover
you as the shaivala grass of the sea. Cleanser and purifier
of life, be good and gracious to us.


5. (Agni Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)


feet car sea Of rea à




[Names: Himasya]
and clothing round the frosty cold of the season. Come,
cleanser and purifier of life, and be kind and gracious
to us.


6. (Agni Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)





[Names: Asdan]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Agni, clad in the brilliant flames of light, come
upon the earth, descend in the midst of the earth's
abundance. Descend into the streams of life. Since you
are the life and lustre of the waters, come with that life
and lustre. Come and bless this yajna of our home with
peace and prosperity.


7. (Agni Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)






[Names: Pest, Waetsstert, Apamidam, Anyanste]
This home is the abode of peace as the sky is the
abode of waters. It is an abode of the depth of life as the
deep ocean is. May Agni, lord of yajna and life and
lustre of the waters be kind and gracious to us in this
home of yajna, and may the heat of his passion and
displeasure be directed elsewhere away from us.


8. (Agni Devata, Vasuyu Rshi)





[Names: Afat]
Agni, generous lord of light, purifier and

sanctifier of life, with your brilliant and exhilarating


tongue of flames you call the noble yajnic devotees
together and proclaim to them the truths of eternity.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


9. (Agni Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)





Agni, power of light and lustre, purifier and
sanctifier of life, you graciously call the noble powers
of nature and humanity together here close to our yajna
and let us all share the gifts of the fragrance of libations.


10. (Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)





[Names: Warn, Noll, Pavakaya, Turvan]
Agni, lord of light and power, commander of the
army, with his cleansing, enlightening and splendid
force, shines on the earth like the dawn blazing with
the light of the sun. And young, unaging, unexhausted,
hastening apace on the course of his chariot, thirsting
for victory in the heat of the battle, blazes with his own



11. (Agni Devata, Lopamudra Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Salutations to Agni, lord of light and justice,
radiant and pure, divine and adorable, and saviour from
pain and suffering. Lord sanctifier of life and nature,
be good and gracious to us. And may the heat of your
passion and punishment for sin and injustice fall upon
others far from us, i.e. different from real human nature
and character.


12. (Agni Devata, Lopamudra Rshi)


aS ug




[Names: Nrsade]
Homage to Agni, lord present in and presiding
over humanity. Homage to the lord present in and ruling
over the waters. Homage to the lord governing within
and over the business of society. Homage to the lord
present in and ruling over the forests. Homage to the
lord creator and giver of the joy of life.


13. (Prana Devata, Lopamudra Rshi)


[Names: Ahutado]
Pranas (Sanyasis, those who are the life-breath
of the spirit of society), those who are noblest among
the nobles, adorable among those who adore Agni in
yajna, serve and receive their part of the annual sessions
of yajna, and, free from the performance of yajna before


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




meals, themselves receive and enjoy the honey-sweets
and drinks of the libations in this yajna.


14. (Prana Devata, Lopamudra Rshi)






[Names: Yebhyo]
Pranas, life-breath of the spirit of humanity, souls
who have attained the state of divine grace among the
nobles, who walk in the very presence of this Lord of
the universe, without whom nowhere in the world
anything moves nor is anything sanctified, they are not
confined to any particular region of heaven, nor to any
particular region of the earth, they are universal,


15. (Agni Devata, Lopamudra Rshi)






[Names: Pranada]
Agni, Lord of light and power, you are the giver
of vital energy, means of the removal of impurity and
waste, universal knowledge, lustre of life and the light
of truth and Dharma. Be good and gracious to us, lord
purifier and sanctifier of life and soul, and let your
displeasure and punishment befall somewhere else far
away from us.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




16. (Agni Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi)


saat era RA esi




[Names: Agnistigmena, Agnistigm, Agnirno]
Agni, lord giver of light, knowledge and power,
with its incessant waves of light and warmth ripens and
begets all good nourishing foods for us. The same agni
with the power of electric energy begets all the wealth
for us. (So may the man of knowledge and scientific
power produce food and wealth for humanity.)


17. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro VishvakarmaRshi)





Our father, Vishvakarma, omniscient lord and
into His own fire of cosmic yajna and remains. And
then He, self-moved by His own will to create the
profuse variety of existence, projects and pervades the
first evolutes and later continues the expansion and self
pervasion on and on.


18. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi)


fagat: eeu


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Yato]
What is the ultimate stay of the universe? What
is the original cause of the creation? What sort? From
which Vishvakarma, omnipresent seer who pervades
the universe, created the earth and then heaven with


19. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi)


Vasu: ue su




[Names: Visvatascaksurta]
Vishvakarma, the one absolute self-effulgent lord
of the universe, with universal eye to watch, and
universal mouth to reveal the Word, and universal arms
for action, and universal feet for omnipresence, having
created the heaven and earth from dynamic particles of
Prakriti, keeps the universe in constant motion with his
mighty arms of omnipotence.


20. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi)
aay RoW


[Names: Kimsvidvanam, Manisino]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




What is that original cause, that lovely tree, from
which the lord maker shaped the heaven and earth and
the whole dynamic world? Men of intelligence and
conscientious mind ask the men of wisdom and vision:
Who is that lord who holds and sustains the regions of
the world and presides over all these and yet remains
the sole lord above the universe?


21. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi)






[Names: Siksa]
Vishvakarma, lord of your own omnipotence, lord
of nature, heaven and earth, maker of the universe,
enlighten us, your friends and devotees, about the worlds
of your own creation, the highest, the lowest and
youngest, and the middle ones. Lord of food and energy,
expanding the material world of existence, you yourself
provide for sustenance with constant inputs into the
systemic growth of the universe.


22. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi)


femen gat erem: tad eure uferefüua
VET ou




[Names: Muhyantvanye]
Vishvakarma, lord maker of the universe, exalted


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




by the celebration and offerings of yajna, bless the earth
and heaven with your presence. May the others, enemies
of life and progress all round, fail. And may Indra, lord
of power and glory, of wealth and learning, be the
harbinger of knowledge and wisdom.


23. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi)








For our protection and progress in the battle of
life to day we invoke Vishvakarma, lord of knowledge
and speech, universal master of all karma working at
speed faster than that of mind. May he, beneficent lord
of unfailing action, kind and generous to all, be pleased
to listen to our invocation and grant our prayers for
protection and progress.


24. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi)






[Names: Geared]
Vishvakarma, lord President of the total activity
of humanity/the nation, with the growth and
advancement arising from the developmental activities
of the people working with yajnic dedication in unison,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




we pray, appoint Indra, a man of power and glory as
minister for defence who should be an inviolable
defender of the world/the land, so that all the people
bow to him in acceptance and reverence and (with that
universal support) he becomes mighty and formidable
in action.


25. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi)
aga: fac ater fe si gAs |



[Names: Caksusah, Yadedanta]
When the ruler, Vishvakarma, is of calm and
resolute mind, loves and protects men of vision and
justice, and promotes the creation of food and wealth,
and when the people bow to him in obedience and act
in unison like parts of one organism, then only the people
and the government strengthen each other and grow like
the earth and heaven of yore together.


26. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi)


[Names: Tesamistani]
Vishvakarma is the one lord maker of the world,
sole treasure-home of universal knowledge, present in


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the universal variety of existence, creator and sustainer
of the universe, all-seeing universal presence and
supreme reality, whom the wise sages call one and
absolute, wherein the humans with their five senses,
mind and intelligence rejoice and wherein they realise


27. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi)


Vishvakarma is the lord who is our father and
creator, law-giver and sustainer, who knows all the
regions of the universe, who is one and absolute yet
holds the names of all the powers of nature and His
own potential. In Him enter all the worlds, and He is
the eternal question and mystery for all the conscientious


28. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi)


m Ren



[Names: Asurte]
They are the Rishis, visionaries of Divinity, who,
like celebrants in worship, have offered songs and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




libations of rich materials to Lord Vishvakarma and
who, residing in known as well as in unknown worlds,
have directed and attracted the mind and soul of living
beings to the lord.


29. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi)




Get uu




[Names: Paro, Kainsvid]
The Lord Supreme, Brahma, is beyond the
heavens, beyond this earth, beyond the gods of nature
and beyond the evil and the lifeless. He is the One
wherein the life-force bears the first grand and
mysterious seed of the universe and whom the
primordeal visionaries of divinity see directly as if face
to face.


30. (Vishvakarma Devata, Vishvakarma Rshi)







[Names: Tamid, Ajasya]
Therein surely the life-force bore that first seed
of the universe wherein all the powers of nature and the
visionary souls find their repose. He is the one sole lord


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




seated at the centre of the mother force, Prakriti, and he
is the lord presiding over existence, wherein reside all
the worlds of the universe.


31. (Vishvakarma Devata, Vishvakarma Rshi)






[Names: Niharena]
You don't know Him who has created all these
worlds. He is different and distant from you all, and yet
within you all. People sunk in darkness roam around
quoting scripture but serving their own selfish ends with
empty words void of vision.


32. (Vishvakarma Devata, Bhuvanputro Vishvakarma Rshi)






[Names: Trtiyah]
Lord Vishvakarma, creator of the world, self-
effulgent lord of light and life, first manifested in
existence. Then after that was born the sun which holds
the earth. The third was the cloud which, in its womb,
holds the waters, offspring of the sky and the winds,
vital air, and generates and sustains the herbs and trees
in many ways.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




33. (Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)


fired: 13311



[Names: Asuh, Samkrandano]
He alone is Indra, worthy to be commander of
the army, who is swift and instant in action and wields
blazing deadly weapons in readiness, who roars with
strength like a bull and strikes fear, terror and panic in
the enemy force, who is constantly watchful and a
fearless challenger, who is a matchless hero, rallies the
force at the call and with us comes out victorious over a
hundred armies of the enemy.


34. (Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)




wen Wasi




[Names: Samkrandanenanimisena, Tadindrena]
Ye men of war, challenge, engage and defeat that
enemy force and be victorious with that commander,
Indra, bold and daring, alert and watchful, thirsting for
victory, master of tactical deployment and engagement
of forces, informidable, fully armed and overwhelming
the enemy with a rain of arrows/bullets/missiles.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




35. (Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)






[Names: Pufstdet, Samsrstajit]
That warrior, router of the enemy, Indra, self-
controlled, lover of exhilarating soma and defender of
peace, creator and commander of the army, strong of
arm, wielder of mighty weapons and awful marksman,
supported by his well-selected and well-deployed army
highly equipped with arms and armaments, defeats the
collective forces of the enemies.


36. (Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)




[Names: Wiss, Mitran, Prabhanjantsenah]
Brihaspati, commander of the mighty army,
destroyer of the wicked, repulsing the enemy, routing
his force and causing havoc all round by your chariot,
you come out victorious over the violent and the evil in
the battle. Be the protector and defender of our chariots
and the wheels of the nation's economy.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




37. (Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)




[Names: Wetar, Geist, Settee]
ma NoN




[Names: Balavijnayah, Abhiviro]
Indra, expert of army management, veteran
tactician, admirable soldier, steadfast and resolute
fighter, man of patience and endurance, mighty and
victorious, fast and terrible, hero of heroes, admiration
of the great and intelligent, lustrous and powerful,
honoured by the victorious, master of effective
communication and reconnaissance of territory, take to
your chariot and ride across the earth, over the seas and
into the skies.


38. (Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)




[Names: Gotrabhidam, Imain]
Friends, countrymen, children of mother earth,
with all your might and main, follow this Indra,
commander of the army, hand in hand. Join him in battle
and display your valour and heroism with him who is a
master of tactical code of signals and reconnaissance
of enemy territory, wields the thunderbolt in hand,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




breaks through the enemy lines, routs the forces,
destroys the enemy and wins the battle.


39. (Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)
"p us




[Names: Satamanyurindrah]
Indra, valiant commander, relentless warrior of
enemy defences with his strength of armour, irresistible,
invincible, victor of enemy forces, may direct and defend
our army and lead it to victory.


40. (Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)


[Names: Geeta]
teenies Sait medi axa wot




[Names: Devasenanamabhibhanjatinam]
The commander of those noble and enlightened
armies which break down and conquer the forces of
evil in life is Indra, a man of power and grandeur; he is
Brihaspati, a man of grandeur, knowledge and
magnanimity; he is Soma, the man of magnanimity,
peace and joy; he is the candid expert on the right side
of the nation; he is the clarion call for unity and progress,
and he is the first among all to take the lead in advance
in a crisis. At his call the Maruts, commandos of the
first order, must storm the citadel of the enemy.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


506
41.




(Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)

TATA Qe



[Names: Vrsno, Mahamanasam]
The battle cry of the bold and fierce army


consisting of brilliant, stormy, magnanimous, noble and
victorious soldiers of the powerful, virile and celebrated
ruler should rise high to the sky shaking the enemy with


42.


(Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)


[Names: Sade]
arabe ahea seat ag arat: sz




[Names: Uddharsaya, Udvrtrahan]
Lord of power and glory, destroyer of the darkest


enemy clouds, refine and sharpen the arms and
armaments of our forces, boost the morale of our
soldiers, accelerate the speed and raise the fire power
of our horses and rockets, and let the roar of our
victorious tanks and chariots rise to the skies and rend
the clouds.


43.


(Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)

[Names: Assad, Waxaenreiss, Parsataar]
BAT usu


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Asmakamindrah]
When the flags fly high and the battle rages, may
our leader and commander, Indra, and our arms and
arrows be victorious. May our valiant warriors win and
live happy ever after. May the noble scholars and sages
and the warriors and tacticians protect us through the
challenges and battles of life and life’s values.


44. (Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)




[Names: Amisam, Sokairandhenamitrastamasa]
Valiant women's corps, dazzling and bewildering
the mind of those enemies, engage their troops in action
and overthrow them far. Advancing deep into their
ranks, burn them at heart and afflict them so that they
may regret and lie low covered with darkness and


45. (Ishu Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)


adqger wad mà aaah |


[Names: Avasrsta, Saravye, Gacchamitran]
kancanoccisah.


Valiant women’s corps, trained by the military
experts of the Vedas, commanded and exhorted by the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




leader, shooting like an arrow, go far and fall upon the
enemies. Go deep and take them all, do not spare any
one of them.


46. (Yoddha Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)




[Names: Preta, Ugra]
Valiant warriors, go, advance and win. May Indra
grant you victory and joy. May your arms be strong and
bold so that no one may be able to challenge you and
you remain free and invincible.


47. (Marutah Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)






Warriors, intelligent, bold and fierce, yonder is
that army of the others, rivals, which marches upon us
out of jealousy to surround and overcome us with all
their might. Cover that with repellent smoke in utter
darkness so that they may fail even to perceive each


48. (Indra Brihaspati, etc., Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)


[Names: Afraga]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Yatra, Tanna]
Where the arrows strike all round and young
soldiers fall like children shorn of hair at play, there
Indra, lord of power and glory, and Brihaspati, lord of
this great world, and the Great Council of Mother Earth
itself may grant us peace. May they grant us peace and
well-being for all time.


49. (Soma Varuna Devah Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)






[Names: Marmani, Somastva, Urorvariyo, Varunaste, Varunast, Noble]
limbs with a protective armour. May Soma, lord of
health and well-being, ruler of all, wrap you round in
happiness and immortality. May Varuna, lord supreme,
the noble powers of the earth bless you with joy,
victorious one.


50. (Agni Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)






[Names: Udenamuttaram]
Agni, lord of life and progress, invoked and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




worshipped with libations of ghee and fragrant
materials, take this yajamana, ruler, victor, to higher
and higher states of honour and glory. Bless him with
the wealth of life and good health. Let him rise and
grow with a good family and noble children.


51. (Indra Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)




[Names: Indremam, Samenam]
Indra, lord of power and glory, take this warrior
victor to that high state of ethics and policy whereby he
may rise to organise, control and rule over his fellow
citizens, children of the mother land. Bless him with
the light and lustre of life and learning so that he is able
to do his duty to the noble people, powers of nature and


52. (Agni Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)






Agni, lord of light and learning, lead the man in
whose home we perform the yajna to the high road of
progress and prosperity. Let the noblest people speak
high of him and to him. And so may this scholar of the
Vedas speak to him and about him.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




53. (Agni Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)




[Names: Farah, Rearea]
Agni, lord of power and glory, may all the noble
people of the land with their heart and soul accept,
approve, support and raise you to the heights. And you
too, so high and noble, a very image of nobility and
magnanimity, be good and kind to us.


54. (Disha directions Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)


SEAT ux




[Names: Rayaspose]
May all the five directions of space replete with
the celestial generosity of nature protect and promote
yajna. May the intelligent and pious women,
brahmacharinis and wives of saints and scholars,
preventing and dispelling ignorance and evil genius,
supporting and serving the yajnapati in the growth of
health and wealth, protect and promote yajna in the


May the yajna and the household be established
in good health, wealth and progress in well-being.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




55. (Agni Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)




[Names: Samiddhe, Taptam]
That yajna, adorable, praiseworthy, flying high
on the wings of Vaidic verses, accepted and honoured
of yore, which the ancient sages performed with
libations of boiled ghee into the flaming fire, that same
yajna, noble people, you also accept and perform with
the same devotion and enthusiasm.


56. (Agni Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)


gata at wie gasi: sitar: adar: 1 ufo


-—— C


[Names: Satapayah, Parigrhya]
Noble people sit with the noble people round the
fire, performing yajna for the noble people in honour
of the divine powers.


Let the noble people take to the noble yajamana,
aman endowed with wealth of virtue, generosity of heart
and plenty of sumptuous food and drink, and let them
perform the yajna in honour of the heavenly lord,
sustainer of the world and loving father of his children.


57. (Yajna Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)




[Names: Amga]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Vitam]
The dynamic and blissful libations of fragrant
materials, offered by the peace-loving yajamana into
the yajna fire for the highest yajna of the fourth (turiya)
order where the libations ultimately reach, from there
the Vaidic voices and the blessings of yajna come and
reach us.


58. (Agni Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)


[Names: Geena, Suryarasmirharikesah]
Savita, lord creator, clothed in sun-rays, radiating
the golden-green emanations (waves) of light is the light
that arose at the dawn of creation. Lord omniscient,


protector and sustainer, He goes on and on watching
the worlds of existence.


In His creation, the man of science too goes on
watching and watching, collecting the endless light of
knowledge about the worlds of the universe.


59. (Aditya Devata, Vishvavasu Rshi)


a AT I4


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Vimana]
This sun, traversing like a divine car, remains in
the midst of the regions of light and illuminates the
heaven, the earth and the sky. It is the sustainer of the
world, source treasure of waters, and watches and
illuminates before, after and in-between (past, present
and future).


60. (Aditya Devata, Apratiratha Rshi)






[Names: Uksa, Madhye]
The sun, seminal fertilizer of life, ocean of spatial
waters, scarlet red at dawn, lord of manifold splendour,
illuminator of the firmament, sustained in the midst of
heaven, travels in space sustaining and binding the ends
of the spheres and moving towards the womb of its
original mother, eternal energy, from whence it came


61. (Indra Devata, Madhuchhanda Sutajeta Rshi)


[Names: Tata, Rathitamam]
patim.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Wider than oceans of space, supreme over the
commanding and blissful powers of existence, lord
sustainer of the universal energies and nourishments,
lord ordainer of the truth and reality of the world and
Himself the supreme reality, all the voices of nature,
humanity and divinity celebrate the only one omnipotent


62. (YajnaDevata, Vidhriti Rshi)


agafada gate san at ARA nee




[Names: Devahuryajna, Yaksadagnirdevo]
Yajna is the divine power which calls forth the
noblest powers and people to the congregation. May it
raise the voice of truth and give us the divine message
and save us from untruth. Yajna stimulates life with
pleasure and well-being. May it inspire us with pleasure
and well-being. The fire of yajna and the lord of light
feeds the powers of nature. May it augment and enrich
the treasures of the environment and bless us with the


63. (Indra Devata, Vidhriti Rshi)




akah.


May Indra, lord creator of nourishment and
energy and giver of knowledge, elevate me to the heights


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of virtue with inspiration and ambition. And may he,
for me, devalue the negative forces of jealousy and
enmity with depression to the lowest depths towards
elimination.


64. (Indragni Devate, Vidhriti Rshi)




[Names: Fost, Udgrabham]
May the powers of life strengthen and expand
our capacity to rise high, and our capability to resist
depression toward the fall. And may Indra, divine power,
and Agni, divine light, throw out far off our dispersive
tendencies and our jealousies and enmities.


65. (Agni Devata, Vidhriti Rshi)






[Names: Kramadhvamagnina, Divasprstham]
By virtue of Agni, lord of knowledge, light and
energy, act and rise to the heights of joy, holding the
gifts of yajna in your hands. In the company of the
noblest people, favoured by the generous powers of
nature, reach the heavens of bliss and establish
yourselves in the regions of light.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


66. (Agni Devata, Vidhriti Rshi)


write ufasi of fasts qissifasag d



[Names: Pracimanu, Agnirbhaveha]
Agni, man of knowledge and power, go ahead
and move eastward to the rising sun. In front of Agni,
lord of light and power, be agni yourself, a brilliant man
of the front rank here and now. Shine, and around
yourself illuminate the environment and create food and
energy for our fellow humans and our animals.


67. (Agni Devata, Vidhriti Rshi)




[Names: Prthivya]
(With the knowledge of science and the discipline
of yoga) I rise from the earth to the skies. From the
skies, I rise to the regions of light, the sun. From the
regions of the sun, lord of life and joy, I rise to the
heavens, the regions of eternal bliss and light divine.


68. (Agni Devata, Vidhriti Rshi)






[Names: Taian, Svaryanto, Yajnam]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Those virtuous men of knowledge who perform
yajna and expand it, yajna which sustains the whole
world, they expect nothing of the material world and,
through yoga, rise above the earth and heaven and
ascend to the regions of bliss and light divine.


69. (Agni Devata, Vidhriti Rshi)


ar Uf vat daaa agiata uela i




[Names: Taher, Iyaksamana]
Agni, man of knowledge and yajna, you are the

first among men on way to godliness. You are the eye


for the average humans as you have the vision of the
men of divinity.


May the people of faith and love full of devotion
dedicated to yajna and performing yajna with men of
knowledge and vision of divinity enjoy peace and
happiness and ascend to the heaven of bliss and life
divine.

70. (Agni Devata, Kutsa Rshi)



[Names: Naktosasa]
Just as the mother and the nurse, different of
character and status but of equal mind and common


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




purpose, nurse one baby, so do the night and dawn,
different in form as darkness and light but harmonious
and equal of purpose, nurse one new born, the sun, Agni.
The brilliant sun blazes between the earth and heaven
as the source of light and symbol of cosmic yajna.
Dedicated people who offer libations of holy materials
sustain the yajna fire in honour of cosmic Agni for light
and nourishment.


71. (Agni Devata, Kutsa Rshi)


amaleri masih aet a fata anita




Agni, lord of a thousand eyes and hundred heads,
hundred fold are your pranic energies of life, thousand-
fold are your energies of action and volition in living
beings and in nature. Thousand-fold is the wealth of
the world you create and govern. To this generous lord
of life and energy we offer our homage with libations
into the fire with total dedication, without reservation.


72. (Agni Devata, Kutsa Rshi)




[Names: Bhasa]
Agni, lord of light and life, magnanimous of
nature, settle on the face of the earth and bless it with


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




life. Fill the sky with light. Illuminate the heaven with
light and glory. Enrich the directions of space with life
and splendour.


73. (Agni Devata, Kutsa Rshi)




[Names: Ajuhvanah]
Agni, lord of light and life, invoked and invited
in yajna, splendid and gracious in form, come and settle
in your own seat in front, in the east. The yajamana and
all the noble souls may sit and grace this home now as
the yajamana, and all the noble souls in this life and


74. (Savita Devata, Kanva Rshi)







[Names: Yamasya]
I dedicate myself to this chosen Lord Savita’s

rich, generous and wonderful divine intelligence which

gives a thousand showers of universal knowledge and

which the man of vision distils from the mother

knowledge of the Vedas just like milk from the great


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




75. (Agni Devata, Gritsamada Rshi)
aià "eun

[Names: Vidhema, Yasmadyonerudaritha]
Agni, supreme of manifestation in the highest
region of existence, we honour and worship you. In this
world, in this home, this side of that supreme region we
celebrate and worship you. The place you emerge from,
and the state whence you arise, we sanctify and love to
join. And when you are ablaze in flames of glory, we
offer fragrant libations in honour and homage to you.


76. (Agni Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)





[Names: Preddho, Tvain]
Agni, brilliant and most youthful power, arise in
flames and blaze with incessant waves of light right in
front of us. And may a perpetual line of worshipful
devotees and a continuous flow of fragrant food come
to you in homage.


77. (Agni Devata, Parameshthi Rshi)






[Names: Taga]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




ambition nursed in the heart, like a blissful yajna
sustained with holy chants, we celebrate you in the fire
and perpetuate you with homage, and we pray we too
may advance in life and virtue.


78. (Vishvakarma Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)


Fatt were water gaa wed asgari-



[Names: Cittim, Patye]
With concentrated mind and thought I offer
homage to Agni with libations in the fire, so that the
noblest people, lovers of yajna and promoters of truth,
come here (and join in homage for advancement. And
in company) every day I offer sacred and intrepidable
libations of havi to Vishvakarma, lord maker and
sustainer of the great good universe.


79. (Agni Devata, Saptarshi Rshis)




[Names: Sapta, Sapta]
Agni, seven are the samidhas (sticks of sacred


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




fuel) whereby you rise and shine. Seven are your tongues
of flame whereby you devour the food. Seven are the
Rishis, visionaries of knowledge and piety who invoke
you for homage. Seven are your darling places, contexts,
wherein you love to shine and play. Seven are the priests
who seven-ways do homage and seven-fold extend your
blessings. Seven are the places, vedis, where from you
manifest and grow. Fill all these places with ghee and
your blessings, grow and prosper and let us too grow
and prosper. This is the divine voice.


80. (Maruts Devata, Saptarshis Rshis)



[Names: Sukrajyotisca]
Lord of pure light, and lord of wondrous light,
and lord of the light of truth, and lord of light and the
lord light itself, lord pure and immaculate, and the lord
protector of truth, the Law and the cosmic yajna of
existence and the lord sinless of infinite virtue is He.


(May the Maruts, heroes of the speed of lightning,
81. (Maruts Devata, Saptarshi Rshis)
$qx cetur eb aga a RE ow od
faasa aaga wu 22




[Names: Idrn, Mitasca]
Men of single vision, men of others’ (objective)
vision, men of comprehensive vision, men of discreet


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




vision, men of measure, men measured around by all,
and men who support and sustain all — they are the
men, they are the Maruts who succeed at top speed.


82. (Maruts Devata, Saptarshis Rshis)






[Names: Edge, Rtasca, Dharta]
The man of the knowledge of truth and law, the
man of reality dedicated to truth, the man stable and
steadfast, the man support-column of the stable and
steadfast, the man who bears and forbears, the man who
bears and forbears the variety of reality, and the man of
versatility who faces all and bears all in a variety of
ways — this man is one of the Maruts who move at top


83. (Maruts Devata, Saptarshi Rshis)






[Names: Rtajicca, Anti, Mitrasca]
The man master of the Law and reality, master of
the truth of reality, master of his forces, the man with
close friends around and the man whose enemies are
few and far — this is the man, one of the Maruts, who
wins at top speed, with his comrades.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




84. (Maruts Devata, Saptarshis Rshis)




WASARA ux



[Names: Idrksasa, Mitasa]
Men of this character and vision, men of similar
character and vision, men of comprehensive character
and vision, men of equal character and vision for
everyone, men of balanced mind and men of definiteness
and ascertainment in all matters — these are the Maruts
among humanity who may, to-day, come and join this
yajna of ours.


85. (Maruts Devata, Saptarshi Rshis)





[Names: Svatavansca, Kridi, Saki]
The man inherently valiant and firmly rooted,
who maintains good health with nourishments, who
endures and gives a hot pursuit to the enemy, who is
dedicated to the home, who loves sports, is powerful,
and who is ambitious to win, such a man is Marut, a
live wire. May the Maruts join our yajna.


86. (Maruts Devata, Saptarshis Rshis)


[Names: Tedstaatttstery]
Aaa Wed ug il


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Evamimam]
The noble scholars of virtue and wisdom, the
distinguished citizens and the smartest warriors should
follow Indra, in the manner in which all noble scholars,
noble citizens and smart warriors ought to follow Indra,
the ruler of the land.


All the noble scholars, noble citizens and the
smartest warriors should follow Indra, the ruler of the


Similarly all the noble scholars, distinguished
citizens and the average people should follow this
yajamana.


(The ruler too should act and behave in a noble
manner so that all the noble scholars, distinguished
citizens and the average people follow him
spontaneously and faithfully.)


87. (Agni Devata, Saptarshis Rshis)




[Names: Bebe, Utsam]
Agni, lord of light and power, in the midst of this
world, drink of this nature's motherly breast of energy
replete with the nectar of life. Foremost among the
fastest heroes, drink deep at this fountain head of honey-


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




sweets. Enter this oceanic house of yajna, (expand and
go round the world).


88. (Agni Devata, Gritsamada Rshi)



T ucc





[Names: Srito, Anusvadhamavaha]
I wish to mix and go deep into water/ghee for
offering it into the fire. Fire arises from water/ghee,
which is its birth-place. It is latent in water/ghee. Water/
ghee is its place of rest. Prepare the materials for the
libation and call up Agni. Generous power of rain
shower, prepare the materials for the offering and make
us all rejoice. (The indication is to prepare the waters
and produce fire/energy from this rich source.)


89. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)





[Names: Partha, Samudradurmirmadhuman]
Honey waves of energy arise from the sea/vedi
and, mixing with the rays of the sun, ascend to a state
of divine vitality. These rising waves are tongues of the
gods (divine powers of nature), and the central birth-
place of nectar. These are the mystical names of the
mysterious but still scientific powers of ghrta/the sea
through the process of yajna.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




90. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)


[Names: Jasen, Soll]
In this yajna we chant and meditate upon the
mystical name of ‘yajna’, of ghee, waters and the spirit
of fertility, and with all reverence, salutations, faith and
holy offerings, observe, perform and internalize yajna
as name and as the creative act that it is. May Brahma,
the presiding priest, man of the Vedas and generous
teacher, hear the celebrated name and expound its
meaning and value to others.


91. (Yajna Purusha Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)






[Names: Givdifa, Catvari, Sirse, Tridha]
(i). Yajna is a purusha, a living person, a metaphor.
Just as a person is a living human being, and he/she has
a name which is identical with the person, so is yajna, a
living act and a name, and the name-word is identical
with the act. (1) This person, the living act of yajna, has
four heads, the four Vedas. It has three legs/sessions:
morning, mid-day and evening. It has two heads, the
prayaniya ceremony (inauguration), and the udayaniya


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




in the form of seven chhandas, gayatri and other metres.
It is tied three-ways, structured in three parts: Mantra,
the original vedic texts, Brahmana, expositions
containing rules and explanations, and kalpa, rules of
ritual performance. It is Vrishabha, that which showers
joy and prosperity. It roars with the voice of the Vedas.
It is great, it is brilliant and divine, and it is seated in
the deepest layers of the human mind.


(ii). Now the name ‘Yajna’, the word in language:
[Names: Akhyata]
the roots and verbs, Upasarga, the affixes, and Nipata,
particles, indeclinables and irregulars. It has three legs:
past, present and future tenses. It has two heads: the
eternal Word and the structured words of language in
use, and the word and its meaning (signification). It has
seven arms: the seven cases and case endings or case
forms. It is tied three ways: in the mind/intellect, in the
chest, and in the throat/mouth. It is a Vrishabha, it
showers the thoughts and emotions in communication,
and it roars through the medium of sound. It is great, it
is rich and brilliant and it is seated in the deepest layers
of the human mind.


(This mantra gives a comprehensive abstract of
the linguistic structure of any language, and on the basis
of this abstract a universal grammar of human language,
any form of it, can be written.)


92. (YajnaPurusha Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)


[Names: Rheni]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





The mystique of yajna/ghee/waters, three-way
hidden and three-way studied in quietude by
knowledgeable people, the visionaries sought and found
it in the cow, the Veda and nature. One was found and
revealed by Indra, specialist of electric energy, one by
the specialist of solar energy, and one was received from
the scholars of the Vedas and enacted with oblations by
the devotees of yajna.


93. (YajnaPurusha Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)








[Names: Raunt]
These waves of cosmic energy, these vibrations
of the cosmic boom of the Word, issue from the oceanic
depths of the Eternal Mind. In countless streams they
flow all round, not even an enemy can deny them. And
I, a soul wrapped in golden hue, stand in the midst of
these waves like a reed and feel the power and the


94. (YajnaPurusha Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)




[Names: Atsara]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




These waves of divine energy, vibrations of the
divine voice issue forth from yajna and, purified by the
mind in faith, flow serene and quiet like streams through
the heart within, away from the fluctuations of the outer
world, as deer fly away from the fear of a tiger/hunter.


95. (YajnaPurusha Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)


[Names: Reratha]
für: usu t




[Names: Sindhoriva]
The mighty streams of ghrita, waves of cosmic
energy and vibrations of yajnic voice, issue forth (from
the divine) and flow incessantly (into the universe) as
the turbulent streams of a river blown upon by the wind
hasten through their course and fall into the sea, or, as a
fearless troop of horse breaking through the enemy
defences goes forth to victory winning over the field
with the speed of its motion in the heat of action.


96. (YajnaPurusha Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)

wear: ues

Just like young women of equal mind and


pleasing, noble and generous, smiling in festive mood,
the streams of ghrita (ghee) flow from all round and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




join Agni to feed the holy fuel. And Agni, pleased with
the offering, blazes with heat and light.

So do the waves of energy and the vibrations of
the divine voice of yajna meet the dedicated man who
happily receives them and shines with the light of


97. (YajnaPurusha Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)





[Names: Kanya]
Just as a lovely maiden dressed in luxurious finery
at her wedding goes to meet her groom, so do the streams
of ghrita flow from all sides to meet Agni where yajna
is performed and soma is generated for the light and
energy of life.

I perceive the flow of light and energy and I feel blest.


98. (YajnaPurusha Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)






[Names: Hela, Abhyarsata]
Powers of Divinity, bless us with creditable
praise, plenty of food and drink and knowledge, and
victory in the battles of life. Bless us with auspicious
and excellent wealths of the world. Carry this yajna of
ours to a noble finale. Let the honey streams of ghrita


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


flow to Agni in our homes.


99. (YajnaPurusha Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)





[Names: Dhamam, Apamanike]
Yajna Purusha, Agni, Lord of the universe, in your
domain, under your law and power rests the entire world
of existence. In this domain, whatever is contained in
the oceans of space, in the splendour of the skies, in the
heart, in life, in yajna, to that we may attain. May we
have the taste of the honey-sweets of that cosmic yajna,
may we have the feel of that universal energy.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1. (Agni Devata, Devas Rshis)


efrferg el À mdra À ratsa À yehya À sry À




[Names: Jyoti]
By yajna, by the Grace of God, by virtue of our
joint action, by virtue of my own performance: food is
mine and energy is mine; prosperity is mine and the
way to prosperity is mine; effort is mine and the will to
effort is mine; management is mine and preservation is
mine; faith is mine and firmness is mine; vision is mine
and resolution is mine; freedom is mine and discipline
is mine; praise is mine and the tongue is mine; the heard
is mine and the spoken is mine; shruti (Veda) is mine
and Smriti (law and tradition) is mine; light is mine and
illumination is mine; joy is mine and supreme bliss is
these be auspicious for all, by yajna.


2.  (Prajapati Devata, Devas Rshis)
[Names: Asdsa]
uss a À are a A aya À ouais A smd


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Prana]
By yajna, by the Grace of God, by the blessings
and goodwill of the community, and by virtue of my
own discipline: my life and the breath of life, the
outgoing air and systemic cleansing, the joints and
suppleness of the body, my will to live and the spirit of
joy, my mind and my memory, my resolution and
meditation, my speech and listening, my thought and
self-image, my eye and love of direct truth, my ear and
search for confirmation, my expertise and my smartness,
my strength and prowess, all these may grow, be
favourable and auspicious for all, by yajna.


3. (Prajapati Devata, Devas Rshis)






[Names: Assit, Ojasca, Sarirani]
My vigour and my power, my victory and my
moral courage, my soul and my potential, my body and
health, my home and my family, my defence and my
weapons, my limbs and their functions, my bones and
my blood, my generation and my vitality, the bodies
and health of my people, my life and longevity, my old
age and self-dependence, all these may grow, be good


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and auspicious, for me and for all by yajna, observance
of Dharma, law and joint and individual discipline.


4.  (Prajapati Devata, Devas Rshis)


"p uferar cci a afer d a ghar a A ag a a




[Names: Jyaisthyam]
By yajna, joint action and observance of Dharma
and law, community and participative discipline of my
freedom : my fame and my wealth, my self-rule and my
ruler, my passion and my love of peace, my righteous
anger and moral discipline, my honour and my sense of
justice, my waters and my fruitfulness, my valour and
my victories, my grandeur and my reputation, my
greatness and my conduct, my expansion and my
domain, my seniority and my humility, my loftiness and
my depth, my riches and sense of values, my growth
and sense of limitations, all these may be strong and
firm, grow and be good for me and for all, by yajna.


5. (Prajapati Devata, Devas Rshis)
aa cb Hp aa t A tea d ot a À fag a
PAAT dis I


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Satyam, Sraddha]
By yajna, Grace of God and observance of
Dharma: Truth is mine and the good of all is mine to
work for, faith is mine and the reason and basis of faith
is mine, the dynamic world is mine and the sense of
change is mine, the wealth is mine and the sense of
value is mine, all life is mine and all its opportunities
are mine, glory is mine and the respect for glory is mine,
fun is mine and games are mine, joy of the world is
mine and the freedom of liberation is mine, all that is
born is mine and I am for it, all that is being created is
for me and I am for it, all that will be created will be for
me and I shall be for it, all that has been said well is for
me and I am for it, all that has been well done is for me
and I am for it, all these and all my good words, thoughts
and deeds may grow and be firm and favourable for me
and for all by virtue of yajna.


6.  (Prajapati Devata, Devas Rshis)
[Names: Asad, Asagi]
was a A geet 8 ga a A Gat eneusdns t


[Names: Rtam]
me Sayanam ca me susasca me sudinam ca me


My knowledge and practice of truth and Dharma,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




my immortal spirit and meditation, my freedom from
illness and exercise, my freedom from suffering and
my medication, my vitality and tonics, my longevity
and yoga, my freedom from enmity and love for all, my
freedom from fear and self-confidence, my joy and
means of comfort, my sleep and freedom from tension,
my beautiful dawn and early prayers, my happy day and
good fortune, may all these grow, be firm and favourable
for all and for me by yajna, corporate action and the
Grace of God.


7. (Prajapati Devata, Devas Rshis)
A ése À aired d arta À gee d wqgd a
at a a cava À our neum wei




[Names: Yanta]
My ruler and my observance of the rules, my
sustainer and supports, my security and the protector,
my constancy and self-protection, my world around and
my behaviour, my nobility and noble actions, my
awareness and self-knowledge, my field of
specialisation and my achievement, my inspiration and
initiative, my potency of generation and my children,
my agriculture and the farmers, my house and my
property, all these may grow, be strong and firm and
good and auspicious for me and for all by yajna, personal
endeavour, corporate action and the Grace of God.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




8. (Atma Devata, Devas Rshis)


Amase A ya A gidoi a a ag A A Adra


nukamasca me kamas$ca me saumanasasca me

[Names: Sreya]
My peace and well-being, and my comfort and
happiness, and my love, and my desire, and my ambition,
and the good cheer of my mind, and my dignity, and
my wealth, and my worldly good, and my ultimate good,
and my advancement, and my honour and glory, may
all these grow and be good and auspicious by yajna for


9.  (Atma Devata, Devas Rshis)


web da gid a À ads À sa À ud ub oW


And my food pure and delicious, and my speech
true and pleasing, and my milk and drink, and my tonics
and herbal essences, and my ghrita and butter, and my
honey and sweets, and my food and dessert, and my
drinks and dressings, and my farming and special
breeding, and the rains for us and the libations, and our
man-power and our accomplishments, and our minerals


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and the tonic roots, may all these grow and be good and
firm and auspicious by yajna for all.


10. (Atma Devata, Devas Rshis)
tase À dya d ws ot À yiya d fay ot A






[Names: Aseter, Rayi]
My wealth of knowledge and power of action,
my wealth of possessions and all round prosperity, my
health and growth, our public health and nourishment,
my mental expansion and intellectual growth, my self-
mastery and meditation, my fulfilment and its relevance
to life, my worldly advancement and philanthropy, my
management of damage and pollution of crops, my foods
and my delicacies, and our management of hunger and
thirst and shortages, may all these grow and be strong
and auspicious for all by yajna.


11. (Shrimadatma Devata, Devas Rshis)
[Names: Gdpowfered]
HUA 9 9 M




[Names: Vittam]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




All my thought and whatever I have thought out,
all that I know and ought to know, my past and my
present, all my future and all my timeless, all my short-
cuts and my proper actions, my treatments and my
diagnoses, my riches and my achievement, my spiritual
wealth and my fulfilments, my intentions and my
imaginations, my reflections and my reasons, my
understanding and my analyses, my intelligence and my
faith and commitments, all these may grow, and be
strong and auspicious by yajna for all.


12. (Dhanyada Atma Devata, Devas Rshis)




[Names: Jedra, Aagaaya, Asutaya, Aana, Vrihayasca]
me’ nava$ca me $yamaka$ca me nivaras$ca me


My paddy and rice, and my barley, and my beans,
and my sesamums, and my mungo beans, and my
legumins, and my long pepper, and my small grains,
and my millet, and my wild grains, and my wheat, and
my lentils and all other grains, and their preparations,
may all these grow in plenty, rich and delicious, by yajna
and scientific treatment for all.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


542
13.




(Ratnavandhanavanatma Devata, Devas Rshis)


va od A eee A dt a a ad a A ue





[Names: Asma]
Our stones and gems, and our clay and its


varieties, and our clouds and crops, and our mountains
and hills and valleys, and our sands and pebbles, and
our herbs and trees, and our gold and minerals, and our
iron and steels, and our sapphires and other gems, and
our copper and bronze, and our lead and its varieties,
and our zinc and brass, all these may develop by the
yajna of scientific treatment and grow good and
auspicious for all of us.


14.


(Agnyadiyukta atma Devata, Devas Rshis)





My fire (heat) and electricity, and my waters and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




aquatic wealth, and my shrubs and creepers, and my
herbs and trees, and my cultivated grains and
specialities, and my wild fruits and berries, and my
domestic animals and pets, and my wild beasts and
animals, and my wealth and dearest possessions, and
the sweets and dear forms of my past and present, and
my honour and glory and all the efforts required, all
these may develop and grow auspicious for all of us, by


15. (Dhanadiyukta atma Devata, Devas Rshis)






[Names: Asiya, Rise, Saktisca]
My assets and articles, and my house and
community, and my work and workers, and my power
and love, and my capital and the subscribers, and my
management and knowledge and competence, and my
working and technique, and my progress and new
ventures, all may develop and grow auspicious by


16. (Agni adividyavid atma Devata, Devas Rshis)






[Names: Adya, Somasca]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Agni, solar energy and magnetic force of the earth
is mine, and Indra, lord controller of power and energy
is mine. Soma, nature's power of rain and generosity is
mine, and Indra, lord justice controller of rain and
generosity is mine. Savita, power of generation and
prosperity is mine, and Indra, lord and controller of
generation and prosperity is mine. Saraswati, divine
spirit of knowledge, art, and the system of education is
mine, and Indra, lord and power controller of the value
and application of knowledge is mine. Pusha, power of
food and production is mine, and Indra, enlightened
controller of good nourishment and production is mine.
Brihaspati, great lord of social activity, manners and
culture is mine, and Indra, lord controller of social and
moral values is mine. May all these powers of nature
and society for development, direction and control grow
strong and auspicious for me and for all by yajna, social
action in unison, enlightened guidance and by the Grace
of God.


17. (Mitra-aishvaryavan atma Devata, Devas Rshis)




[Names: Hsguiyer]
Mitra, my pranic energy of breath and energy of
the system, and Indra, my lustre and electric energy; and
Varuna, pranic energy ofthe throat and blood circulation,
and Indra, solar energy of sustenance; and Dhata, my


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




controller and ordainer, and Indra, giver of prosperity;
and Tvashta, catalytic energy of my system, and my
endeavour, and Indra, the breaker of my negative forces
and giver of scientific energy; and the Maruts, cosmic
wind and body vitality, and Indra, universal energy and
its scientific use; and all the powers of nature such as
earth and great powers of humanity, and Indra, lord giver
of all glory and success; may all these powers grow
strong and auspicious for me and for all by yajna, joint
action in the service of nature and by the Grace of God.


18. (Rajya-aishvaryadiyukta atma Devata, Devas Rshis)




The earth and her fertility, and the power that
controls and regulates that fertility; the sky and the riches
that exist therein, and the powers that control those
riches to shower on the earth; and the regions of light
and the energy therein, and the sun that presides over
the light; and the yearly rounds of time and its divisions
and their effects, and the supreme lord of time; and the
stars and planets and their movements with their effects
on our environment, and the operative powers of natural
law that control the movements; and the directions of
space and the currents of wind and energy therein, and
the powers that control the weather and the atmosphere;
may all these regions of space and heavenly bodies and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the operations of mother Prakriti grow strong and firm
and be good and auspicious for me and all by yajna, the
process of replenishment, renewal and enrichment.


19. (Padarthavid atma Devata, Devas Rshis)






[Names: Asahaga, Asfa, Asaatasd]
The pervasive sun and its light, and the foods
ripened by the sun rays, the fearless man and the
protector of the law-abiding, and the presiding power
and the office thereof, and my holy-chant in meditation
and concentration on the secrets of mysteries, my mid-
breath and inner strength, my vital heat that controls
the winds and electric currents of the body system and
the water, the pranic vitality related to prana and udana
(breath and the upper motions of energy wind), and the
inner light between the solar and the lunar plexi and its
effects on health, and the energy for movement and my
movements, and my purity of mind and vital energy,
and my churner and dairy foods and apparatuses, may
all these grow strong and be good and auspicious for
me and for all by yajna.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




20. (Yajna-anushthanatma Devata, Devas Rshis)






[Names: Gygdeyd, Rott, Agrayanasca, Marutvatiyasca]
My special yajna of the month of Margashirsha,
and my guests of this noble assembly at the yajna, and
my settled behaviour and universal hospitality and
reverence, and my yajna for the development of wind
and fire energy, and my reverence for the noblest people
of the world, and my dedication to the yajna of the
liberation stage of yoga, and my yajna for solar energy,
and my dedication to the eminent scholars of science
and literature, and my love and regard for the married
couples, and my travels, transport and transporters, may
all these grow and be good and auspicious for me and
for all by yajna.


21. (Yajnangavanatma Devata, Devas Rshis)




[Names: Gayest, Afira, Asewperye]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Srucasca]
My ladles and their cleaning, my bowls and their
contents, my aerial apparatuses and their maintenance
and function, and my soma vessels, and my urns and
jugs, and my stone presses and mortars and pestles, and
my handpress and the soma plants, and my urns of pure
soma, and the vessels for clearing and filtering soma,
and the yajna altar, and my holy grass and the feather
broom, and my holy bath and ablutions, and my
valedictory chant of joy at the completion of yajna :
may all these grow and be good and auspicious for me
and for all by yajna.


22. (Yajnavanatma Devata, Devas Rshis)


[Names: Asche, Assada, Aseda]
HOUT URI




[Names: Agnisca, Suryasca, Sakvarayo]
My fire and my use of fire, my hymns of worship
and the singers, my passion and cool of mind, my
sunlight and my warmth of living, my vital breath and
air-energy, my nation and its policy and governance,
my earth mother and her riches, my ethics and self-
control, my imperishable wealth and my earthly life,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




my spiritual light and my days and nights, my fingers
and their hold and my powers and potentials, and my
directions and my reach there, all these may grow, be
good and auspicious for me and for all by yajna.


23. (Kalavidyavidatma Devata, Devas Rshis)



[Names: Ases]
My holy vows and my commitments, and my
seasons and my solstices with change of the seasons,
and my observance of Dharma and my practice of yoga,
and my yearly rounds of the sun and the planets and the
ages of time, and my days and nights and my daily work
and prayers, and my thighs and knees, and my grandeur
and nobility, and my heavenly lights and spaces and
the cosmic periods, may all these grow by days and
nights by yajna, and may all these be good and
auspicious for me and for all.


24. (Vishamanka-ganitavidyavid atma Devata, Devas Rshis)
Wenb aH rene Gp frayed À usd a À used a
Ù aa A Aaa d aad a a ad a oususniayt
usay a A Usdast a A Geo a À aaa eT
[Names: Uchfaxefave]
Gat RAA gx


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




panca ca me sapta ca me sapta ca me nava ca
me nava ca ma 'ekada$a ca ma’ekadasa ca me
ca me navadasa ca me navadasa ca ma’

By yajna, the process of addition and collection,
may the numbers increase and be good and auspicious
for me and for all: One is mine and unity is mine. (And
one and one becomes two, and one plus two becomes
three. In this way, in this progression) three is mine,
and three is mine, and five is mine, and five is mine,
and seven is mine, and seven is mine, and nine is mine,
and nine is mine, and eleven is mine, and eleven is mine,
and thirteen is mine, and thirteen is mine,‘ and fifteen
is mine, and fifteen is mine, and seventeen is mine, and
seventeen is mine, and nineteen is mine and nineteen is
mine, and twenty one is mine, and twenty one is mine,
and twenty three is mine, and twenty three is mine, and
twenty five is mine, and twenty five is mine, and twenty
seven is mine, and twenty seven is mine, and twenty
nine is mine, and twenty nine is mine, and thirty one is
mine, and thirty one is mine, and thirty three is mine,
and so on the numbers may increase and be good and
auspicious for me and for all by the process of yajna in

Also: By implication, by the same process of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




yajna which also means 'dana', giving away, we have
the progression in the reverse direction by subtraction.
The meaning of the mantra then would be:


Thirty-three is mine, give away two and thirty
one is mine, thirtyone is mine, minus two, twenty nine
is mine and so on.


In the same way, by implication, we can work
out the process of multiplication, and division and the
process of squaring and cubing and square-root, etc.
Further, we can move from arithmetic to algebra and
other branches of mathematics.


25. (Samanka-ganitavidyavid atma Devata, Devas Rshis)


adara Às eb Ase ub À gray cur Hp gay a




[Names: Aserre, Tswerfdesreaver, Catasra, Sacca, Sacca]
By yajna, the process of addition and collection,
may the numbers increase and be good and auspicious


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


for me and for all:


Four is mine, and four is mine, eight is mine. Eight
is mine, and four, twelve is mine. Twelve is mine, plus
four, sixteen is mine. Sixteen is mine, add four, and
twenty is mine. Twenty is mine, and twenty four is mine.
Twenty four is mine, and twenty eight is mine. Twenty
eight is mine and thirty two is mine. Thirty two is mine,
and thirty six is mine. Thirty six is mine, and forty is
mine. Forty is mine, and forty four is mine. Forty four
is mine, and forth eight is mine. And so on the numbers
may increase till infinity by yajna, for me and for all for
the good of life and joy.


Also: By implication, the mantra can be applied
to the process of yajna by ‘dana’, gifting away,
subtraction, by four, from forty-eight down to four and
so On.


The mantra can also be applied to the process of
multiplication. In fact, the mantra itself gives the
multiplication table upto twelve times four and so on.


So too the mantra may be interpreted as showing
the process of division since it gives a table of the
division of forty eight by four upto twelve times.


26. (Pashuvidyavid atma Devata, Devas Rshis)








[Names: Brea, Hear, Tryavi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




By yajna, veterinary science and the science of


My man of three breeds of sheep and their
maintenance, the woman of three breeds of sheep and
their milk, etc., the man in-charge of damage control
and his knowledge, and the woman in-charge of
maintenance against damage and her stores, and the man
of five grades of sheep and his staff, and the woman of
five grades of sheep and her assistants, the man of three
breeds of calf and his knowledge, and the woman of
three breeds of calf and her knowledge, the bull of the
fourth year of age and its training and maintenance, and
the cow of the fourth year of age and its maintenance,
may all these grow in number and quality and be good
and auspicious for me and for all.


27. (Pashuvidyavid atma Devata, Devas Rshis)




[Names: Agee, Usqasise, Pasthavat]
And my beasts of burden both male and female
and the articles and materials for trade and transport,
and my virile bull and my infertile cow, and my strong
bull and my miscarrying cow, and my bullock and my
milch cow, may all these grow by the yajna of animal
husbandry and veterinary science and may all these be
good and auspicious for me and for all.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




28. (Sangramadivid atma Devata, Devas Rshis)



[Names: Taretshista, Vajaya]
For the warrior and the battle, all hail and honest
action! For progress and prosperity, virtuous living and
hard work! For acceptance and acclaim, commendable
action! For knowledge and practical application,
dedication and meditation! For housing and settlement,
work, money and materials. For the lord of the day,
knowledge of time and chronology. For the day-
bewildered and lost, sympathetic action. For the
misguided and destructive, proper counselling. For the
man settled but on way to destruction, forceful voice of
truth. For the lowest and meanest man of the world,
strongest counselling. For Lord of the universe, hymns
of praise and worship. For the protector of the world,
correct knowledge. For the protector of the nation,
correct policy. For the protector of the people, correct
knowledge of Raj Dharma. This is your brilliance of
governance. You are generous, selfless guide and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




controller of your friends. We accept, respect and admire
you for your prowess and action, showers of favours,
the support and sustenance of the people, and for the
government of the people.


29. (Yajnanushthatatma Devata, Devas Rshis)






[Names: Garda, Stomasca, Svardeva]
a=


Man of the yajna of governance, to accomplish
your task, may health and age grow by yajna, may pranic
energy grow by yajna, may the eye and vision grow by
yajna, may the ear and information grow by yajna, may
the tongue and communication grow by yajna, may the
mind and morale and national confidence grow by yajna,
may the soul grow strong by yajna, may the man of
universal knowledge and the sense of higher values
grow by yajna, may the light of justice and wisdom grow
by yajna, may comfort and joy grow by yajna, may the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




questions, heights and foundations of life grow by yajna,
may the yajna of Dharma grow by the yajna, pursuit of
Dharma, may the hymns of praise and celebration of
the Divine, the Yajus, the Riks, and the Samans, the
Brihat Sama and Rathantara Sama also grow by yajna.
May the noble people attain to the eternal joy of
immortality. May we all attain to you and immortality.
May we all be the children of the Lord and father of the
universe by the truth of word and deed.


30. (Rajyavanatma Devata, Devas Rshis)


wifi faya yira wei at da: daar




In this Lord Omnipotent's yajna of life and
sustenance, we celebrate with holy songs of Divinity,
the Veda, the great inviolable Mother Nature in whom
reside the entire worlds of existence. May Savita, lord
creator and generator of life strengthen and promote
our Dharma in the lap of the mother within the Law.


31. (Vishvedevas Devata, Devas Rshis)






All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




May all the airs and winds come to us. May all
the powers of protection and promotion, all the noblest
people of the world, come to us with all the means of
protection and advancement. May all the fires of life’s
yajna light and shine for us. May the entire wealth of
the world, food and energy be available to us by the
Grace of Savita.


32. (Annavan Vidvan Devata, Devas Rshis)




[Names: Vajo, Vajo]
May our food and energy, power and prosperity,
spread over the seven regions of the world, and may it
extend even beyond in all the four directions. And may
our power and knowledge, with the noblest people of
the world, guide and protect us here in the acquisition
and distribution of the wealth of life.


33. (Annapati Devata, Devas Rshis)





It is food, energy, power, wealth, which inspires
us to give in charity. With the seasons, according to
need, it feeds the powers of nature and humanity. It is
food and energy which produces and promotes our


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




children and young people. By virtue of the same food
and power, may I, producer and promoter of food,
energy and wealth, attain all my hopes to fruition in all


34. (Annapati Devata, Devas Rshis)






[Names: Headt, Vajah]
Food with oblations in yajna takes us forward in
the beginning and in the middle of home life. With
oblations it feeds and enriches the powers of nature and
the noblest people too. It is food which blesses me with
the best and the bravest powers and people everywhere.
I pray I may be the producer, promoter and protector of
food in all directions and realize all my hopes and


35. (Rasavidyavid vidvan Devata, Devas Rshis)






Agni, I invigorate and enrich myself with the milk

and juices of the earth. I invigorate and enrich myself


with the waters and herbs of the earth. So I invigorate
and enrich myself with food and energy.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




36. (Rasavidvidvan Devata, Devas Rshis)




[Names: Wehr, Payasvatih]
Agni, man of medicinal herbs and juices, take
on, hold on to, the juices and tonics in the earth, in the
herbs, in the regions of light and in the sky and study
them. And may all the worlds and directions of space
be full of juices and tonics for me too.


37. (Samrat Raja Devata, Devas Rshis)






[Names: Serb, Astat]
In this socio-political yajna of the land in Lord
Savita's creation, I in-vest you with the power and
presidency of Agni, the Ruler, and consecrate you with
the arms of Ashvinis (the heat and passion of the sun
and the peace and cool of the moon) and the hands of
Pusha (power of the nation's sustenance with the
positive and negative current's of the systemic circuit).
I vest in you the constitution of the sovereign nation
and sanctify you with the voice of the people in the
service of Sarasvati, the wisdom and culture of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




38. (Rituvidyavid vidvan Devata, Devas Rshis)





[Names: Rtasadrtadhama]
Agni, Lord of the earth and defender of the land,
Observes truth, defends the truth, and abides in the truth.
His pleasure and joy is the herbs which grow and play
in the waters like water nymphs. May he protect and
promote our Brahma system of education and
knowledge, and our Kshatra system of defence and
administration. Homage to him in love and reverence.
All hail and care for the herbs and waters!


39. (Surya Devata, Devas Rshis)


Tal ATE AIA: AE da



[Names: Samhito]
Surrounded by lights and joining day and night,
that lord of universal peace and celebrated in all the
Sama hymns, the sun, is the lord sustainer of the earth.
His pleasure and joy is the rays of light which play and
exult in the sky joining and disjoining things in space.
May he protect and promote our Brahma system of light


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and education. May he protect and promote our Kshatra
system of defence and administration. Homage to him
in truth and faith! AII hail and love to the rays of the
sun!


40. (Chandrama Devata, Devas Rshis)


[Names: Vata]
asa: xemel on



[Names: Susumnah]
The moon, blissful at heart and blest by the sun-
rays with light, is the lord sustainer of the earth. May
he sustain and promote our Brahma system of peace
and education. May he sustain and promote our Kshatra
system of law and administration. His pleasure and joy
surely is the rays of light which play and exult with the
planets and satellites. Homage to him! Homage to his
rays, to light!


41. (Vatah Devata, Devas Rshis)





[Names: Isiro]
The wind, fast in motion and pervading the whole
world, is the lord and sustainer of the earth. His pleasure
and joy is the waters which, for sure, create energy. May


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




he sustain and inspire our Brahma system of education
and advancement. May he sustain and excite our Kshatra
system of defence and expansion. Homage to him!
Homage to his waves of waters and energy!


42. (Yajna Devata, Devas Rshis)


marat isan



[Names: Bhujyuh]
Yajna, creator and giver of joy and prosperity,
health and nourishment, is the sustainer of the earth,
cows and the Word of the Vedas. His pleasure and joy
is the gifts for the priests and the devotees and the bliss
of the holy chants which play around in ecstasy. May
the yajna sustain and promote our Brahma system of
knowledge and generosity of light and creativity. May
yajna sustain and advance our Kshatra system of defence
and development. Homage and libations for yajna!
Homage and libations for charity and holy chants!









[Names: Vishvakarma, Rshis, Prajapatirvi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Father and guardian of His children, lord maker
of the universe, universal Mind, Vishvakarma is the
sustainer of the earth and master of universal knowledge,
the Veda. Riks and Samans, Vedas, are the vibrations
of His omniscience ever on the move across space which
are the love and desire of the devotees. May He protect
and promote our Brahma system of education and
scientific yajna, and our Kshatra system of enlightened
and modern administration and defence. Homage and
libations to Him! Homage and libations for the divine
voice of the Veda!


44. (Prajapati Devata, Devas Rshis)






[Names: Asmai]
Father guardian of your children, lord protector
of the world, all your homes and habitations up above,
and all your homes and householders down here, bless
them all. Bless our Brahma system of education and
enlightenment and our Kshatra system of administration
and employment with good homes and great peace and
joy. Homage and libations to the Lord!


45. (Prajapati Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Avasyurasi]
Prajapati, father and guardian of creation, vast
and deep as the ocean, oceans roll around in you. Lord
of spaces and spatial waters, showering the earth with
rain and the mind with virtue, you are peace yourself
and the giver of peace, bliss yourself and the giver of
bliss. Come and fold me into bliss all round.


Tempestuous lord of the winds, lord of the stormy
scholars of the world, you are goodness yourself and
the giver of universal good. You are prosperity and joy
yourself and the giver of universal joy and prosperity.
Come and fold me into the tempestuous storm of
knowledge and discovery all round.


You are the supreme lord of protection and
universal help. You are both lord and object of honour
and worship, peace and joy yourself and the giver of
joy and total freedom. Come and fold me into the bliss
of worship and acceptance all round.


46. (Agni Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi)







Agni, lord of the universe, that beauty, light and

love of yours which shines in the sun and fills the
heavens and all other spaces of the world with its rays,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




with all those rays of light and beauty and all those
vibrations of love, bless us today for the people and


47. (Brihaspati Devata, Shunah-shepa Rshi)






[Names: Narda]
Brihaspati, lord of the great wonderful world,
brilliant powers of divinity, saints and sages, that light
and love of yours which shines in the sun, and that which
reflects in the sun-beams, the earths, fires, sense organs,
cows and horses, with all that light and love, may Indra,
lord of universal energy, and Agni, power of universal
heat and light, and the saints and scholars of the world


48. (Brihaspati Devata, Shunah-shepa Rshi)




[Names: Rucam, Rucam]
ruca rucam.


Brihaspati, lord of the universe, eminent teacher
and master of vast knowledge, inspire our Brahma
section of the community—scholars, scientists, teachers
and researchers with brilliance and love. Infuse
brilliance, love and justice into our Kshatrias, defence,
administration and justice section of the community.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Bless with light, love and generosity our Vaishyas,
producers and distributors among the community. And
bless our Shudras, the ancillary services, with light, love
and loyalty. Bless me with light and love toward us all.


49. (Brihaspati Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi)






[Names: Tattva, Ahedamano]
The yajamana, singing Vedic hymns of praise in
honour of the lord, offers libations of fragrant materials
with absolute dedication in the hope of self-fulfilment.
The same I come to you, Varuna, Lord of our love and
choice, universally worshipped and celebrated. Here I
am at your door. Kind and favourable lord, know, accept
and enlighten us, let not life slip through our fingers
into the sands of time.


50. (Surya Devata, Shunah-shepa Rshi)






[Names: Svarna, Svarnarkah, Svarna, Svarna]
Warmth is heavenly, soothing, use it well, for
yajna. Fire is heavenly, generous, use it well, for yajna.
Air is heavenly, energy, use it well, for yajna. Light is
heavenly, power, use it well, for yajna. Sun is heavenly,
life, miss it not, use it well, for yajna.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




51. (Agni Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi)








[Names: Savasa]
I feed the fire with powerful oblations of ghee,
fire which is divine power and sustainer of life, feeding
on food and growing higher, mightier and more and
more pervasive. And thereby, desiring and increasing
the joys of life, may we rise to the regions of the
illustrious lord of light, the sun, and ultimately attain to
the highest level of bliss, the freedom and ecstasy of


[Names: Moksha]
52. (Agni Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi)




[Names: Yams, Imau, Tabhyam]
ajah puranah.


Agni, lord of light and life, cause and effect,
consumption of food and creation/production of energy
and new forms, these are the two wings, ever young,
constant, and never decaying, of your systemic catalysis
in the process of evolution and development, by which
you negate the forces of counter-evolution and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




destruction. By virtue of these two, may we rise to the
regions of the noble heroes of action to which arose the
visionary seers first-born and ancient.


53. (Indu Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi)






[Names: Sada, Amsa, Indurdaksah, Mahantsadhasthe]
Cool as the moon, versatile and brave, fast as an
eagle, committed to truth and law, powerful and brilliant,
generous as the sun, great, steadfast, firmly seated in
this house of the nation, salutations to you. Forbear, do


54. (Indu Devata, Galava Rshi)






[Names: Arama, Visvayuh]
Brilliant man of peace and power, you are on top
of the light of knowledge, at the centre of the life on
earth, the essence of waters and herbs, life of life, shelter
home for all, celebrated through the land, guide, path
and destination for all. Salutations and homage to you!


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


55. (Indu Devata, Galava Rshi)




wee uw




[Names: Divasparjanyadantariksat]
Brilliant power of light and life, you are on top
of the world, steadfast and presiding over all! Your heart
is deep in infinity. Your energy is one with universality.
Break through the oceans of space and hold the waters
of life for gift. And then, protect and promote us with
the rain of light from heaven, showers from the clouds
and the sky, and honey sweets from the earth.


56. (Yajna Devata, Galava Rshi)


ger ad qini adi:



[Names: Isto]
Yajna, wealth and power of the world, source of
benediction and fulfilment, loved and performed by top
scientists and scholars of the highest order, come and
bring us here and now all that we love and all that we
desire.


57. (Agni Devata, Galava Rshi)


[Names: Trad]
Tare dem AA: uen


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Svage, Agnirahutah, Agnirahuta]
May Agni, invoked and fed with love and fragrant
materials, protect and promote us with the desired
comfort and joy. And may this food and homage which
comes to its own reach the noblest powers of nature
and humanity.


58. (Agni Devata, Vishvakarma Rshi)


UOT: neei


[Names: Yadakutat, Tadanu]
puranah.

Lovers of truth and action, whatever you have
thought and imagined and whatever has issued forth
from your intention or heart or mind or from your actual
experience of the eye, and whatever stays held up within,
follow that and achieve, and rise to the heavenly regions
of the meritorious to which arose the divine visionaries
first born and ancient.


59. (Prajapati Devata, Vishvakarma Rshi)




[Names: Anvaganta]
Lovers of Divinity sitting in this heavenly home


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of yajna, I pass on to you this supreme treasure of
knowledge and joy which Jataveda, Agni, and the
devoted scholar of the Veda brought down hitherward
from the highest heavens, and to which the yajamana
also attains following upon the yajna. Know him, and
know and experience that supreme presence and that
supreme joy which abides in the highest heavens.


60. (Prajapati Devata, Vishvakarma Rshi)
Ud sia UA cata sat: Tera faq Bane |



[Names: Yadagacchat]
Lovers of Divinity, noblest scholars and sages,
sitting together in this heavenly home of yajna, know
and realise this supreme creative presence which
pervades the highest and the ultimate spaces of the
universe. Realise its form and power, and feel the bliss
that emanates from this presence. Perform the acts and
observe the devotions prescribed by the Vedas and the
Vedic Traditions for the attainment of this presence
which comes to those who travel by the paths followed
by the godly men and women of divinity.


61. (Prajapati Devata, Galava Rshi)


ew ge



All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Agni, fire and power of light and life, man of fire
and knowledge, awake, arise, and let the yajamana arise
and act. And both of you together enact the holy rites
and offer the devotions to the Lord. Men and women of
divinity and the yajamana, all be seated in this blessed
house of yajna on the holy seats around the vedi.








[Names: Devashrava, Devavata]
Lord of fire and knowledge, by the power you
conduct the yajna of a hundred gifts, and the yajna of
total Vedic knowledge, and all the worldly wealth, by
the same power lead on this yajna of ours to reach the
regions of bliss among the noblest souls of divinity.


63. (Yajna Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)
wan ud al wa erem We g3




[Names: Prastarena, Rcemam]
Lord of yajna, by the sacrificial seat (asana),
vedi’s girdle of fire-sticks, the ladle, the vedi, the kusha
grass and the light of fire, and by the chant of Vedic
hymns, take our yajna on and forward to lead us to reach
the joy of life and the bliss of divinity among the blessed


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




64. (Yajna Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)


aed ahan aqd area afo:




[Names: Yaddattam, Tadagnirvai]
Whatever is given, whatever is received from
others for others, whatever works are raised for charity,
whatever gifts are given to priests, may versatile Agni
of universal action carry all that to the heavenly powers
in the regions of bliss for our sake.


65. (YajnaDevata, Vishvakarma Rshi)




[Names: Fest, Tadagnirvaisvakarmanah]
Where streams of nectar honey flow
uninterrupted and where flow streams of purest milk
and ghee, there among the noblest souls, may Agni, lord
of universal yajnic action, lead us into the heaven of


66. (Agni Devata, Devashrava & Devavata Rshis)






[Names: Agnirasmi, Arkastridhatu]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




I am fire, so by birth, present in all that is born.
Ghee is my light of the eye. Nectar is my mouth. What
I consume turns into nectar. Loved and adored with
Riks, Yajus and Samans, I am threefold in constitution,
my elements being akasha (ether), vayu (wind and
energy), and agni, fire that I am. I pervade and cover
the sky, I am perpetually active and moving. I am the
heat and light of the sun and summer. I am havi, the
food of yajna, and I am a name, I have an identity of my


67. (Agni Devata, Devashrava & Devavata Rshis)



[Names: Ureesrrssreu, Tesamasi]
I am Riks by name (Rigveda), I am Yajus, that's


[Names: Samans]
(Samveda) for sure.


Yajnagni, five are the sacred fires that are on this
[Names: Anvaharya, Dakshina]
Garhapatya, Ahavaniya, Sabhya, and Avasthya), which
are good and auspicious for all the people without
discrimination. Of them, you are the supreme. Awake,
arise, come and inspire us for a full life on earth,
dedicated to yajna.


68. (Agni Devata, Indra Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Vartrahatyaya, Savase]
Indra, lord of blazing power and prowess, for your
power to break down the anti-life clouds of darkness,
for the sake of strength and superiority in advancement,
and for your potential to rout the forces of the enemies
of humanity, we turn to you, abide by you and act under


69. (Indra Devata, Indra & Vishvamitra Rshis)






[Names: Sahadanumpuruhuta]
Indra, lord of lightning power, disarm, wither and
crush the rival negative forces, lurking within,
mischievous, growing, vociferous, and like the cloud,
withholding the waters of progress. Indra, blazing with
the thunderbolt like the sun, break up the cloud and
destroy the mischief with your might.


70. (Indra Devata, Shasa Rshi)






[Names: Aber]
Indra, lord of might in command, eliminate the

battles of blood. Take them down to those who rise with

violent force and come upon us to fight. Whoever wish

to enslave us, take them down to utter darkness of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




71. (Indra Devata, Jaya Rshi)
A UO? I




[Names: Mrgo, Srkam, Satrun]
Like a terrible lion of the mountain forest,
roaming around freely, go far and fall upon the hostile
forces. Having tempered and sharpened the point of your
steel, drive off the enemies and eliminate the battles of


72. (Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)




All commanding power, reaching everything and
everyone like the light of the sun and the heat of fire,
come to us from afar for our protection. Fire of life,
listen to our songs of praise and prayer and come.


73. (Agni Devata, Kutsa Rshi)
fear a Rata vad 930




[Names: Prsto, Vaisvanarah]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Vaishvanara]
omnificent vitality, which blazes in heaven as the sun
is worth knowing. The fire in the earth is worth knowing.
The fire that has entered the entire herbs and trees of
the world is worth knowing by research. May this Agni
protect and sustain us against violence day and night.


74. (Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)




[Names: Asyama]
Agni, lord defender, protector and sustainer,
under your umbrella, may we get the benefits we desire.
Lord of wealth and plenty, may we get the wealth and
the valorous heroes we need. Fighting the battles of life,
may we achieve the victories we prize. Lord ever young,
unageing, may we also share and achieve your
imperishable glory and majesty.


75. (Agni Devata, Utkeela Rshi)




[Names: Hune, Neal, Yajisthena]
Agni, lord of light, knowledge and power, with
hands raised up in homage, we come to you today with
a dedicated, concentrated, thoughtful and faithful mind


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and make the loved-most offerings. With the same
dedicated, concentrated and committed mind,you too
do honour to the powers of divinity.


76. (Vishvedevas Devata, Utkeela Rshi)


adam fae der aa ure T: du Mogu




[Names: Dhamacchadagnirindro, Sacetaso]
Agni, lord protector of regions and places, lord
of knowledge, Indra, lord of power and honour, Brahma,
lord of creative Vedic vision, Deva, lord of generosity
and brilliance, Brihaspati, lord of learning and teaching,
may all these and other noble powers of the world,
enlightened and magnanimous, protect and promote our
yajnas of life for the good of all for ever and onward.


77. (Vishvedevas Devata, Ushana Rshi)


Tat Aaa wat ion




Lord of life and humanity, ever young, generous
giver, listen to the voice and prayers of the people.
Protect and promote humanity, and preserve the race
with the breath of life.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1. (Soma Devata, Prajapati Rshi)
[Names: Weird]
Waa were wanut wat uad




[Names: Svadvim, Madhumatim, Somo]
Tonic of life, panacea for health, delicious in
taste, sharp in action, honey sweet and healing like
nectar, I mix and develop you with soma, delicious
sharp, honey sweet and nectar-like in healing. Integrated
with soma, you are now soma itself. Mature and ripen
for the Ashvins, powers of health and men and women
of learning. Ripen and mature for Sarasvati, woman of
the divine voice. Mature and ripen for Indra, man of
power and honour who protects and promotes humanity


2. (Soma Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)




[Names: Sear, Stee, Parito, Dadhanvan, Somamadribhih, Somamadribhi]
Soma, extracted, richly reinforced and distilled
thus is the best for life and yajna. Let the best person


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




among humans develop and produce it mixed with the
waters and matured on the mountains with the clouds.


3. (Soma Devata, Abhuti Rshi)


a: Ya: ufecur aesa: | zu
eH aa: Tat dad




[Names: Vayoh, Vayoh]
refined, and seasoned in westerly wind, instant and
usable is a friend of Indra, man of power and honour,
for concentration of mind.


and seasoned in easterly wind, instant and effective is a
friend of Indra, man of power and honour, for
concentration of mind.


4. (Soma Devata, Abhuti Rshi)


guid c vara gaT à




[Names: Punati, Somain, Somai, Varena, Sasvata]
Lover and maker of soma, the dawn, daughter of
the sun, constantly purifies and vitalizes the streams of
your soma with an uninterrupted flow of the currents of
its celestial light and eternal energy.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




5. (Soma Devata, Abhuti Rshi)


af wei




[Names: Sukrena]
Soma, extracted and taken, purifies and energizes
the Brahmana community of intellectuals, and the
Kshatra community of warriors, defenders and
administrators, and inspires them with passion and
enthusiasm for action and achievement. It sharpens the
senses with sensitivity and the mind with brilliance.


Deva, man of science and yajna, with the purity
and energy of yajna and soma, please and serve the
powers of nature and humanity and enhance the
production of food for the yajamana with vital juice


6. (Indra Devata, Abhuti Rshi)








[Names: Garats]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




O friend, ruler and administrator, those farmers
who produce grain and harvest the crop for strength
and sustenance, and those brilliant ones who,
accordingly, study, analyse and pronounce their
judgement on food production, for all these provide food
and maintenance.


Accepted and sanctified you are for the Ashvins,
earth and sunlight (for production), scientific
knowledge, strength and power and defence and
protection. This is your value and justification for life.
I consecrate you for splendour, power and prowess, and


7. | (Soma Devata, Abhuti Rshi)
Afas wei


[Names: Nana, Susmint]
Many are the things for you in this wide world.
They are different, each in its own place good for the
noble people. Don't confuse one with the other in your
own understanding: “You are sura, intoxication. And
you are sura, stimulation for life's energy. This is soma,
life's energy, passion for action, peace and pleasure for
the mind. Coming to your own in your own place, don't


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


8. (Soma Devata, Abhuti Rshi)








Indra, accepted and initiated you are in the laws
of life, vested with splendour of the sun and beauty of
the moon, power and prowess of the world on the move,
and the thunderbolt of lightning. This world is your
home and justification for existence for the experience
and creation of joy, spiritual bliss, universal honour and
glory. I consecrate you in your place and position by
virtue of Soma.


9. (Soma Devata, Abhuti Rshi)






You are the light of life, put light into me. You are
the vigour and vitality of life, put vigour and vitality
into me. You are the strength and force of life, put
strength and force into me. You are the lustre of health
and energy of life, bless me with the glow and lustre of
health and energy. You are the passion for life, put
passion into me. You are the challenge and victory of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




life, bless me with the spirit of challenge and the
ambition for victory.


10. (Soma Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)






[Names: Syenam]
That secret agency which watches and keeps off
both the tiger and wolf, the eagle and other birds of
prey, and the lion, the same may warn and protect this
ruler from sin and wrong-doing.


11. (Agni Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)


fere ea fa at waat uz een




[Names: Yadapipesa, Etattadagne, Samprca]
Agni, lord of light and yajna, when my child sucks
its mother with joy and hugs her almost crushing her
with love, then I feel free from my filial debt to nature
and my parents, since then are my parents saved through
me.


Stay one with the parents, with nature and with
God. Join me with piety and goodness. Stay away and
keep me away from sin and evil.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




12. (Vidvan Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)




[Names: Vaca]
The healing powers of nature and the two
Ashvins, positive and negative currents of universal
energy, enact the medicinal yajna of evolution in the
service of Indra, lord of the universe. So do the
physicians, men and women both, holding their mind
and senses in order, carry on the yajna of health and
healing with their knowledge and advice. (So too should
we all work for health and healing in the service of God
and humanity.)


13. (Yajna Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)





[Names: Diksayai, Saspani, Krayasya, Somamsavo]
Blades of grass are symbols of initiation. Shoots
of barley are symbols of yajnic inauguration. Roasted
rice treated with soma is the symbol of exchange. Honey
is the essence of soma plant. Develop these for yajna.


14. (Atithya/Hospitality Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)




[Names: Atithyarupam, Rupamupasadametattisro]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Roasted barley and masara drink is the mark of
hospitality. Gift of food, drink and clothes is the mark
of heroes. Three nights stay is courtesy to the guests.
The secret of soma drink is three nights distillation and
maturity. Observe these in the hospitality yajna.


15. (Soma Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)


iren cad sitet ued |




[Names: Sasthr, Asvibhyam]
The juice of soma fully distilled and prepared by
the expert physician, mixed with milk and approved
and accepted by a learned woman of Vedic knowledge
of medicine, matures into a panacea fit to be the
favourite tonic for the sophisticated Indra, lord of
strength, power and governance.


16. (Yajna Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)






[Names: Asandi, Antara]
The seat of soma is the mark of governance. The
flask of soma drink is the mark of an auspicious altar.
Invigorating food is the mark of an auspicious northern
altar. The filter that separates the essence of soma from
waste is the symbol of a good physician.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




17. (Yajna Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)


aan afa: water aféat aféitigar i




[Names: Wottdtssiharhaat, Vedya, Yupena, Agniragnina]
By vedi and performance of yajna, yajnic land is
acquired and sanctified. By yajna seats of grass and
noble work, wealth and prosperity is obtained. By the
pillar of yajnic celebration and social cooperation,
honour and celebrity is achieved. And by the yajna fire
and creative work, advancement and honourable
leadership is attained.


18. (Grihapati Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)


sahede deíremei We ae: ue N




[Names: Havirdhanam, Indrayaindrain, Indrayaindrai]
The Ashvinis, husband and wife, prepare the
yajna chamber and collect the holy materials. Sarasvati
the learned house-wife, is the lady of yajna and the host
for the priests and the guests. The house is the seat of
yajnic prosperity for the master of the house. And the
home is the lady’s forte. This is the house-hold, a socio-
economic yajna in operation.


19. (Yajna Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)
wate: Areh aet |


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Praisebhih, Prayajebhiranuyajan]
In all yajnic activities of life : By courteous
invitations and orders, you get responsive audience and
assistants. By obliging favours, you get pleasing help
and cooperation. By careful planning and preparation
of the preliminaries, you reach the finale with credit
and success. And with the pronouncement of a holy
offer, you get the divine acceptance.


20. (Yajamana Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)




[Names: Pasubhih, Chandobhih]
By love and care of animals, you beget the wealth
of animals. By oblations of rice cakes and generous gifts,
you get the wealth of holy materials. By the knowledge
and practice of sacred verses, you get the secrets of fire
kindling. And by sacrificial chants and actions, you


21. (Soma Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)
[Names: Utena]
ater was gfensamfasm asst usi ngu





[Names: Dhanah, Roasted]
milk, curds, mixed milk and curds, best of grains and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




honey, these are forms of soma, vital energy, and they
are holy foods for the sacred fire.


22. (Yajna Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)
[Names: Dhananam, Saktunam]
Seed of water-lily is symbol of rice and grains.
Wheat is symbol of puddings. Cotton seed/jujube fruit


is symbol of roasted grain powder. And barley is symbol
of gruel.


23. (Soma Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)




[Names: Payaso]
Barley is the form of milk. Jujube berry is the
form of curd. Grain is the form of soma. And mix of
milk or curd is the the form of the essence of soma.


24. (Vidvan scholar Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)
[Names: Reat]
wd smemeu were Gb sme: uid




[Names: Sravayeti, Anurupah, Anurupa, Yajeti]
"Speak to us of knowledge", say the disciples to
the teacher. And let what is spoken, heard and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




understood be in conformity and unison. “Conduct the
yajna", say the yajniks. And conduct of the yajna is the
function of the priest, the singers and the performers,
all in unison.


25. (Soma Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)






[Names: Ardha, Pranavaih]
By half-Riks you get to the form and meaning of
Uktha verses. By phrases you get to the Nivids,
invocatory verses and formulae. By the chant and
worship of Om you get to the form and meaning of
mystic powers. By water and milk rejuvenation is
achieved as by soma.


26. (Yajna Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)


[Names: Wana]
àa wean gidi aaa ura




The morning Soma-yajna is performed with
hymns to the Ashvinis, the dawn, the sun and the moon.
The mid-day Soma-yajna is performed with hymns to
Indra for energy, power and honour. And the third,
evening Soma-yajna, is accomplished and completed
with hymns to Sarasvati, spirit and word of universal
knowledge and inspiration for the sake of universal
peace and happiness.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




27. (Yajna Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)




[Names: Tacha, Vayavyairvayavyanyapnoti, Kumbhibhyamambhrnau]
With the properties of wind and air you get the
energy of wind and air in the soma in the vayavya air-
vessels. With filtration you get to the drona-measure
vessel of soma. With two jars of corn and water, you
get two water-jar measures of soma, one for stirring
and cleansing and the other for the pure and distilled
soma. And then by cooking cauldrons you get the
finished cauldronfuls of soma offerings for the yajna.


28. (Yajna Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)


miine Wet oe: Eaves fared:




[Names: Yajurbhirapyante, Chandobhirukthasastrani]
With verses of Yajurveda, you take ladlefuls of
soma, learn the ways of the world and knowledge of
the stars and planets. With the knowledge and libations,
you come to stomas, hymns of praise and qualities of
things and facts of life. With metres of verses and from
singers, you come to formula hymns of the Veda and
the secrets of weapons. And then with the recitation of
Samans, you come to the valediction of yajna and the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




29. (Ida Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)


zenia gareT: i
eee ee cm




[Names: Idabhirbhaksanapnoti, Sarn]
With the sacred Word and worship you get food
from the fields of earth. With sweet words and songs of
reverence one gets all the good wishes and success to
the heart’s desire. With a peaceful and generous mind
the husband gets the best conjugal relations with his
wife. And with the performance of yajna with the desired
Yajurvedic hymns, you come to the consummation of
settled life in a happy home.


30. (Yajna Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)






[Names: Vratena, Daksina]
By the observance of discipline and celibacy, the
child comes to initiation and consecration into learning
and education. By learning and education, the young
man/woman comes to settlement, wealth and honour.
Settlement, wealth and honour begets faith. And through
faith one comes to attain the ultimate truth and values
of life and existence.


31. (Yajna Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)


maadam at Maa we use


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Etavad, Tadetat]
sute.


This is the form of yajna with its meaning and
values which has been described and prescribed by God,
the Vedas and the Rishis. If a person is consecrated in a
Sautramani yajna, performed in honour of Indra, i.e., in
the service of God and for the good of the world, with
the yajnopavita and the knots of dedication and
commitment of oneself in faith, he/she is blest with all
that and this, that is, in this life and hereafter.


32. (Indra Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)






[Names: Suravantam, Dadhanah]
Great enlightened people, with rich libations of
havi, promote yajna, source of joy, operative in space
and maker of the brave.


Let us too, blest with enlightenment, holding
libations of soma for the divinities of heaven and earth,
performing yajna in honour of Indra, lord of the
universe, and ruler of the earth, rejoice with heavenly


33. (Indra Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)


FAT 1311


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Sarasvatimas, Sarasvatima]
Spirit of life, Indra, of your essence which is
contained in the herbs and plants, that which is extracted
from the soma plants and reinforced with energy (by
cleansing and distillation) is most powerful and
exhilararing. With that elixir of life, delight and inspire
the yajamana, Sarasvati, lady of learning, Ashvinis,
scholars and students of health and medicine, Indra, the
ruler and administrators, and Agni, the leader and
defenders of the land.


34. (Soma Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)






[Names: Yamasvina, Somarn, Somar]
Here for the sake of inspiration, I take this pure,
honey sweet, bright and soothing soma drink of the
supreme order which the experts of bio-science and the
lady scholar of nutrition have extracted from the plants
growing among the clouds on the mountains and
distilled for the sake of exhilaration and rejuvenation
of the mind and senses.


35. (Soma Devata, Haimavarchi Rshi)




[Names: Ahas, Yadatra]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Of the delicious and powerful soma juice of
purest extraction available here, which the sun too draws
up (and releases) with its rays, the soothing supreme
and most inspiring part I drink with a happy and blessed
mind here and now.


36. (Pitara Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Pitrbhyah, Aksan]
To our parents and seniors, we offer their own
share of food and reverence. To our grand-parents and
seniors, we offer their own share of food and reverence.
To our great-grand-parents and seniors, we offer their
own share of food and reverence. Parents, partake of
your own share we offer and rejoice. Rejoice and give
us the pleasure of joy. Parents, teachers, seniors, enjoy
yourselves to your full satisfaction and give us the
satisfaction of service and reverence. Parents, teachers,
seniors, be pure yourselves, and purify and sanctify us
with the service we offer and your blessings.


37. (Sarasvati learning Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Punantu, Satayusa, Punantu]
May my parents, grand parents, and great grand
parents, kind, beneficent and honourable, purify me and


sanctify me with the purity of discipline and education
for a life of hundred years.


May my grand parents and my great grand parents
purify me and sanctify me with the purity of moral life
and learning for a full life, so that with their blessings I
may live for a full age of hundred years.


38. (Indra Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi)


[Names: Yarsifad]
an Tea TAA N3


Are badhasva ducchunam.


Agni, father, mother, ancestors, saints and sages,
purify and sanctify our years of life, purify and vitalize
our food and energy, sanctify and bless our desires and
ambitions. Keep off all mischief, evil and calamity far
from us.


39. (Vidvan Scholar Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi)




Jataveda, lord of light and knowledge, purify and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




enlighten me. May all the saints and sages purify me.
Purify my intelligence and understanding with divine
knowledge and science. May all the living beings, in
fact everything of the wide world, lead me to knowledge
and purity.


40. (Agni Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi)
uferiur gi ur yout de dete |




[Names: Pavitrena]
Agni, blazing lord of light and fire, generous giver
of knowledge and purging power, purify me with the
purity and power of life's vitality. With your light and
sacred action, lord of action and holiness, purify and
sanctify our knowledge, understanding and action.


41. (Agni Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi)




Agni, self-luminous lord of omniscience, within
the holy light of your eternal consciousness shines the
universal knowledge, the Veda. With that holy light of
knowledge, enlighten, purify and consecrate me.


42. (Soma Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi)
[Names: Asem]
a: Ua a Wem AT use


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Pavamanah]
Lord omniscient, that is pure, immaculate, saviour
and purifier of all of us, may He with His purity and
holiness purify and consecrate us here and now.


43. (Savita Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi)
"wi Uris feme: neg




[Names: Ubhabhyam]
Savita, lord of light and life, generation and
inspiration, lord luminous of purity and holiness, with
both your purity and holiness purify me wholly, and
sanctify me with knowledge and good action.


44. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi)








[Names: Vaisvadevi]
Of the widest range of intelligence and education
among women, a most virtuous and brilliant personality
may come and oblige us as teacher so that these many
girls may be trained in wide knowledge and rational
living for home life and we, as householders, happy
and rejoicing in the corporate life of the community,
may become masters of wealth and honour.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


45. (Pitara Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi)
ul cies: were val agit xau Hota gud




[Names: Tesamllokah]
May the parents, seniors, guardians of the people
and officers who are under the governance of the ruler
of the world be harmonious and agreeable in thought,
word and deed, and may their home life, social status,
standard of living and yajnic (creative) performance of
duty be of the highest order of nobility and
responsibility. And may they prosper and rise to the
heights of divinity.

46. (Shri Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi)
samah.

My people who are living among the people
around are of equal mind and noble action in thought,
word and deed. May their honour, wealth and grace be


vested in me and live on in me to grow for a hundred
years in this world.


47. (Pitara Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Tabhyamidam]
I have heard of two paths of the existential travel
of mortals, all that is born of father and mother between
earth and heaven: One, the path of the ancestors, and
the other, the path of the divines. By these two paths
does this world on the move moves on and on to its


48. (Agni Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi)




[Names: Asared, Idain, Atmasani]
May this fertility of mine, the married life, be a
generative yajna, productive of ten brave children with
all the virtues for the well-being of society.


May this yajna and its production be the source
of spiritual enlightenment, progress of the people,
protection of animals, advancement of society and
creation of fearlessness.


Agni, lord of life and fertility, create for me lots
of noble children. Bless us with plenty of food, milk
and water, energy and generative vitality.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


49. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi)




[Names: Udiratamavara, Asum]
May all our seniors, guardians of the nation, far
and near, old and new, high and low, and all those of
the middle rank, settled in peace, prosperity and power,
inspire us with passion and energy. May our parents
and seniors dedicated to truth and rectitude, far from
violence and exploitation, who raise the pranic energy
of life, guide and protect us in our battles of the world.


50. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi)




Our parents and seniors, guardians of the nation,
are seers and sages of the facts of holistic knowledge
and law, scholars of the latest sciences, and experts of
technology and engineering, all dedicated to universal
love, non-violence and spiritual values and settled in
mind for the peace and prosperity of mankind.


Let us concentrate and dedicate ourselves to their
wisdom, grace and excellence, and magnanimity and
benevolence, for the reason of their devotion to yajna
and their contribution to the progress of society.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.



51. (Pitarah Devata, Shankha Rshi)




[Names: Tebhiryamah]
May our parents, seniors and ancestors, great
lovers of life and divinity, settled in peace and
prosperity, rich and generous at heart, come and join
our soma-yajna in person or in memory. With their
blessings and with their guidance may we, their children,
fair and just in conduct, loving the gifts of life and keen
to create happiness and share it with the community,
realize all our aims and ambitions in the world.


52. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi)




[Names: Wott]
Soma, lord of light, peace and prosperity, spirit
of yajna, brilliant you are, wide-awake and responsive.
With your vision and wisdom, you lead us on by the
noblest and simplest paths of nature to divinity. Lord
of beauty and blessedness, inspired by your grace and
guidance only do our parents, seniors and guardians of
the community reach the coveted seats of joy and
celebrity among the noblest souls of the world.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


53. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi)




[Names: Aanst, Vanvannavatah]
nah.


Soma, lord of peace and power, by you alone our
early forefathers, brave and constant all, performed their
acts of glory.

Inspiring spirit of commonalty, purging,
purifying, unshaken and unviolated, be like Indra of
the thunderbolt for us. Arise with passion for action
and with your warriors of the horse throw off the forces
of violence ranged around us.


54. (Soma Devata, Shamkha Rshi)




Soma, power of peace and prosperity, in covenant
with the senior guardian spirits of humanity, grow and
expand from earth to heaven.


Spirit of beauty and joy, it is for the sake of growth
and expansion that we offer fragrant oblations to your


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




worship in yajna, so that we may create, protect, master
and enjoy the riches of the world.


55. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi)






[Names: Barhisadah]
Parents, seniors and guardians of humanity in
yajnic seats of power, here are these refreshing
presentations we have prepared for you which you
please accept graciously and enjoy. Come to us and
bring us peace and protection. Bless us with comfort
and prosperity free from mischief and remove all the
sins and evil from our life.


56. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi)






[Names: Barhisado]
I know the parents, seniors and guardians of life
so kind and generous. I also know the dynamics of Lord
Vishnu's immanence in His creation.


May the venerable seniors in yajnic seats of
knowledge and vision, who in their own right enjoy the
fragrant drinks distilled from the essence of life, come
here and bless this place and me.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




57. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi)






[Names: Aaaf, Upahutah]
Senior guardians of life and the human spirit
established in inner peace and spiritual freedom are
chosen by Grace to partake of the dearest treasures of
universal knowledge and life divine. We call upon them:
may they come here, may they listen to us, may they
speak to us from the heights of divinity, may they redeem
and save us!


58. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi)

[Names: Tate, Ferd]
May our seniors and scholars established in the
peace and prosperity of fire knowledge and yajna come
to us by the noblest paths of divinity. And may they, in
this our yajnic project of science and technology,
enjoying themselves in their own right to their own
knowledge, speak to us, enlighten us and protect us from
ignorance and poverty.


59. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi)




[Names: Gavia]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Agnisvattah, Agnisvatta, Atta]
Senior scholars and experts of the science of heat
and energy, men of justice and positive policy, come
here to us, seat yourselves in every home and every hall
of assembly, take the food and materials prepared with
care and offered with love and hope, and, sitting in your
laboratory and workshop, create the knowledge, impart
it to people, and produce the wealth which creates
versatile heroes for the nation and humanity.


60. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi)


[Names: Tebhyah]
Those seniors who are experts of the science and
technology of fire, and those who are not such but who
are experts of other fields of knowledge, and all those
who rejoice in the midst of the light of their own
knowledge itself: for all these, the self-luminous lord
of omniscience in-vests this body with health and energy
according to their need and desire.


61. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi)






[Names: Assy]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Agnisvattanrtumato, Somapitham, Somapitha]
Those experts of the science and technology of
fire who work according to the seasons needs and who
enjoy a drink of soma, we invite to social receptions
and honour of felicitations. May they, noble scholars
and creators, be great benefactors of society, and may
we all become producers, protectors and masters of
wealth and prosperity in the world.


62. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi)




[Names: Purusata]
Noble seniors of the world, do not, for any reason
whatever, destroy or injure our manliness and


manpower. Take on this yajna for us, do it well and
speak well of it.


We sit kneeling on your right respectfully, and
whatever your omission or commission in well-meaning
work, we overlook and make up. And then we move on
with the work in earnestness.


63. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi)


prz: TIER euer: Were asgat wem 11GB


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






Parents and seniors of the community, create and
hold wealth for the man of charity and for the children
sitting in the lap of their noble mothers. Give them ample
means of living so that they may have ample energy.


64. (Agni Devata, Shamkha Rshi)




[Names: Tanno]
yujam.


Agni, carrier of sumptuous foods and fragrance
for the noble people, bless us with that wealth of life
which you believe is fit for the use of divinities in nature
and humanity, and which is worthy of celebration in
the best of words worthy of the best listeners.


65. (Agni Devata, Shamkha Rshi)


asara: kaaa: aqaa:
ax a e a NEN




[Names: Predu]
Surely that person is the leader, torch bearer, path
maker, first among all who is brilliant as Agni (fire)
and spreads purity and fragrance all round. He/She
respects the parents, seniors, ancestors and the
promoters of truth and justice. He/She communicates
the noblest thoughts and ideas in persuasive and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




powerful words to the seniors and the brilliant and


66. (Agni Devata, Shamkha Rshi)


[Names: Ssisd, Gather]
gef neg



[Names: Tvamagna, Pradah]
Agni, brilliant master of noble thoughts, words
and deeds, loved, invoked and adored, receive the gifts
of life, convert them to fragrance and acknowledge.
Share them with the parents, seniors and respectable
people so that they too enjoy them as their own. These
gifts are valuable, prepared and collected with effort.


[Names: Generous]
67. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi)
3p ae frat a a Ae ive fast areiss a a
tia iat cheer ufa a wade: aaria
WET Neon




Agni, brilliant and generous power, the seniors
who are here, and those who are not here, and those
whom we know, and those whom we don’t know, you
know them all, how many they are and where they are,
since you know everything that is anywhere. Let this
yajna of service and adoration be done well. Carry it on
with grace and with gifts made in faith and love.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


610
68.


(Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi)




Let this food and adoration today be for the


parents and seniors, those who came earlier, those who
came later, those who are seated in this earthly world
and those who are on the move for sure among the


69.


(Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi)





[Names: Sucidayan]
And Agni, brilliant scholar, just as our teachers,


saints and sages, eminent and ancient, dedicated to the
holy Word and serving the cause of universal truth and
justice, realized the purity and blaze of that truth, and,
breaking through the dark veil of the night opened the
flood-gates of the light of dawn, so do you blaze, burn,
purge, purify and enlighten the world.


70.


(Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Usantastva, Usannusata]
Noble youth, with all the love and care, we accept,
maintain and educate you. Out of love and affection
with all the care, we develop your personality and
potential. You too, loving and caring, bear the
responsibility for the food and maintenance of the loving
parents and other seniors.


71. (Indra Devata, Shamkha Rshi)


fasar gata: eget: eet



Indra, ruler, commander, like the foam of the sea,
like the vapours of water in the sky, rise and expand
and break the head of the powers which hoard the wealth
of the land like the cloud hoarding the waters. Conquer
the forces which stand in opposition out of sheer


72. (Soma Devata, Shamkha Rshi)


Tat non



[Names: Rtena]
Soma, the man cleansed and distilled like soma
through discipline, brilliant and inspiring, meditating
on God and godly in character, by the simplicity and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




sincerity of his natural living conquers the pain of death.


By his dedication to Rita, the universal Law of
drinks, purity and vitality, best foods, honour and
prosperity, water and milk, honey and the very nectar
of life.


73. (Angirasa Devata, Shamkha Rshi)


Bun eee




[Names: Adbhyah]
The man of genius and discrimination trained by
a divine sage, like the swan, separates the milk from
the water, accepts the milk and rejects the water.


With his dedication to the essential reality of
existence through yoga, he attains the eternal verity,
divine speech, the vision of word and meaning, purity
of the inner light, spiritual food, honour and prosperity
of the world, purest drinks, abiding health, and the
honey-sweet joys of living.


74. (Soma Devata, Shamkha Rshi)


"ej noxii




[Names: Somamadbhyo, Sucisat, Sukramandhasa]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




The man of discrimination, friend of pure
visionaries, with the freedom of his vision, distils the
essence, soma, from the waters as the swan separates
the milk from water. He accepts the essence and rejects
the scum.


With his vision of the Vedas, he attains the truth
of divinity, the purity and energy of food, direct
experience of the divine presence, and the supreme taste
of the sweetness and bliss of Immortality and Moksha.


75. (Prajapati Devata, Shamkha Rshi)






[Names: Annatparisruto]
Prajapati, ruler and protector of the people,
President of the council, alongwith the study of the
Vedas, receives the juices, essences and inspiring vital
sweets extracted from the ripe grains and blessed waters
of the land, and wields the onerous responsibility of the


With fair and enlightened justice he attains the
people's dedication to truth, the divine gift of national
glory, comprehensive protection and defence, pure and
vital foods, light of justice and knowledge, divine grace,
energising drinks, honey, and noble state-order of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




76. (Indra, Soul, Devata, Shamkha Rshi)

tt wat atra of ufesfefasau a cru


[Names: Setfa, Reto]
In the process of growth and regeneration, the
male organ of generation discharges the semen. Entering
the womb it discharges/releases the seed of life to plant
it into the mother’s body.

The foetus is covered with the placenta during
its growth till maturity. When the seed is born as an
independent soul in a new body-system, it abandons
the cover in which it had grown and matured. (Thus
elimination and regenerative growth through the natural
movement of discharge, elimination, union and
separation is part of life’s evolution under the universal
law of nature, which is Rtam, creative dynamics of Lord

By Rtam, the soul (jiva) gets Satyam, natural
existence of the body, Indriyam, organs of perception,
drinks and assimilation, purity and vitality for
regeneration, foods and growth, potentials for living and
continuation, and the immortal honey sweets of the joys
of existence for itself (jiva).


77. (Prajapati Devata, Shankha Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Drstva]
Having over-seen two aspects of created
[Names: Existence]
One, reality, truth, dharma; the other, unreality, illusion,
adharma. Then Lord Prajapati places faith and
commitment (shraddha) in truth, and no-faith and no-
commitment (ashraddha) in untruth.

With truth and faith He joins right mind and
intelligence (rtambhara-buddhi) which is the Lord's gift
of saving grace, protective, purifying, and enlightening
against the darkness of illusion. And this is the soul's
real power and faculty which can lead to the honey
sweets and milky streams of immortality.


78. (Prajapati Devata, Shamkha Rshi)





[Names: Vedena]
By Veda, Prajapati, the soul, comes to know both
forms of existence: Truth which is reality, dharma, Rtam,
and untruth which is illusion, adharma, anartam.

By Rtam it can realise the full potential of its
faculties and the immortality of its essential nature,
while with pure foods and drinks (in the interest of health
and meditation) it can experience here and now the
honey sweets and milky streams of nectar.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




79. (Prajapati Devata, Shamkha Rshi)






Having viewed the essence of knowledge distilled
with an objective mind from the panorama of existence,
the consecrated Prajapati, guardian of his people, should
drink this life-giving nectar of truth (Rtam).


By Rtam, knowledge of reality, he attains the
force of truth, joy of governance, purity of intention
and action, plenty and prosperity, royal honour and
dignity, and the pleasure and sweetness of immortality.


80. (Savita Devata, Shamkha Rshi)






[Names: Sisena, Sarasvatindrasya, Sarasvatindras, Just]
from woollen yarn with leaden loom, and intelligent
designers create models of machines with their
imagination and expertise, so do the Ashvinis, scholars
and researchers of health and nature, Savita, man of
inspiration and imagination, Sarasvati, woman of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




learning and education, Varuna, expert of health and
medication, create models of creative and productive
yajna and of the form and character of Indra, the ideal
individual or ruler, the ideal family and the ideal society.


81. (Varuna Devata, Shamkha Rshi)


[Names: Boars]
AT: UZ

[Names: Tadasya, Sactbhistisro, Lomani]
lajah.

Three divine powers, loving and generous,
variously enact the immortal form and structure of this
yajna with their acts and imagination: They structure
the body hair, as if, with blades of grass, and the body
cover (skin) with shoots and ears of corn; and roasted
grains become, as if, the substance (flesh) of the body.


82. (Ashvinau Devate, Shamkha Rshi)


ware uu




[Names: Tadasvina, Rudravartani, Asthi]
Sarasvati, the enlightened woman, with dedicated
mind and knowledge, weaves its beautiful inside, the
bones and marrow created with the holy barley meal
and vitalizing juices, while the Ashvinis, powers of
health and healing, at the speed of energy, prepare for


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




soma and place the filter and the cask on the floor of
the earth.


83. (Sarasvati Devata, Shamkha Rshi)
aq csi




As a wise and intelligent expert designs and
weaves a beautiful cloth on the loom with the shuttle,
so does Sarasvati, enlightened woman of wisdom and
science, with her mind and knowledge, create the
charming, special and excellent form and structure of
yajna with the help of friendly Ashvinis, specialists of
health and healing: yajna (visible symbol of Indra, lord
of honour, power and prosperity) in which the pure and
vitalizing essence of soma joy distilled from all elements
of nature ripples like the vital spirit (blood) of the body.


84. (Soma Devata, Shamkha Rshi)




[Names: Sate, Walser, Payasa, Apamatim]
(Three divinities, i.e., Sarasvati and the two
Ashvinis) with milk, juices and inspiring drink of soma
create the pure, life-giving, generative seed of life
discharged from the generative organ (into the womb),


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and (for the same purpose of purity and vitality, with
the same food and drink) ward off intellectual debility
and ignorance as well as hyper-activity and arrogance
from far and near.


85. (Savita Devata, Shamkha Rshi)


S: Gat ean cue dase afad sis d
fiw uu




[Names: Indrah, Yakrt]
Indra, saviour, protector and preserver, with his
heart and love, Savita, inspirer and giver of
nourishments, with food and drink, create satyam, the
reality of life and yajna, bringing it into formal
manifestation. Varuna, with health and healing and with
air and pranic energies preserves and maintains the
working of the liver, lungs and neck, the chest and the


86. (Savita Devata, Shamkha Rshi)
F Ula ea


[Names: Antrani, Syenasya, Sacibhirasandi]
The intestines in the human body system (yajna)
are like the cooking pans preparing delicious food for
the vital fire. The bowels are like milk-pots or the udders


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of an abundant milch cow. The spleen, pancreas and
liver are powerful defensive organs like the wings of
an eagle pouncing on disease-attacks. The navel with
its energizing actions is like the royal seat of power.
And the stomach, to all the body parts, as the mother-
host, distributes holy food among all members of the


87. (Pitarah Devata, Shamkha Rshi)





[Names: Kumbho, Plasirvyaktah]
The husband, progenitor, is like a jar overflowing
with love and vigour. Healthy and handsome, he is like
an exuberant fountain flowing in a hundred streams of
action with grace and piety. So is the wife, her womb a
recipient jar into which the husband should project the
seed, the foetus inside being like an oblation in honour
of his parents and ancestors.


88. (Sarasvati Devata, Shamkha Rshi)






[Names: Wade, Mukham, Capyam]
Sarasvati and the Ashvinis, enlightened woman


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and the health and spirits of the man, create a happy
home with the head and mouth of both together in truth
with a sweet tongue fluent in purity. The purity, comfort
and security of the home, the love and desire of the
woman's fertility, the passion and power of the man's
virility, and the child as bloom of the health and love of
the union, all these keep the family together.


89. (Ashvinau Devate, Shamkha Rshi)








[Names: Paksmani]
By the Ashvinis, sun and moon, with portions of
clear soma distilled, is created the immortal light of the
eye. With tonics prepared with goat's milk is created
the lustre of health. The lower and upper eyelashes are
created with wheat and water lilies, and the beauteous
form white as well as dark shines with the same nature's


90. (Sarasvati Devata, Shamkha Rshi)
maqui teal aA gon




[Names: Avirna, Sarasvatyupavakairvyanam]
Like the sheep and the ram, the protector and
contender, the Ashvinis, with portions of clear soma,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




create the immortal passage of pranic energy in the nose.
Sarasvati, nature's flowing vitality, with animation and
energy, creates the systemic vyana air in the body, and
with grains and fruits, she creates the hair-filter in the
nose.


91. (Indra Devata, Shamkha Rshi)
[Names: Teter]
yata ue?




[Names: Srotramamrtam, Yava]
The soul’s will to live in body form manifests as
the bull for the expression of strength. From portions
of nature’s auditory element in soma is created the
immortal faculty of the ear. Barley, as the grass,
manifests in the eyebrows. And the jujuba fruit creates
the honey sweets that flow from the mouth.


92. (Atma Devata, Shamkha Rshi)




[Names: Atmannupasthe, Ssmasruni, Kesa, Ssirsanyasase, Sriyai, Sikha]
In the presence of Divinity, the soul rises in

eminence and potential: the lower hair of the body is

like the hair of the wolf, the beard and moustache on


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the face are like the whiskers of the tiger, the hair on
the head and the top hair glows with beauty and glory
like the lion's mane, and the senses shine as lightening.


93. (Ashvinis Devata, Shamkha Rshi)






[Names: Anganyatman]
Thus do the Ashvinis, bio-engineers of nature,
structure limbs for the soul, and thus does Sarasvati,
divine mother, join the soul with the limbs, creating a
living Indra of a hundred years of age blest with the
immortal light and beauty of the moon.


94. (Sarasvati Devata, Shamkha Rshi)


wat ues




Sarasvati, the wife, bears inside the womb the
foetus so well created by the Ashvinis, nature's powers
of creation, Varuna, supreme ruler, immanent in the
world, integrating the soul with the vital essences of
nature and completing the creation of a living Indra,
the human being, for a glorious existence.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




95. (Ashvinau Devate, Shamkha Rshi)






[Names: Past, Tejah]
The healthy glow of living forms, the mighty rich
nourishments of life, the delicious honey collected by
the bee from juices all round are the nectar, the vital
power, the beauty distilled from the original as well as
the refined sources of nature by Sarasvati, mother spirit
of life and humanity through the Ashvinis, creative and
healing powers of nature's cosmic flow.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1.  (Sabhesha President Devata, Prajapati Rshi)
m vat ferum at feret: neu



[Names: Ksatrasya]
President of the Council, you are the seat of world
power. You are the centre-hold of the order of humanity.
May no one challenge you! You too do not hurt me, any
citizen.


2. (Sabhesha Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Reima]
President of the Supreme Council, committed to
noble resolutions of conscious choice, master of noble
thoughts and good actions, best and first choice of
humanity, be seated on the seat of governance among
the peoples of the world for a sovereign world order.
Save us from death and destruction. Save us from
lightning and the thunderbolt.


3. (Sabhesha mires Ashwinau Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





In this yajnic world order of Lord Savita's
creation, with the arms of Ashvinis, harbingers of light
and knowledge, the hands of Pusha, powers of strength
and nourishment, and the efficacy of Ashvinis, powers
of health and healing, I consecrate you for the sake of
world-wide brilliance and universal glory of


I consecrate you for Sarasvati, for the sake of
learning and education of the people.


With the powers of health and nutrition, I
consecrate you for the sake of food and vigour for all.


With the power and enlightenment of divine
Indra, Lord of glory, I consecrate you for the
achievement of the moral strength, honour and beauty
of the world order.


4.  (Sabhapati Devata, Prajapati Rshi)
wee Gest PERS Is




[Names: Susloka]
Man of high reputation and honour, leader of
many noble causes, illustrious dispenser of truth and
justice, you are a man of peace, giver of peace and
prosperity. Therefore I accept and consecrate you in the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




service of Prajapati, divine lord of peace, and His people,
for the achievement of universal peace and prosperity.


5.  (Sabhapati Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Aytsa, Smasruni, Raja]
People of the world: honour of the human nation
is my head, nobility of the people is my mouth, light of
justice and grandeur of world culture is my hair,
moustache and beard, good governance is my life and
breath, unity of the order is my vision, and diversity of
the constituents is my ear.


6.  (Sabhapati Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


fa 4 ag are vel wat wer a aT:
mat: waama fat A Gene




[Names: Jihva, Modah, Mitram]
Members of the world state: My tongue shall
speak for the good of all. My speech shall explain great
shall be for the defence of freedom. My fingers shall
point to the paths of joy. My limbs shall dance with the
people's festivities. My prowess and challenges shall
be for the promotion of love and friendship.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




7. (Raja Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


seat aaa At non




[Names: Bahu]
May my arms, strength and prowess, my hands,


actions and heroism, my heart and my very soul be for
the supremacy and sovereignty of the world order.


8. (Sabhapati Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


wein? wena aa siib |



[Names: Asst, Prsthirme]
The government order is my back. My belly,
shoulders, neck, hips and loins, thighs, elbows, knees,


and all my limbs are wholly for the people — my people
and my government are me.


9.  (Sabhesha Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Nabhirme, Anandanandavandau, Janghabhyam]
I am the ruler, honoured and consecrated among
my people. I am Dharma, the law, committed to bear
the burden of the order on my legs and feet.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




My navel, mind, knowledge, security, honour and
reverence, hips and loins, organs of excretion,
generation and pleasure, honour and dignity, and good
fortune all is for the order and the people.


10. (Sabhesha Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Pratyangesu]
Accepted, appointed and consecrated in this
divinely protected Order of the brilliant State of the
World: I dedicate and commit myself to the Order, in
the Order, for the Order. I dedicate and commit myself
to the State, in the State, for the State, to the people,
among the People, for the People. I dedicate myself to
the horses and cows. I dedicate myself to all parts of
the Order and the State. Firmly established in my mind
and soul, with all my soul and pranic energy, I dedicate
myself to the living spirit and exuberant dynamics of
the human nation. I dedicate myself to the growth and
development of the strength and prosperity of the
people. In the light of heaven and greenery of the earth
and her environment, I dedicate myself to heaven and
earth. I dedicate and commit myself to the grand socio-
economic yajna of service, governance and brilliance
of a generous humanity for total and holistic


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




11. (Devas Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Traya, Brhaspatipurohita]
Three are the orders of divinities, brilliant powers
of nature’s generosity. Three times eleven are they,
thirtythree powers of grandeur and majesty all,
Brihaspati, the Sun, great lord of light and knowledge


In this great world of Lord Savita’s yajnic
creation, may the devas, brilliant scholars of knowledge
and generosity, with all these divine powers, protect
me and promote me for the higher life.


Note: The thirty three devas, according to Swami
Ji are:


i. Eight Vasus, abodes and supports of life, are:
earth, water, fire, air, space, sun, moon and the stars.


[Names: Eleven]
energies (prana, apana, vyana, udana and samana), five
devadatta and dhananjaya), and the soul. They are
Rudras because they destroy pain, and when they leave
the body they make people cry in sorrow.


iii. Twelve Adityas, viz., twelve months of the
year, they being zodiacs of the sun in the year. They are
Adityas because they count up the time and exhaust the
life of whatever is born. In addition to these (8+11+12),
there is Indra, universal electric energy, and Yajna,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




12. (Vishvedeva Devata, Prajapati Rshi)










[Names: Qsqaren, Rare, Prathama]
The first order of divinities (Vasus) with the
second order (Rudras), the second with the third
(Adityas), the third with Satya (nature), nature with
yajna (science and technology), science and technology
with Yajurveda hymns (application), application with
Samaveda hymns (dedication, devotion and joy),
dedication with Rgveda hymns (knowledge and vision),
knowledge with Puronuvakas of  Atharva
(specialization), specialisation with Yajnas (yajnic
work), yajnic work with Vashatkaras (noble work),
noble work with ahutis (oblations), oblations (inputs)
with sincere conduct, and all these (in cycle with the
Vasus, Rudras and Adityas and so on) on the earth —
may all these grant all my desires and promote me among
the people.


13. (Teacher Preacher Devatas, Prajapati Rshi)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


[Names: Mamsam]
The hair on my body, my effort and action, my
skin, my humility, my coming and income, my flesh,
my courtesy, my wealth, bones, marrow and my humility
and reverence be all for the teachers and preceptors.


14. (Agni Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Yaddeva, Agnirma]
Teachers, preaches, saints and sages, whatever
our offence we have done to the devas, noble powers,
may Agni, Lord God and the noble saint, forgive, and
save us from all that offence, irreverence and sin.


15. (Vayu Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Yadi, Vayurma]
If we commit any sin or offence either in the day
or in the night, then may Vayu, lord of dynamic
knowledge and imagination, deliver me from all that
sin and offence.


16. (Surya Devata, Prajapati Rshi)
si ur aerate fasaa: NA N


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Suryo]
If we happen to commit any offence or sin either

while awake or while asleep, then may Sun, lord of

brilliant knowledge and warmth, deliver me from all
that offence and sin.


17. (Sages Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Yacchudre]
Saints and sages, whatever offence or sin we
happen to commit in the village, or in the forest, or in
the assembly, or in the mind, or among the assistants,
or among the employers, or against anyone’s dharma,
conscience or profession, then you alone are the powers
to save and deliver us from that.


18. (Varuna Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Paor, Praet, Garrat, Yadapo]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Prana, life, is precious and sacred. The cow is
precious and sacred, inviolable. Varuna, Lord Supreme,
the eminent sage, is great. If ever we injure, violate or
us from that sin.


Noble sage of knowledge, you are initiated and
consecrated, blessed, calm and generous as a fountain.
Ward off the sins committed by the nobles, through/by
the nobles. Let the ordinary people fight out and
eliminate the crimes committed by the average people.
Save us from fear, terror and violence.


19. (Apah Devta, Prajapati Rshi)


was a amga: d cat femreerdefnmard:





Soma, disciple, your heart and soul is in sea, in
the midst of the energy there and in the depths of
celestial waters. May the pranic energies and the vitality
of the herbs enter your mind with their secrets. May the
herbs and the pranic energies be friendly to us. They
will be unfriendly to those negativities which harm us
and which we, in consequence, hate and avoid.


20. (Apah Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Drupadadiva, Putam, Sundhantu]
Like a prisoner freed from a post of captivity,

like a man in sweat cleansed of dirt after bath, like ghee

purified of scum through a strainer, may the waters and


energies purge me of sin and evil into the purity of


21. (Surya Devata, Praskanva Rshi)




[Names: Udvayam, Devam, Suryamaganma]
Up we move beyond the dark with a vision of the
higher regions of bliss, and may we reach the sun, the
Lord of Light Supreme, among the lights of the world.


22. (Agni Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Payasvanagna]
I have tasted the waters of bliss to-day. Let us all
create joy and open out to the flood gates of freedom
and bliss.


Agni, having drunk of joy and bliss, I have come
to you. Lord of light and knowledge, bless me with
children, wealth of knowledge and prosperity and the
splendour of honour and dignity.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




23. (Samid Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Asaan, Sera, Edho, Samavavarti, Samu, Vaisva]
Samit, food of the holy fire, you are the harbinger
of prosperity. May we be prosperous. You are the food
of the light divine, light itself. Infuse light and lustre
into me. May the earth be generous. May the dawns
bring us light and peace. May the sun give light and
warmth. May this whole world be full of joy. May I
shine with the light of the world and be the light itself.
May I attain my desire and great ambitions. May I, with
truth of word and deed, attain the glory of the world.


24. (Agni Devata, Ashvatarashvi Rshi)




[Names: Abhyadadhami]
aham.


Agni, lord keeper and sustainer of the vows of
speech and karma, initiated and consecrated I place the
fuel into the holy fire with concentration and dedication
of mind. I light the fire and commit myself to the vows
of yajna and faith in the divine order.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




25. (Agni Devata, Ashvatarashvi Rshi)
a ote goa uaa at car: aea een



[Names: Tamllokam]
Where the Brahma order of learning and the
Kshatra order of governance coexist and work together
in harmony, and where the noble citizens abide by the
fire of yajna, that holy land and spirit divine, O Lord, I
pray, reveal to me.


26. (Agni Devata, Ashvatarashvi Rshi)



a ote goa use at afet faad usa


[Names: Yatrendrasca, Vayusca]
Where Indra is light and power, and Vayu breath
of life, and both in unison work for all, where want is
non-existent and weariness no more, that holy land of
plenty and sacred joy, O Lord of Light, reveal to me.


27. (Soma Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Amsuna, Gandhaste, Somamavatu]
Soma is the Spirit of life, fragrance imperishable,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Let the filament of the soma plant stay joined to
the branch, let the branch with the plant mature and be
whole with the plant.


May the knot of the cane grow out of the knot,
stay joined to the knot, mature and be one and whole
with the tree.


Soma, Spirit of life, may your fragrance and


eternal vitality protect the unity and wholeness of life


28. (Indra Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Sincanti, Surayai]
Those who take the shower of bliss in soma, life
divine, merge wholly, purge and raise themselves, and
purify their soul with the nectar for the sake of vitality,
dignity and ecstasy of living, they are the immortals.
‘So what?’ says the sceptic and ends up in the doubt.


29. (Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)






[Names: Wasted, Dhanavantam]
Indra, master of knowledge and power of speech,
in the morning accept and enjoy our food, delicious and
rich with nutriments, mixed with curds and honey cakes,
excellently prepared with holy recipes and offered with
reverence.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




30. (Indra Devata, Nrimedha Purushameda Rshis)





[Names: Brhadindraya]
Heroes of knowledge, ever watchful, promoters
of truth and right, sing the great joyous songs of Brihat-
Sama in honour of mighty Indra, lord of the universe,
by which you would awaken the heavenly light which
will break through the clouds of darkness and open the
flood-gates of light and prosperity.


31. (Indra Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Adhvaryo, Punahindraya]
High-priest of yajna, bring down the soma, waters
of life, distilled from the clouds and sanctify them for
the drink of Indra and his citizens of the world order.


32. (Paramatma Devata, Kaundinya Rshi)




[Names: Ager]
The Lord that is the presiding power of all the
forms of existence, under whose law the worlds of the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




universe reside, who is greater than the greatest and
reigns supreme over all, to this Lord of existence, for
His grace, I bow in faith.


Lord of mine and all, I come, I hold on to you,
and I consecrate my heart and soul with your presence.


33. (Soma Devata, Kakshivat sukirti Rshi)


WH A aA Raa cer eri eere cord er eem spetta 3 UI




Teacher/scholar, approved and authorized you are
by the Ashvinis, teachers and scholars of eminence, for
the service of Sarasvati, language and learning, Indra,
administration, and Sutraman, security and discipline.


Now here is your new office with the Ashvinis,
teachers and scholars, with adequate powers in the
service of Sarasvati, teaching and research, Indra,
administration, planning and development, and
Sutraman, discipline and security of the organisation.


34. (Lingokta Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Pranapa, Vaco]
Soma, teacher scholar, you are protector of my
prana, apana, eye and ear, speech and language, and
you are the master and controller of my mind.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




35. (Lingokta Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Garant, Asvinakrtasya]
On invitation, I take the food served here as it
has been prepared by experts, supervised by learned
women, ordered by Indra, the dignified host, and
certified by the chief of security.


36. (Indra Devata, Angirasa Rshi)






[Names: Badana, Samiddha, Usasamanike, Usasamanik, Tribhirdevaistriin]
Just as Indra, the sun, ancient light of the world,
refulgent in the splendour of the dawn, blazing and
advancing in the east with thirty three devatas, destroys
the clouds of darkness and opens the flood gates of light,
so do you, brilliant man of knowledge and modern
challenges, advance with all the force of your scholars
of the Vasu, Rudra and Aditya order, destroy the
darkness of ignorance and open the flood gates of the
light of knowledge.


37. (Tanunapat Devata, Angirasa Rshi)




[Names: Roars]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Narasarnsah, Gobhirvapavan]
Universally admirable is the man who is brave
and totally fearless, maker of many things, self-
dependent and self-protective, wholly dedicated to
yajna, farming the land with bulls and cows, well-
provided with milk, butter and honey, bright with golden
wealth, and highly enlightened, and begins his day with


38. (Indra Devata, Angirasa Rshi)






[Names: Geant, Idito, Sardhamanah, Purandaro]
Indra, the man respected and admired by the
godly, brilliant spirit of many yajnas, invited and
engaged in discussions with presentations, bold yet
patient, breaking the clouds and enemy forts like Indra,
lord of the thunderbolt, is invited to our yajna. May he
come and grace the yajna with his presence.


39. (Indra Devata. Angirasa Rshi)




[Names: Uruprathah]
Just as Indra, the sun, wielder of the waters and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




expansive lord of the rays of light, pervading the sky
and regions of the universe, united with the Vasus and
the Adityas, graces the ancient, vast, beautiful and
celebrated floor of the earth, so please you, celebrated
man of yajna, grace our home of yajna.


40. (Indra Devata, Angirasa Rshi)




[Names: Dvaro, Srayantam]
Just as noble women sweet of speech and good
wives and mothers to be, eagerly join Indra, virile young
men of power and dignity, and find the door to their
new home of settlement, so should noble and virile
young men, celebrated for their power and dignity, take
to good and virtuous women wholly and freely and settle
in a happy new home.


41. (Ushasa-nakta Devate, Angirasa Rshi)






[Names: Gade, Usasanakta, Suramindram, Tantum]
Night and dawn, beautiful, great, abundant,
generous, wearing the design of the warp and woof of
light, already spread out in the east, with form and
colour, adorn Indra, the rising sun, light of lights so


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


brave and majestic, with the splendour of the morning.


(Just as night and dawn look forward to the sun,
so should the people look forward to and associate with
the brilliant and the brave and fearless.)


42. (Daivyadhyapaka-upadeshaka Devata, Angirasa Rshi)






[Names: Daivya, Murdhan]
Teachers and preachers, learned and brilliant
makers of yajnic projects, generous in oblations, noble
of speech, first and foremost in yajnic organisations,
leaders and supporters of people in many ways, with
honey and fragrant materials light up, promote and
advance the ancient fire of yajna and glorify Indra, the
Spirit, power and ecstasy of the holy performance.


43. (Tisro-daivyah, Three goddesses Devata, Angirasa Rshi)






[Names: Seat, Tisro, Acchinnam, Sarasvatida]
The trinity of Ida, Sarasvati and Bharati,
sustain and augment the continuous flow of life-yajna
with holy food and drinks, serving thereby and pleasing


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Indra, lord of existence. (Ida holds the inexhaustible
potential, Sarasvati controls the flow, and Bharati
defines the forms in the continuum.)


44. (Tvashta Devata, Angirasa Rshi)
qur ATL AIT RIA regit SAT THAT serre




[Names: Vrsa, Puruni]
May Tvashta, creator of fine and sophisticated
forms, provide the weapons of defence and power for
virile Indra, lord defender of life. Let the dynamic man
going far and wide collect various and versatile materials
for his glory. Let the generous man of tempestuous speed
studying the rain and clouds at the head of yajna (of
science and technology) bring together the noblest
scholars and sages in the service of the generous Indra.


45. (Vanaspati Devata, Angirasa Rshi)




[Names: Vanaspatiravasrsto]
The chief of the forests, like an arrow shot from
the bow, with all the bonds of dedication of his heart
and soul, fills the treasures of Indra with created wealth
like the brilliant and blissful yajna of the nation, and
himself too enjoys the honey sweet gifts of the yajna.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




46. (Svahakritayah Devata, Angirasa Rshi)






[Names: Garton, Stokanamindum, Ghrtaprusa]
May the brave, generous and exalted hero, Indra,
conqueror of the violent, and the brilliant realized souls
among humanity, rejoicing at heart by the sacred acts
of their holy sacrifice into the fire and gifts of love and
kindness, drink of the nectar sweets of soma in yajnic
life and live the ecstasy of their immortal being on earth.


47. (Indra Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)






[Names: Hamd, Surah, Vavrdhanastavisiryasya]
May Indra, mighty hero, come for our defence
and protection here and, sung and celebrated, be with
us as a friend and companion, augmenting his forces
trained by veterans, which superior power of his forces,
able to suppress the enemies, may strengthen and
promote our social order like the umbrella of vast


48. (Indra Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)




[Names: Taft]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Ojisthebhirnrpatirvajrabahuh]
Indra, come to us from far and near for our
protection. Mighty hero, achiever of cherished goals,
ruler of the people, man of arms of steel, victorious over
the enemies, come with the most powerful forces for
our defence in the battles of life.


49. (Indra Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)






[Names: Reia, Tisthati]
May Indra, eminent man of dynamic knowledge
and movement, come well with his power of horse for
our protection and advancement in prosperity. Wielder
of the thunderbolt, lord of power and majesty, mighty
strong, may he grace this our yajna with favour. May
he stand by us firm and inviolable in the battles of life.


50. (Indra Devata, Garga Rshi)







[Names: Bale, Gegdhtes, Trataramindramavitaramindram, Hvayami]
I invoke Indra, lord of might and majesty,
adorable and universally adored, saviour, protector and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




promoter of His creation. I invoke Him for protection
in every problem of life.


I call upon Indra, royal and brave ruler of the
nation, saviour and protector of the people, and
destroyer of the nation's enemies. I call upon him for
protection and solution of every problem in the life of
the nation.


I call upon Indra, commander of the army,
defender and protector of the land, instant in action, for
defence in every battle of the nation.


May Indra, saviour, protector, defender and
promoter of life, destroyer of evil and router of the
enemy, lord of power and prosperity, bless us with all
that is good and hold it safe for us.


51. (Indra Devata, Garga Rshi)






[Names: Hund, Badhatam]
May Indra, lord of life and the world, gracious
saviour and protector, sole lord of his power and people,
master of universal wealth and knowledge, lord of
progress and advancement, we pray, be kind and give
us all the protection we need.


May the lord keep off all hate and enemies and
bless us with freedom from fear. We pray we may be
defenders and promoters of manly power and honour.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


52. (Indra Devata, Garga Rshi)






May Indra, lord of life and the world/Ruler of
the land, master of his own power and people, saviour
and protector, always and everyway keep off from us
whatever hate or emity is there far and near.


May we be with him in his yajna of life, in his
creative and constructive works, and abide by him
enjoying the favour of his love as well as judgement.


53. (Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)




tan ihi.

Come Indra, lord of might and majesty, by your
hold you back, let no hunter catch you with snares like
a bird. March on like an exceptional hero of the bow,
advance and take them (the enemies) on.


54. (Indra Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Evedindram]
The best, richest and most excellent people, well
settled in peace and prosperity, honour and worship with
prayers and good works Indra, lord of might and
majesty, ruler of the land and the world, hero of the
arms of steel. Honoured and worshipped thus, may he
hold and protect our land and nation blest with heroic
warriors and the wealth of cows, fields and pastures.


55. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)


[Names: Samiddho, Agnira, Duhe]
Agni, lighted, heated, burning and blazing as
universal and sovereign light of the world, inspired with
vitality, creates food and energy for the Lord's creation.


Sarasvati, voice of universal knowledge, holds
the pure nectar of the wealth and grandeur of the spirit
of life and, like a cow, yields it for the nourishment and
benefit of men and women of the world.


So must I create light and vitality. So should all
men and women do like the Ashvinis, powers of health
and nourishment.

56. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Madhva]
vahan.


In this world of beauty created with the sweetness
of soma distilled from the spirit of nature, both the
Ashvinis, powers of health, the physicians, and
Sarasvati, scholar of knowledge and the divine voice,
should bear the honour and glory of Indra, lord of the
world, and render it back to Indra,the ruler, in faith and


57. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)




[Names: Supe, Uttadt, Hast, Indrayendum, Indrayendu, Adhatamasvina]
Let Sarasvati, mother scholar of knowledge and
the Vedic voice, create the inspiring honour and joy of
life by the admirable yajna of the people in honour of
Indra, lord of yajna and the world.


Let the Ashvinis, experts of health and medicine,
create and bear the sweet medicinal panacea in honour
of the Lord.


58. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)



[Names: Ajuhvana, Idabhira]
The wife, woman of knowledge respected and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




praised all round, should hold in the home the best of
health-giving, rejuvenating and powerful foods for her
husband's body, mind and senses. The physicians and
nutricians should, with their knowledge and researches,
create special energising foods, elevating tonics and
blissful wealth of health.


59. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)






[Names: Asvina]
The scholars of science and medicine and women
of knowledge and motherly love, with all their research
and yajnic dedication, should create and bear for Indra
pure nectars of vitality distilled from the juices extracted
from all herbs for the cure of chronic and deadly
diseases.


60. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)






[Names: Uedtssa, Kavasyo, Indro]
As the humming bees go round wide spaces, as
wide spaces are lit up by the sun and moon, as Indra,
universal energy, invigorates the heaven and earth, so
does Sarasvati, mother of vision and knowledge, with
the Ashvinis, fiery energy of the sun and soothing beauty
of the moon, create all the means of joy and comfort for


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




61. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)






[Names: Eaki, Usasanaktamasvina, Sanjanane]
Day and night from early dawn to evening,
Ashvinis, scholars of knowledge and wisdom, with
Sarasvati, mother of joy and generosity, in words of
sweetness and persuasion, knowing well together life
and its values, invest Indra, the human spirit, with a
handsome form and noble faculties, powers and


62. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)





[Names: Asean, Aarts, Patam]
Men of knowledge and wisdom, teachers and


preachers, and mother Sarasvati protect and promote
us day and night.


Noble men of yajna and sacrifice, men of health
and medicine, working together in the world, save and
protect the human spirit, create and protect the spirit of


joy.

63. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)




[Names: Tisrastredha, Tivram, Somamindraya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Three]
and wisdom, and the mother-land, and two powers of
health and medicine, may distil and create the intense
and joyous nectar of soma extracted from all nature for
Indra, the human soul, in three ways, that is, for physical,
mental and spiritual nourishment.


64. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)


[Names: Yast, Brung, Indre, Sriyain]
sute.


The soma juice of health having been prepared
for us and Indra, the ruling powers, may the Ashvinis,
sanative powers of nature and the scholars, Sarasvati,
generous motherly women of knowledge, and Tvashta,
refiners and creators of beautiful forms bless us with
honey-sweets of life, honour, wealth and prosperity and
graceful forms of individual and social life appropriate
for everyone.


65. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)






[Names: Risa, Rtuthendro, Kiladlamasvibhyam]
Let Indra, the ruling power, the chief of the
forests, the great growing trees, the generous cow and
the enlightened mother, Sarasvati, with the advice and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




expertise of the Ashvinis, scholars of health care and
medication, create and produce powerful honey-tonics
from the flowing and fermenting juices according to
the seasons.


66. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)




[Names: Gobhirna, Somama, Samadhatain]
Ashvinis, expert powers of health and nutrition,
like milk produced and held by cows, create and hold
for the man of power and glory soma, honey-sweet
tonics, distilled from widely extracted juices mixed with
curds and barley prepared by the generous mother
Sarasvati with love and dedication.


67. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)






Let the Ashvinis, scholars of health and nature,
and Sarasvati, expert of science and the divine word,
with their intelligence and vision, distil and create from
the heavenly waters of space, modes of Prakriti, pure
vitality, exceptional drinks, wealth and prosperity,
sacred materials for yajna, and noble mind and senses
worthy of the man of honour and glory.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


68. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)


a fata act ueber Gat usc




[Names: Yama]
Indra, man of power and glory, whom the
Ashvinis, masters of health and vitality, and Sarasvati,
lady of knowledge and divine speech, together, created
and reared with holy foods and drinks, could surely
break through the wondrous vitalities of nature hidden
in the heavenly waters of space.


69. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)




[Names: Tamindram, Dadhana]
That wondrous vitality of soma which the
animals, both the Ashvinis, scholars of life sciences,
and Sarasvati, generous mother scholar of knowledge
and divine vision share and bear in common, you all
celebrate and intensify in yajna with powerful holy
offerings and yourselves shine bright in consequence.


70. (Indra-Savita-Varuna Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)


sascata.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Lord creator Savita, supreme lord Varuna, and
Bhaga, lord of glory, bless Indra, lord of power and
prosperity, with wealth and riches of mind and sense.
The same lord Indra of yajna and holy materials, saviour
and protector of the soul, we pray, may provide for the
yajamana.


71. (Indra-Savita-Varuna Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)




[Names: Adatta]
The supreme lord Varuna, creator Savita, and
saviour and protector of life Sutrama, collect energy,
prosperity and efficiency of intelligence from the spatial
currents of nature and bear it to bestow it on the generous
yajamana.


72. (Indra-Savita-Varuna Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)





[Names: Sriyam, Sutrama]
Just as Varuna, man of excellence, Savita,
creative man of inspiration, and Sutrama, protective man
of industry, create the social order, power, strength and
beauty, and hold and sustain it with honour and grace
and thereby attain the fruits of yajna. So should all men
and women try to achieve the earthly goal of their life
with yajna.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




73. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)






[Names: Havisendram]
The Ashvins, creative and curative powers of
nature, and the teacher and the preacher, and Sarasvati,
universal intelligence, and the woman of knowledge and
enlightenment advance Indra, prosperous man of yajna,
with wealth and power by cows and produce of the earth,
valour and prowess by horses, and moral and spiritual
strength by the holy foods of yajna fire.


74. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)




[Names: Ader, Gastar]
Indra, leader and path-maker possessed of the
wealth of knowledge and power, those two Ashvinis,
teacher and preacher, graceful of form, immaculate in
thought and conduct, foremost in virtue moving on the
paths of gold, and Sarasvati, generous mother
overflowing with yajnic materials, guide and protect us
on the paths of action.


75. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)
[Names: Garon, Arar]
a dae maketa eater uweuu




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




The two physicians of body and soul, teacher-
preacher and the doctor, the learned woman, giver of
total fulfilment, and the brilliant man of hundred-fold
genius, mighty opener of the treasures of good fortune,
may these create and promote all the power and
prosperity for Indra, the happy man.


76. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)


fiam: maig paaa ean




[Names: Vipipanah, Sarasvatindram, Sarasvatindra]
Come Ashvinis, both protector promoters of life,
come-Sarasvati, enlightened mothers of the land, come
all of you together, and, drinking deep at the nation's
fount of glory, defend her honour at every move in the
onward march to progress within the ceaseless flow of
divine evolution.


77. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)


aa: erat: meai ver maaro wow




Indra, lord of knowledge, power and grandeur,
now that you have drunk keep at the joyous fount of
life with your mighty deeds of grace worthy of poetic
songs of celebration, may Sarasvati, enlightened mother
of the land, recompense and consecrate you. May both
the Ashvinis, divine powers of health and intelligence,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




like father and mother, protect and promote you as a


78. (Agni Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)




[Names: Hurssieneras, Ages, Yasminnasvasa, Kilalape, Somaprsthaya, Somaprstha]
Man of knowledge, enlightened citizen, blessed
is the land where horses, strong and virile bulls and
bullocks, cows, sheep and other animals are planned,
produced, raised, trained, and deployed in service; where
Agni, brilliant leader and ruler and a revered man of
knowledge is protector and promoter of food and bearer
of the burdens of soma for the prosperity of the people;
there, in the land, noble citizen, create a good
disposition, high opinion and charming love for Agni.


79. (Agni Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)


aera galt were as aes egentes N




[Names: Ahavyagne, Vajasaniin]
Agni, rich libations of havi, fragrant materials as
ghee in the ladle and soma in the cup are offered into
your fiery mouth. We pray create for us and bless us
with plenty of food and victorious generosity, noble war-
like children, wealth and prosperity and resounding
honour of universal order.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




80. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Vidarbhi Rshi)




[Names: Vacendro]
Ashivinis, creative powers of nature and the
experts of health and nutrition, Sarasvati, divine
intelligence and the enlightened mother, and Indra, the
sun and the man of knowledge and power, these create
and strengthen for the living soul the eye with light,
virility with pranic energy, a sharp mind with senses,
and honourable disposition with vital energy and noble


81. (Ashvinau Devate, Gritsamada Rshi)



adit Set TAAL eg


[Names: Gomadu, Vartti]
Ashvinis, eminent teacher and sagely preacher
going by the path of truth, and Rudras, men of justice
and rectitude, go slow by the path of the cow, go fast by
the path of the horse, as is fair, but see you go by the
path which is beneficial to humanity and worthy of
acceptance and support.


82. (Ashvinau Devate, Gritsamada Rshi)


a Feat Ad saree quus |




[Names: Duhsamso]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Ashvinis, ruler and defender, showers of wealth
and shelter of the strong, let there be no man too strong
uncontrollable, far or near or in the middle, to terrorize
us or jeopardize the state.


83. (Ashvinau Devate, Gritsamada Rshi)
[Names: Dhisnya]
Ashvinis, both ruler and commander of the state,
with your intelligence, create, bear and manage the


wealth bright and beautiful as gold which may bring
honour and comfort to the nation.


84. (Sarasvati Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi)

[Names: Pavaka]
Sarasvati, mother spirit of divinity, mistress of
sacred knowledge and super-intelligence, purifier of the
mind and soul and creator of prosperity with divine
vision and knowledge of nature, may, we pray, grace
and intensify our yajna and bless us with purity and

85. (Sarasvati Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi)


aa dà aad neu




[Names: Codayitri]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Sarasvati inspires the voices of holy truth, she
awakens and brightens the noble intelligence of
and carry it on to high success.


86. (Sarasvati Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi)


aasan: ata w caufa eat i



[Names: Maho]
Sarasvati, Divine Intelligence, inspires the cosmic
mind with consciousness and vests the universal Word
with meaning and self-revelation. It illuminates the
mental faculties of the soul with divine light and matures
their potential for self-expression.


87. (Indra Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi)






[Names: Frau, Indrayahi, Anvibhistana]
Indra, lord of versatile forms and lights of
knowledge, ruler, president of the assembly, come and
take your share of the things rich in quality, prepared
by hand and cleansed by fingers.


88. (Indra Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi)






All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Indra, lord of power and majesty, refined by
intelligence, inspired by the wise, enlightened by the
divine voice, come and accept the reverence and
hospitality of the makers of soma.


89. (Indra Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi)






[Names: Sute]
Indra, lord of knowledge and power, come on
horse and chariot at your fastest and, in our yajnic
celebration, accept our homage of food and prayer.


90. (Ashvi-Sarasvati-Indra Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi)
afat ai Hep ener USAT |
sad: Gamat quer weedieiuneb vet gon




Ashvinis, scholars of nature and teachers of
humanity, with Sarasvati, vision and voice of divinity,
may drink deep of the honey-sweets of life.


Indra, lord of power and prosperity, saviour of
society, dispeller of darkness and breaker of the clouds,
may enjoy thenectar-sweets of peace andsomaic ecstasy.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1. (Varuna Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi)




[Names: Tvamavasyuracake]
Varuna, lord supreme and first of my choice and
love, I yearn for light and protection and I have come to
you: Listen to this prayer of mine to-day and be pleased
to bless me.


2.  (Varuna Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi)






Varuna, lord supreme, as the yajamana honours
you with holy offerings in worship, so do I come to you
singing songs of praise. Universally sung and celebrated,
pleased and gracious, enlighten us here. Let not our life
slip away through the fingers.


3.  (Agni-Varuna Devate, Vamadeva Rshi)




[Names: Great]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Yajistho]
Agni, sagely man of light, brilliant scholar and
teacher, most dedicated to yajna, surest guide to light
and life, purest purifier, save us from frivolity and
offence to Varuna, lord supreme of the world, and help
us keep away from all hate and anger.


4.  (Agni-Varuna Devate, Vamadeva Rshi)




[o






[Names: Varunaim, Varunai]
Agni, light of life, be our saviour and protector
at the closest with all the favour and felicity as in the
light of the dawn. Joyous and generous, lead us on to
Varuna, lord supreme of the world. Kind and
compassionate, come in response to our invocation and
bring us the gifts of your grace.


5.  (Adityah Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)






[Names: Tuviksatramajarantimurucim]
For our protection and sustenance, we invoke and
serve the great Aditi, creative power of the universe,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




mother of the observer of pious vows of discipline,
keeper of the universal laws of truth, mighty queen of
the earth, unageing, expansive, sweet shelter of all,
inviolable and the generator of noble values.


6.  (Aditi Devata, Gayaplata Rshi)




[Names: Sutramanam]
Let us, for the sake of success and salvation,
mount the boat with efficient ores, sailing across to
shelter, unbreakable, well-guided, divine, faultless and
free from leakage.


7. (Svargya Nau Devata, Gayaplata Rshi)
=I z] t l




[Names: Sunavamaruheyamasravantimanagasam]
Let me ride the boat to safety and prosperity —
the boat is auspicious, faultless, sinless, and fitted with


8.  (Mitra-Varunau Devate, Vishvamitra Rshi)






All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Mitra and Varuna, noble experts of our yajna of
science and technology, sprinkle and consecrate our
underground path ways with water, and shower our
paths in the sky with honey.


9. (Agni Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)






Mitra and Varuna, young people of science and
technology, listen to this prayer of mine. Extend your
arms for the progress of our life. Sprinkle our yajnic
paths with water and ghrta. Speak among the people of
this programme of ours.


10. (Ritvijah Devata, Atreya Rshi)




May the brilliant men of science and power of
arms, noble and generous, moving at a balanced speed,
be always good and auspicious to us in our projects. As
the sun breaks down the clouds, so, destroying the
serpents, wolves and demons of the society, may they
remove our wants and ailments and give us peace and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




11. (Vidvanso Devata, Atreya Rshi)


am "wed: food mada qum ala ufafiida-




[Names: Vajevaje]
Brilliant geniuses of the yajna of science and
technology, self-realized souls, visionaries of the truths
and laws of nature, defend and advance us in battle after
battle of our life and in all our economic projects.
Drinking deep of the honey-sweets of this programme,
purpose of life, retire by the paths of the divines.


12. (Agni Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)






[Names: Gayatri]
The yajna fire lighted and fed with holy fuel, the
blazing sun, the brilliant man of knowledge, gayatri
verses, the divine speech that sustains the body, mind
and soul, these bear the life and honour for us and the
yajamana.


13. (Vidvanso Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)


apura aasa uet i


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Tanunapacchucivratastanupasca, Usniha]
The protective powers of the body, the sustaining
powers, those who observe the holy vows of purity, the
creative intelligence of the universe, the ushnik verses,
the redeemer of the fallen, the chant of divinity, these
hold the secret of life and splendour for humanity.


14. (Vidvanso Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)






[Names: Shea, Idabhiragniridyah]
Agni, brilliant power of light and knowledge
worthy of homage and research with holy mantras, the
generous and divine Soma, the self-realized soul,
anushtup verses, the sustainers and protectors of the
five orders of humanity from the highest to the lowest,
and the scholar singer of the divine Word, these hold
the secrets of life and age with perfect mind and senses
for us.


15. (Vidvanso Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)






[Names: Subarhiragnih, Brhati]
Agni, divine light and knowledge omnipresent


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




in space, blazing and beautiful, immortal existence and
source of sustenance, and the sagely scholar, master of
his body, mind and soul, and the divine speech, these
hold the knowledge and the mind and senses for the


16. (Vidvanso Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)






[Names: Duro, Pankti]
In the world here, the grand directions of space,
divine revelations through the doors of nature, Brahma,
lord of knowledge, the sun, great source of light and
warmth, pankti verses, the sage in the fourth quarter of
his life's experience, and the generous cow, these bear
the life and the wealth of life for us.


17. (Vishvedeva Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)






[Names: Tristup]
In this world here, the early dawn and the evening
twilight with the grandeur and peace of their beauty,
the immortal powers of divinity in life and nature,
trishtup verses, the ox that patiently carries the burdens
on his back, these bear and sustain the life and senses
for us all.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




18. (Vishvedeva Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)




[Names: Jagati]
Two divine personalities dedicated to yajna, the
physicians, men of focussed mind working together (like
fire and wind in the sky), jagati verses, the bull and the
cow, these hold and bear the life and the desired wealth
of life for us.


19. (Vishvedeva Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)




[Names: Tisra, Virat]
In the world here, three, earth, Speech and
Intelligence, the winds, the humans and other living
forms, and virat verses, like the milch cow and the
bullock, sustain the life and the health and wealth of
life for us.


20. (Vishvedeva Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)






[Names: Dvipada]
Nature's speedy and wonderful power of catalysis
and formation, pranic energy, vital heat and light, givers


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of vigour and growth, the two-pada verses, like the virile
bull and the generous cow, bear the secrets of life as
well as the mind and senses.


21. (Vishvedeva Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)






[Names: Kakup]
The best of peace-giving trees and herbs and the
chief of the forests, the sun that creates and promotes
the grandeur of life, the Kakup verses, the barren cow
as well as the cow in season create for us the desired
objects of life.


22. (Vidvanso Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)



[Names: Aticchanda]
Varuna, lord supreme of the grand order of
humanity, with creative yajnic acts, creates the yajna of
unification and produces sanative drugs and waters for
health. The atichhanda verses, rishabha, the mighty
generous bull, and the supreme herbs provide the means
of life and prosperity beyond ordinary desires.


23. (Rudras Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)




[Names: Tama]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Vasantena, Rathantarena]
The brilliant and generous Vasus, celebrated and
worshipped with the Rathantara Sama, along with the
spring season and with their own splendour, create the
energies for the growth of life in the soul.


24. (Vishvedeva Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)
Weise gar wet: daa AAT:




[Names: Grismena, Brhata]
The generous Rudras worshipped with the
fifteenfold stoma of Brihat Sama, with the summer
season create strength and power with honour for the
life of the soul.


25. (Indra Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)






[Names: Berger, Varsabhirrtunaditya, Vairupena]
The Adityas, worshipped with seventeenfold
stoma in virupa verses, alongwith the rainy season,
create life and life-energies alongwith lustre and noble
people for enrichment of the soul for Indra.


26. (Vishvedeva Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Saradena, Vairajena]
The Ribhus, brilliant and generous artists
celebrated in the twenty-one fold stoma with the Viraja
verses, in unison with the autumn season, create for man
the means of health and age, comfort and beauty, and
vest it in the soul with all the grace and majesty.


27. (Vidvanso Devata, Atreya Rshi)






[Names: Hemantena, Balena]
The brilliant and generous Maruts, fiery and
stormy geniuses, celebrated in the twenty seven fold
stoma with shakvari verses, with the clouds, in unison
with the winter season, create the means of good life
and living and the courage and patience of mind and
vest it in the soul.


28. (Vishvedeva Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)






[Names: Saisirena, Satyena]
Immortal powers of exceptional brilliance and
generosity celebrated in thirty three fold stoma with
revati verses, in unison with the cool and dewy season,
create, with truth and full faith, health and age, means
of good living, and a powerful social order for the master


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


mind and vest all these in Indra, the mighty soul.








[Names: Ashvi, Svastyatreya, Hota, Sarasvatimajo]
Let the generous man perform yajna on the earth
and light the fire in the vedi with holy fuel in honour of
Agni, light of life, Ashvinis, sun and moon, Indra,
cosmic power, and Sarasvati, creative intelligence of
the universe.


Like the purple fire and grey smoke of the yajna,
sweet sanative fragrances would rise with the libations
of wheat and berries as shoots of grass. Like the
brilliance of fire would follow the lustre of life, wealth
and prosperity, milk and delicacies, soma distilled from
nature, nectar of waters and honey-sweets of the world.

O devotee of yajna, perform the sacrifice with
the richest offerings in faith.


30. (Ashvinis and Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)


Sd is inen


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






Let the man of yajna, preserver of good health,
perform yajna in honour of Sarasvati, creative intelligence
of the world, and Ashvinis, sanative and curative powers
of nature who, like a ram, protector of the flock, bear for
Indra, the soul, efficacious tonics, manly vigour and
splendour by the honeyed paths of health. Let him perform
the yajna with berries, superior barley and shoots of corn;
and then medicinal waters, juices, milk, soma from herbal
essences, butter and honey would follow.


O man of yajna, perform the yajna with the best
of ghrta and fragrant materials.


31. (Ashvinis and Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)


[Names: Stab]
adua N dedi: wa: ate: ufeat




Let the man of yajna perform yajna in honour of
the master challenger of want and wickedness like a hero
of people's celebration, and pray for medicinal cures with
stimulating tonics, and for heroic lustre of life with the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




offers of berries, barley and shoots of corn in all sincerity
of word and deed. And the generous scholar, Sarasvati,
mother of life and intelligence, the physician, like a
brilliant warrior of the chariot, would bless him. And
then the sanative blessings of earth and heaven, delicious
drinks and milk, soma distilled from herbal essences,
nectar-like waters and butter and honey would follow.


Man of yajna, perform the yajna with the best of
ghrta and fragrant offerings.


32. (Sarasvati and Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)






Inspired by grace, called by the sacred voice, let
the man of yajna perform the yajna in honour of Sarasvati,
divine intelligence, Indra, universal glory, and Ashvinis,
nature's powers of health and growth, with libations of
thus be strengthening, refining and promoting food,
medicines and life's beauty for the soul with the aid of
medicinal plants and cow’s milk. And then milk and
delicious drinks, soma distilled from herbal juices, ghee
and honey would follow.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Arise, faithful man of yajna, perform the yajna,
and move on to growth.


33. (Ashvins etc. Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)






[Names: Slat, Sire, Read, Pray, Wasi]
Let the man of yajna, the physician, perform the
yajna to explore the soft and deep skies. Let the two
faithful physicians of nature, the Ashvinis, the expert
physician specialist of the mare with the foal, the expert
physician specialist of the milch cow, and Sarasvati,
scholar of the divine voice, distil from nature divine
cures for Indra, the soul. And then milk and rejuvenating
drinks, soma from vital juices, ghee and honey would


Man of yajna, perform the yajna with the best
libations of ghrta.


34. (Ashvinis etc. Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






Let the man of yajna perform the yajna of
exploration, explore the highways of spaces, resounding
and expansive as if the doors of the spaces are opened
by Indra and Agni for him. Let him, like Indra, explore
earth and heaven both replete with energy like the
mother cow. Let Sarasvati, scholar and visionary of the
divine word, explore the sun and the moon, distil the
panacea and splendour of life as pure and powerful as
light itself for Indra, the soul. And then milk and
delicious drinks, soma distilled from nature, ghee and
honey would follow and flow upon the earth.


Man of yajna, perform the yajna with the best of
ghee in love and faith.


35. (Ashvinis etc. Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)






[Names: Arey]
Just as the beautiful dawn and twilight decorate
the day and night, just as the Ashvinis, sun and moon,
with Sarasvati, currents of universal energy, vest and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




brighten up lustre and vitality in Indra, the powerful
soul, so should the man of yajna, like an eagle (scholar),
one with the soma of the sky, bring and offer rice and
barley pudding in yajna with whole-hearted faith and
grace of mind. And then milk and delicious drinks, soma
distilled from nature, ghee and honey would follow and
flow on the earth.


Man of yajna, perform the yajna with the purest


36. (Ashvinis and others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)






[Names: Erie]
Just as the celestial priests and physicians, the
Ashvinis, fire and wind, perform the cosmic yajna of
evolution in honour of Indra, universal life energy, and
just as Sarasvati, divine creativity, or the enlightened
physician, active day and night, creates vital energy with
sanative waters and lead and distils the glory for Indra,
the soul, from nature, so should the man of yajna perform
the sacrifice to the lord supreme for the sake of the soul.
And then milk and delicious drinks, soma distilled from
nature, ghee and honey would follow and flow upon
the earth.


Man of yajna, perform the yajna with the best of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


ghee and fragrance.


37. (Ashvinis & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)


f&xuerdufserrar 4 and ara ateadt "gsz-la




[Names: Aadat]
Let the man of yajna perform the yajna, invoking
three divine powers, Ida, eternal speech and intelligence,
Sarasvati, fluent speech, and Bharati, specific intelligence,
and let him pray to the Ashvinis, sanative powers of
nature, for curative waters of health and longevity
(bheshajam). The three as well as the Ashvinis would
create threefold balance of health (with sattva, rajas and
tamas — intellect, energy and matter — and three humors
of vata, pitta, and cough), turn it into a golden form and
vest it into Indra, the soul. Thus do the Ashvinis as well
as Ida, Sarasvati and Bharati, with speech and energy,
create glory and prosperity from nature for the soul.


Man of yajna, perform the yajna with ghee, and
then milk and delicious drinks, soma distilled from juices,
nectars of water and ghee and honey would follow and
flow upon the earth.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




38. (Ashvinis and Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)






[Names: Reads, Aeee]
Let the man of yajna perform the yajna and invoke
the virile, powerful, noble maker and creator Tvashta,
destroyer of suffering, Indra, lord of power and majesty,
Ashvinis, nature's energy of wind and electricity,
Sarasvati, universal intelligence as well as the physician,
all creators and harbingers of health and growth. And
like an expert of health he would attain brilliance of health
as well as the drive and splendour for living, ardour of
movement as well as the lightning of the thunderbolt,
honour and reputation as tonics, medicaments with
curative waters, and holy food with beauty and grace.
And further, delicious drinks and milk, soma distilled as
the essence of herbal juices, butter and nectars of waters,
and honey would follow and flow upon the earth.


Man of yajna, perform the yajna with the best of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




39. (Ashvinis etc. Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)



Let the man of yajna offer the sacrifice in honour
of the lord of sun-rays, Vanaspati, giver of peace, hero
of a hundred noble acts of yajna and yet fearsome and
passionate, the ruler, majestic as a lion with the
thunderbolt. And Ashvinis, nature’s currents of energy
(and the president of the assembly and the commander
of the army) and Sarasvati, noble intelligence and speech
as well as the physician would create righteous anger
and dignity for Indra, the ruler. And then all round
prosperity, milk and drinks, soma, beauty and grace,
nectar-like waters and ghee and honey would follow
and flow upon the earth.


Man of yajna, perform the yajna with the best of
ghee for the ruler.


40. (Ashvinis etc. Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)


[Names: Herattael]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Somamindriyarn, Somamindriyar, Varunam, Agnirbhesajam, Agnirbhesaja]
Let the man of yajna perform the yajna in honour
of Agni in all sincerity. Let him in truth of word and
action offer ghee in a stream of libations. Let him offer
libations of fat and meda plant and roots in all sincerity
with reverence. Let him faithfully offer sanative and
palliative materials for the Ashvinis, protectors of
society. Let him work on the clouds and rain with the
light of the divine word of knowledge. Let him offer
sincere drive and action in the service of the mighty
Indra, the ruler. Let him offer money and materials for
the strength and perseverance of the human nation in
sincerity of word and action. Let him work on agni,
heat and fire with love and faith, taking energy as
saviour. Let him serve the lord of peace and joy in
service of his grace and majesty with full faith. Let him
serve Indra, lord of power, saviour and protector, Savita,
giver of life and light, Varuna, the supreme lord, and
the lord president of all physicians, with all might and
honesty. Let him make the oblations for the chief of
forests, vegetation and water, a darling friend and fellow
traveller, with love, as for a soothing medicine. And all
the powers of divinity, lovers, protectors and promoters
of food and nourishments, and Agni, lord of light and
energy, would bring around restorative and curative


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




medicaments, milk and delicious drinks, soma, the
nectar juice distilled from nature, butter and ghee and
honey. These would follow and flow upon the earth.


Man of yajna, make the yajna offers with the best
of ghee.


41. (Vidvanso Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)






[Names: Adal, Aate, Adar]
Let the man of yajna, specialized scholar,
organize yajna and conferences in the service of the
Ashvinis, farmers and cattle breeders. Let them grow
by the wool and breeding of goats and the development
of rich products such as fats, cream and cheese. May
the Ashvinis enjoy the yajna and benefit from it. Man
of yajna, carry on the programme with libations of
knowledge and investments.

Scholar of yajna, organize yajna in the service of
Sarasvati, spirit of learning. Let the knowledge of
farming and animal husbandry develop with wool and
breeding of sheep and the development of fine foods
such as cream, butter and ghee. May Sarasvati enjoy
and bless the yajna.

Man of yajna, carry on the endeavour with rich
libations of knowledge and investments.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Man of yajna, organize the yajna in the service
of Indra, leading power of farming and animal
husbandry. Let the breed of the bull and knowledge
about dairy farming grow with research on the bull, cows
and the development of dairy products such as fat, butter
and cheese. May Indra enjoy and bless the yajna.

Man of yajna, keep on the yajna with rich libations
of knowledge, work and investments.


42. (Hotradaya Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)








[Names: Sarasvatimindram, Sarasvatimindra, Sukrah, Sarasvatindrah]
Let the hota, man of yajna, enlightened citizen,
perform the yajna of development in honour of the
Ashvinis, teachers, preachers and intellectuals, for
Sarasvati, voice and motherhood of the nation, in the
service of Indra, protective and ruling powers of the
land. And here are these soma juices, leaders of rare
quality, distilled, that is, selected, elected, prepared and
perfected from amongst the people. Joyous they are as


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




if with the wealth of goats, sheep, bulls and cows.
Honoured and consecrated they are with shoots of
grasses, ears of corn and roasted rice as with children.
Inspired they are, seasoned and purified with holy food
and nectar-drinks of life. And up-front they are, on their
mark, ready for self-sacrifice in the service of humanity.


Exhort them, all of you, support them with love
and loyalty, and may you and the Ashvinis, Sarasvati
and the protector Indra make the best of their service
and sacrifice. Replete they are with honey-mead,
overflowing, streaming for anyone to taste. May all
drink of the soothing and enlightening sweets, may all
rejoice and prosper with the wealth of life.


Relent not, man of yajna, carry on with the offers
of libations.


43. (Hotradaya Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)


[Names: Tessa]
qat giaet weg

[Names: Satarudriyanamagnisvattanam]
vasananam par$vatah $ronitah Sitamata-


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Let the man of yajna perform the yajna in honour
of Ashvinis, prana and apana powers of nature and the
physicians with the milk and ghee of the goat. Let the
Ashvinis partake of the holy food. Let them eat and
raise the pranic vitality from the middle part of the body,
for sure, before the anti-system forces of ailments take
hold of the body and make their home there. And may
the Ashvinis delight in protecting and promoting the
subtle vitality of the pranas which are ever active in the
digestion of food, first in assimilating the assimilable
and eliminating the waste, exhilarating, creating a
hundred currents of energy, living heat of the system,
and essential strength of the body free from obesity.
May the Ashvinis protect and promote the vitality
expressive from the sides, the back, hyperactive vital
parts, weaker and delicate parts, in short, from every
vital part of the body system.


Man of yajna, offer the holy food in the yajna.


44. (Vidvanso Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)




[Names: Sora, Rimase]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






Let the man of yajna perform the yajna in honour
of Sarasvati, divine voice and mother power of
enlightenment, with the holy food of sheep's milk and
ghee. May Sarasvati partake of the holy food offered in
yajna and raise the pranic vitality from the middle of
body before the anti-system forces of ailments take hold
of the body and make their home there. And may mother
Sarasvati delight in protecting and promoting the subtle
vitality of the pranas which are ever active in the
digestion of food, first in assimilating the assimilable
and throwing out the waste, exhilarating, creating a
hundred forms of energy, vital fire of the system,
essential strength of the body free from obesity. May
Sarasvati protect and promote the vitality expressive
and perceptible from the sides, the back, hyperactive
vital parts, weaker and delicate parts, in short, from
every vital part of the body system.


Man of yajna, offer the holy food of yajna to the


45. (Yajamana-Yajnics Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)




[Names: Herdt, Hass, Hatua, Flagdart]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Sronitah]
Let the man of yajna perform the yajna in honour
of Indra, wonder and glory of the power of nature and
the nation, with the most powerful holy foods of the
strength of the bull and the rishabha plant. May Indra
partake of the food and raise the pranic vitality of the
body-system from the middle of the body, for sure,
before the anti-system forces of ailments take hold of
the body and make their home there. And may Indra
delight in protecting and promoting the subtle vitality
of the pranas which are ever active in the digestion of
food, first in assimilating the assimilable and eliminating
the waste, exhilarating, creating a hundred forms of
energy, vital fire of the system, and essential strength
of the body free from obesity. May Indra protect and
promote the vitality expressed and perceptible from the
sides, the back, hyperactive parts, weaker and delicate
parts, in short, from every vital part of the body system.


Man of yajna, offer the holy food of yajna for


46. (Ashvinis etc. Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)


faa | aRar efad: Aa etA aa


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Gerauregurib, Yatrasvino, Schagasya]
Let the man of yajna perform the yajna in honour
of the lord of forests for love of the forests, herbs and
trees. Let him, with the finest, strongest and most
inviolable protective zone fence the forest: which is the
favourite haunt of the Ashvinis and goats and home of

which is lovely resort of Sarasvati and the sheep
and the source of holy food;


which is the awful seat of Indra and the bull and
the giver of sacred food;


where abound the favourite resorts of Agni, Soma,
the protector Indra, Savita and Varuna;


where the grand old banyan grows and finds his
food;


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




where the noble lovers of divinity seek their
nectar in their holy places;


where the lord of yajna, Agni, loves to shine and
act.


And the brilliant man of yajna out there, strongest
and most enthusiastic of his mission, may offer songs
of inauguration and songs of valediction in his yajna of
protection and extension of the forests and these resorts
and thereby serve the holy lord of nature and partake of
the yajnic gifts.


Man of yajna, perform the yajna, don't relent.


47. (Ashvinis etc. Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)


fuer arate afad: furem eea aeoret




[Names: Heas, Asea, Vidar]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






Let the man of yajna perform yajna in honour of
Agni, lord of knowledge and energy, which leads energy
projects to completion and success.


It is Agni which leads to the favourite haunts of
the Ashvinis, pranic energies, and the goats and holy


It leads to the favourite haunts of Sarasvati,
wisdom, and the sheep and holy foods.


It leads to the favourite resorts of Indra (majesty),
and the bull (power) and holy foods.


It leads to the favourite haunts of Agni (energy),
to the favourite haunts of Soma (peace and prosperity),
to the favourite haunts of Indra, the protector, to the
favourite haunts of Savita (inspiration), to the favourite
haunts of Varuna (water), to the favourite haunts of the
trees and their fruits, to the favourite places of the noble
people of piety and protection of the sacred resources,
it leads to the favourite homes of Agni, lord of cosmic
yajna, it leads to its own grandeur, it creates the means
of its own yajnic sacrifice and all the food and energy
for life.


May the glorious Agni, omniscient light of life,
lead all projects of yajna to success.


Man of yajna, keep on with the yajna, don’t relent.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




48. (Sarasvati & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)


aA sel




Sarasvati, lady of light and knowledge, offers the
seat of honour on the yajna vedi to Indra, noble and
brilliant master of the home. The Ashvinis, powers of
health and wealth, create the light of the eyes as well as
the lustre and splendour of life and vest these in Indra.
For the blessed man the powers of divinity create wealth
with all the resources of nature and bestow it on the
yajnic man of prosperity.


Man of yajna, keep on with the yajna.


49. (Ashvinis and Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)




[Names: Frases, Devirdvaro]
The doors of divinity, the Ashvinis, nature's
powers of health, the physicians, and Sarasvati,
enlightened woman, open the door, create breath in the
nose, vigour and virility, and vest it in Indra, man of
sacrifice and power. For the blessed man, the powers
of divinity create wealth and bestow it on him to enjoy


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Man of yajna, keep on with the life of sacrifice
and enlightenment.


50. (Ashvinis and Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)


[Names: Assata]
IKON




[Names: Devi, Usasavasvina, Balam]
The divine energy of the early dawn and the
evening twilight, the protective Ashvinis, health powers
of sunlight and the moon-rays, and Sarasvati,
enlightened mother spirit of life, with the morning-
evening cycle of time, bless Indra, man of yajna with
strength, noble speech in the mouth as also the lustre of
life for glory. Thus, to the blessed man come all the
wealths of existence for the enjoyment of life.


Man of yajna, live on with the spirit of sacrifice
and enlightenment. Relent not ever.


51. (Ashvinis & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)




yaja.

The adorable vitality of divine nature, Sarasvati,

motherly spirit of enlightenment, and the Ashvinis, wind

and electric energy, advance Indra, man of power and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




lustre, in life by the day-night fortnightly cycle of time
through earth and heaven. They bless him with the sense
of hearing in the ears and honour and splendour of life.
Thus to the blessed man of yajna come the wealths of
existence for the enjoyment of life.


Blessed man, keep on with yajna, never relent,
in life.


52. (Ashvinis etc. Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)






The beautiful morning and the peaceful evening,
generous and blissful, both celebrated with powerful
oblations, the Ashvinis, powers of health and
enlightenment, the physicians, and Sarasvati, motherly
spirit of life, save and protect the man of yajna and bless
him with purity of vigour and golden light of the soul
in the heart. Thus do they bless Indra fortunate man of
yajna with the wealth and splendour of the world and
bring him to perfection in life.


Man of devotion, live on with the spirit of yajna.


53. (Ashvinis & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)


were card ast dad


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Vasatkaraih]
Noble and brilliant powers of divinity, priests of
the noble and generous people, the Ashvinis, learned
scholars, the physicians, and Sarasvati, the voice of
divinity, with Vashatkara hymns by the priests of yajna,
vest Indra, lustrous man of yajna, with divine light and
lightning energy in the heart as well as intelligence in
the mind. Thus do they bring wealth of the world and
splendour of life to the man of yajna and perfect him in
his desire and ambition.


Man of yajna, keep up the sacrifice for perfection
in life.


54. (Ashvinis & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)








[Names: Devistisrastisro, Susan]
Three brilliant and divine powers, Ida, divine
speech, Sarasvati, divine universal intelligence, and
Bharati, specific energies of nature in various forms,
and these three, further, alongwith the Ashvinis,
complementary currents of universal energy, hold
strength and splendour for the soul and infuse it into
the middle of the body-system by the navel for the soul's


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




May all the divine powers come and make the
energy and wealth of the world flow into the blessed
man of yajna.


Blessed man, perform the yajna, never relent.


55. (Ashvinis & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)






The brilliant Indra universally sung and
celebrated, residing in the three worlds of heaven, earth
and the sky, wondrous warrior of the chariot, is reached
through Sarasvati, divine speech and the Ashvinis,
circuitous powers of nature. Tvashta, divine maker of
forms, creates the vital creative energy as well as the
immortal form, senses and the sense organs for Indra
and vests these in him. May Tvashta, Sarasvati and the
Ashvinis create the wealth of the world for Indra, blessed
man of honour and power, and vest the same in him.


Man of yajna, perform the yajna in honour of the
divinities.


56. (Ashvinis & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)


E NUKEM


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




yaja.


The lord of light, guardian of nature, self-
refulgent, of golden hue, generous and fruitful, matures
the honey sweets of fruits and vegetables for Indra, the
soul, with Sarasvati, constant flow of energy, the rays
of light, and the Ashvinis, heat and water. And thus,
the sun, the tree, and the forest chief create and hold for
us lustre of life as well as speed of action, and passion
as much as vitality of life. May all the wealth and power
of body and mind come to the man who loves them


Man of yajna, move on with the creative life of
sacrifice.


57. (Ashvinis & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)






Indra, noble soul, soft as wool and blessed is your
seat in the yajna covered with watery grasses and the
light of heaven spread by Sarasvati, spirit divine, and
the Ashvinis, currents of energy. May your yajnic seat
and home and the lights of heaven create holy and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




splendid passion of the mind for you for the sake of
honour and glory. May all the wealth of the world come
to the man of sacred desire and work through yajna.


Man of yajna, carry on the endeavour, neglect
not the sacrifice.


58. (Ashvinis & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)


[Names: Rete, Raer]
aasar: Resana erat eri fetes




For the man of yajnic endeavour in search of
honour and success in the world, the Divine Agni, lord
of light and life, generous giver of all round success,
does universal yajna with the divinities of nature such
as the earth in appropriate manner. The Ashvinis, wind
and electric energy, both high-priests of nature, act in
yajna with Indra, the sun. With the energy of universal
sound, they work with Sarasvati, the dynamics of nature.
They work on agni, fire, and soma, the moon, both
powers of universal success. Indra, lord protector of
the world, Savita, the sun, Varuna, universal waters, the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




physician, the generous and all-loved tree, the dear
powers of nature which feed on the food of yajna, and
all-loved vital heat—all these work with the universal
fire for the creation of wealth and energy.


Thus any versatile performer of yajna (individual,
social and natural) has the secret of success and creates
honour, glory, energy and fame for the dedicated souls.


May all the powers of yajna create and carry the
wealth of the world for the man of yajna.


Man of yajna, carry on with the sacrifice.


59. (Agnyadayo Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)






[Names: Aarah, Agnimadya, Agnimad]
Let the yajamana to-day, cooking the yajna
offerings and preparing the oblations, select Agni as
the high-priest and as the deity. The devotees rear and
bind the goat for milk and butter for the Ashvinis, prana
and apana energy, sheep for Sarasvati, universal
intelligence, and the bull for Indra, honour and lustre,
and they extract and distil the exhilarating soma drink
for the Ashvins, Sarasvati and the protector Indra, the
ruler.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




60. (Ashvinis & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)






[Names: Hussars, Supastha]
Soothing and joyous is the yajna post to day as a
mark of valediction. For the Ashvinis, prana and apana
energy, milk of the goat! For Sarasvati, speech and
intelligence, milk of the sheep! For Indra, honour and
grandeur in life, let us rejoice with the strength and
vigour of the bull! Let all enjoy the fine foods cooked
with cream and butter and let all grow strong on
specially seasoned foods and delicacies. May the
Ashvinis, teachers, intellectuals and physicians,
Sarasvati, enlightened woman, and Indra, protector and
ruler and leader, all celebrate with the exciting drink of
soma.


61. (Rishis & Others Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)


[Names: Gant]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Tvamadya]
O Rishi, seer blest, child of the Rishis and the
tradition of the Rishis: of the many noble sages
assembled here to-day, this yajamana opts for you,
saying: “This sage among the generous and brilliant ones
would gain for us the consecrated shower of wealth and
vision."

Noble sage, give unto us of those gifts which the


divinities have granted, pray for us, raise us and keep
up the tradition.


Hota, man of yajna, you are the man inspired and
sent to pronounce the sacred Word and sing the hymns
of divinity. Pray, speak the Word, sing the hymns of


ZAPAS: N


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1.  (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Atsa]
Light of life, you are the power and glory of the
world, the passion and purity of life, and the spirit and
immortality of existence. Guardian and protector of life,
protect and promote the life for me. In the world of
Lord Savita's creation, I dedicate myself to you with
nature's currents of energy and the solar gifts of health
and vitality.


2.  (Vidvanso Devata, Yajnapurusha Rshi)






[Names: Rasha, Imamagrbhnan]
The seers of the earliest time of creation in their
communion receive and realise the chain of cause and
effect from the first vibration of the original cause
(Ritam) to the last and closing silence. And the same,
in this world of ours, has become the whispering voice
of the whole truth of existence to us (in the Veda).


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




3. (Agni Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Tras, Abhidha]
You are the preceptor and teacher. You are the
realized soul. You are the guide. You are the support
and preserver of the knowledge and the law. Yajamana,
initiated and consecrated by the sacred acts of yajna,
take up, research and realize Agni, omnipresent vitality
of the world, expansive and infinite.


4.  (Vishvedeva Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Svaga]
Man of knowledge, scholar of divinity and the
in the service of the noblest powers of the world and the
ruler-guardian of the people.


I shall control powerful energy like a horse for the
noblest powers and the ruler-guardian of the people. I
shall thereby realise the mission of my life.

Bind and control energy for the divinities and the


ruler-guardian and thereby realise the mission of your
life.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




5. (Indra & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Warde, Wreaths, Prajapataye]
Dedicated as you are, scholar, to Prajapati, I
consecrate you. Dedicated to Indra and Agni, the soul
and energy, I consecrate you. Dedicated to Vayu, wind
energy, I consecrate you. Dedicated to divinities of the
world, I consecrate you. Dedicated to all nobilities, I
consecrate you. Who ever does violence to the horse-
power, energy and the nation, the supreme lord Varuna
punishes him, the best man too takes him on. The killer
is worse than the worst man. He is worse than a dog.


6. (Agni etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Hata, Gedy]
were fara tare aema vemel usi




All the best action and dedication for Agni,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




knowledge, light and fire energy; all the best action and
commitment for Soma, health and medication; all the best
investment and action for the Apah, development of water
resources; all the best action and dedication for Savita,
solar energy; all the best action and dedication for Vayu,
wind energy; all the best action and dedication to Vishnu,
universal electric energy; all the best action and dedication
for Indra, development of the self; all the best action and
care for Brihaspati, guardian of the elderly; all the best
for Mitra, spirit of friendship and cooperation; all the
best action and care for Varuna, best personalities.


7. (Prana etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Redan, Caled, Caleta]
Taal AA Carat waters Carat Were Carat AAT




[Names: Arfer, Cada, Cara, Wied, Taal, Hinkaraya]
Reverence to the singer of Samans, reverence to
him who has done the singing, reverence to the loud
challenger, reverence to the soft singer, reverence to


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the man of accomplishment, reverence to the specialist,
value for fragrance, welcome to the fragrant, reverence
to the securely seated, reverence to the close-by friends
and yogis in posture, thanks for what is well-given,
reverence for the one on the move, reverence for the
sitting, reverence for the sleeping, care for the one in
deep sleep, welcome to the waking one, love for the
humming one, rest for the yawning one, reverence for
the shining, reverence for the strong and well-built,
reverence for the close neighbours, reverence for the
knowledgeable, reverence for the scholars of special
knowledge. (Those who welcome, respect and reverence
the others are fortunate and blessed.)


8.  (Prayatnavanto Jeevadayo Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Shara, Prtvurra]
varet ara tater acta caret fear ara carer
oda eet para caret eu




[Names: Yate, Susrusamanaya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




All hail and reverence for the man of endeavour,
running, advancing, flying high, acting promptly, and for
the man who has achieved instant success and
accomplishment. Reverence to the man who is of stable
mind, of high values, speed and strength. Reverence to
the man who is expansive, and has achieved
advancement and peace. Reverence for the agitative and
sympathy for the shaken. Welcome and reverence for
the man who wants to listen and is listening, for the
man who is watching, who is watched, and who is
watched and guarded for security reasons. Reverence
for the yogi with closed eyes. Reverence for any one
who eats and drinks and who removes the waste of the
system. Reverence to the man who is doing the job and
to the one who has done and calls it a day.


(Those who honour the men of action and
accomplishment find recognition peace and happiness.)


9. (Savita Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)


fat at 4+: weteata usu




Let us concentrate and meditate on the glory and
blazing splendour of Lord Savita, worthy of our choice
and worship, who may, we pray, inspire and enlighten
our mind and soul.


10. (Savita Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)


Rivara aaa à


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Hiranyapanimutaye]
For the sake of inspiration and self-protection, I
invoke and worship Lord Savita, creator and sustainer
who wields the glorious lights of the world. Lord of light
and omniscience, He is the giver of light and knowledge,
and He is the ultimate goal and haven of all.


11. (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Meas, Sumatim]
We worship and pray for the great truth-bearing
divine wisdom of the brilliant and blazing omniscient
Lord Savita, creator and sustainer of the world. We pray,
meditate and internalize.


12. (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Sustutim]
devaya mativide.


For the seeker of light and lover of wisdom, we
pray for the generous gift of the grace of Lord Savita
who is the creator of the world and promoter of noble
intelligence and wisdom for mankind.


13. (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


ues adi ue díeanud gu i


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Asavam]
I invoke, praise, worship and meditate upon the
generous and glorious Savita, Lord creator and fatherly
guardian of the living creatures for the attainment of
sagely company, noble virtues and divine grace.


14. (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


«ere afaqiaatad farada à




[Names: Dhiya]
With all our intelligence we pray for the great and
generous lord Savita's omniscience and with our mind
and soul meditate upon His glorious and universal
grandeur of divinity.


15. (Agni Devata, Sutambhara Rshi)




[Names: Havya]
Man of yajna lighting the immortal Agni, divine
fire in the vedi with holy fuel, feed it with holy foods
and fragrances, and expand it with holy chants of hymns,
so that it may create and carry among the divinities of
nature such as the air and the sky rich materials of the
wealth of life for the devotees.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




16. (Agni Devata, Prajapati Rshi)





[Names: Agnirdhiya, Agnirdhi]
That Agni, brilliant, immortal, radiant power,

carrier and begetter of holy foods and wealths of life


for nature and humanity is attained through intelligent
and dedicated action.


17. (Agni Devata, Vishvarupa Rshi)






Fire is the fastest catalytic agent of nature. It is
the creator and carrier of the holy foods for life. I light
and place the fire up front in the Vedi and pray that it
may bring us the blessings of divinity in this life.


18. (Pavamana Devata, Arunatra sadasyu Rshi)




[Names: Ajyjano, Sakmana, Gojiraya]
Agni, universal energy, pure and purifying, faster
and hold the sun and, as is mission of the cow and the
earth, with your own actions, bear the waters of
sustenance for existence.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




19. (Agni Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




— L— e






[Names: Repite, Vibhurmatra, Yayurnama]
Agni, universal energy of life and the world, you
are immence and abundant as mother like the earth, pre-
eminent and super-guardian as father like the sky. You
attain to everything; self-impelled you impel everything;
you are constant ever, and ever on the move; you are
ever at peace and ever fresh; you reach everywhere;
you are the way to love and honour; you are fast and
impetuous; you are generous like a shower; kind,
reaching everyone's heart. Surely, you are the way to
final beatitude and worthy of meditation. Ever new as
reborn, you make the time fly with the motion of the
stars. Come and be with us here.


Guardians of the earth in all directions, serve and
save this consecrated power for the noble people and the
environment in the interest of national growth. Here is
peace and pleasure, let it stay while you enjoy. Here is
stability and constancy. Here is self-dependence and self-
realisation.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




20. (Prajapati and Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Haney]
mea wat vereríacr qure carer univer




[Names: Ulan, Later, Kaya, Pururupaya, Pururupa]
Homage in honest thought, word and deed: to
Prajapati, lord giver of peace and comfort, who Himself
is peace and joy in the essence, who is the exceptional
Being among the infinite beings in existence; homage to
the scholar of wider learning; to the lord present in the
mind; to the lord who knows the depths of the
unconscious; to the mother earth; to the divine speech;
to the kind and loving mother; to the streams and rivers;
to the fluent speech that purifies the mind; to the universal
speech in the universal mind; to the wind that sustains
life; to the energy that freshens and restores life; to the
universal teacher of humanity; to the lord creator and
giver of light; to the lord giver of life and speed across


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




life; to the lord maker of many forms; to the lord
omnipresent, protector of existence, and present in the
depths of intelligence and in the unconscious.


21. (Vidvan Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi)






Let all mankind, with truth of thought, word and
action, dedicate themselves to the love and friendship
of the lord and light of existence. Let them all try for


the wealth of the world and choose wealth and honour
for the sake of growth and advancement in life.


22. (Brahmanas & Others/Rashtra Devata, Prajapati Rshi)





[Names: Welt]
Lord Supreme of the world, in this Rashtra


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




(Republic) of ours, let the Brahmanas rise as a
community of brilliant men of divinity and illustrious
scholars of universal knowledge. Let the Kshatriyas rise
as a force of heroic warriors of the chariot and routers
of the enemy with unfailing arrows. May the cows be
fertile and abundant in milk, the oxen, carriers of heavy
load, the coursers, swift, the women, kind and generous;
and may the children (people) of this yajamana, the ruler,
be brave and fearless, victorious riders of the chariot,
and youthful and civilized members of the council.


May the clouds rain in showers for us according
to the need of the seasons. May the herbs and trees
mature and ripen with abundant fruit. And may this land
be securely blest with a ceaseless cycle of growth and
protection of happiness and prosperity.


23. (Prana energy Devata, Prajapati Rshi)





For prana and apana (breath in and out), yoga
exercise; for vyana, systemic energy of the whole body,
expert counselling; for the eye, training in direct
observation and proof; for the ear, word of the wise;
for the speech (tongue), love of truth; for the mind,
thought and meditation.


(This is the way to growth and culture.)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




24. (Dishah, Directions Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Pracyai]
Pursue the science of Astronomy and the literature
on the subject in right earnest for the knowledge of: the
eastern direction from the horizon to the near-most point;
the south-eastern direction from the farthest to the nearest
point; the south direction from the farthest to the nearest
point; the south-western direction from the farthest to
the nearest point; the western direction from the farthest
to the nearest point; the north western direction from the
farthest to the nearest point; the north direction from the
farthest to the nearest point; the north eastern direction
from the farthest to the nearest point; the direction above
from the highest to the lowest point; and the direction
below from the farthest to the nearest point (where you
are).


25. (Jala etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)
[Names: Erebi]
"Tuan caret aera carat ea


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




For sacrificial waters, filtering and cleansing; for
selected and controlled waters, watchful management;
for fresh and spring waters, proper protection; for
standing waters, safety from pollution and proper
treatment with chemicals; for streaming waters, safety
from waste discharge; for the rushing waters, control
and management; for the well-waters, flow out and
cleaning; for cooking and yajna waters, cleaning and
sanctification; for conducted as well as rain waters,
security and proper control; for space waters, research
and environment control; for the oceans, knowledge of
tides and preservation of nature; for the surging and
fluctuating waters, proper management and grid-control.
This is the honest action in truth and dedication.


26. (Vata, winds etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Fara, Talat, Arena]
NEU




[Names: Vataya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Perform yajna for the purification, treatment and
management of the air and wind, smoke and smog, the
mist, the rainy cloud, the lightning cloud, the thundering
cloud, the hailing cloud, the raining cloud, the pouring
cloud, the bursting cloud, the vapour-holding cloud, the
held up vapours, the refreshing rain, the rain that irrigates,
the rain that is full and flourishing, the roaring cloud, and
the frost and freezing rain.


27. (Agnietc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


amà vata uiuis emeta erat ufered



Let us perform yajna for the heat and vitality of
life, for the peace and waters of life, for the energy and
power of the soul, for the earth, the middle regions of
the sky, and heaven and the regions of light, for the
directions of space, for the interdirections, and for the
upper and lower directions of space.


28. (Nakshatra, etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


HII: taal ares: tae seas: aAA:
[Names: Pacers]
vara Gata xerel na: carer adea: et
aqwa: taal ya: carat VIRI: ‘rarer


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Naksatrebhyah, Sakhabhyah]
Let us perform yajna and do our best for the stars
and planets and their part in nature, the day-night cycle,
the fortnights, the months, the seasons and their part in
nature, the year, the heaven and earth, the moon, the
sun, the rays of light, the Vasu sustainers of life, the
Rudra sustainers of pranic energy, the solar zodiacs of
time, the winds, all the divine powers of nature, the roots,
the branches, the herbs and trees, the flowers, fruits and


29. (Earth etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)





[Names: Prthivyai]
Let us perform yajna for the earth, the middle


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




regions of the sky, the heaven of light, the sun, the moon,
the stars, the waters, the medicinal plants, the trees, all
those that swim and float, those that move and don’t move
and all those that creep.


30. (Vasus etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


arzt naon


[Names: Asave]
Let us perform yajna in homage to the energy of
prana, the soul residing in the body, the universal energy,
the lord giver of light, the electric energy that provides
for the beauty of existence, the air that sustains the forms
of life in nature, the heat energy that is always close at
hand, the ruler president of the human community, the
powers of defence, whatever glides or creeps silently,
the moon and beauty of life, the light, the darkness, and
the lord of the day, the sun.


31. (Masah months Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Vows, Laval, Caretta, Laat]
Exec use


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Madhave]
Let us perform yajna for the service and enrichment
of the romantic spring month of Chaitra, the charming
month of Vaishakha, the cleansing month of Jyeshtha,
the brilliant and purifying month of Ashadha, the generous
and showering month of Shravana, the misty and foggy
month of Bhadrapada, the food-producing month of
Ashvina, the feeding and energising month of Kartika,
the strengthening and vigorous month of Marga-Shirsha,
the most powerful endurable Pausha, the austere month
of Magha, the month of observance of vows and
austerities, Phalguna, and the intercalary month which is
the lord over sin and perplexity.


32. (Vaja-food etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Tutar]
Let us perform yajna for the sake of food and
energy, procreation, children and family, intelligence
and action, happiness, intellect and purity of thought,
universal vitality, the ultimate lord of existence, the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




ultimate reduction of existence which is prakriti, the
transcendent lord of creation, Brahma, and and the father
and guardian of the living beings, Prajapati.


33. (Life and vitality Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Vaddiadt, Heads]
May life grow by yajna and be dedicated, may
prana energy grow by yajna and be dedicated, may apana
energy grow by yajna and be dedicated, may vyana
energy grow by yajna and be dedicated, may udana
energy grow by yajna and be dedicated, may the ear
and hearing grow by yajna and be dedicated, may the
speech and all other senses of volition grow by yajna


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and be dedicated, may the mind grow by yajna and yoga
and be dedicated, may the soul grow by yajna and yoga
and be dedicated to the lord of life and existence, may
the knowledge of Veda and the man of knowledge grow
by yajna and meditation and be dedicated, may the light
of knowledge and the spirit grow by yajna and be
dedicated to divine service, may the heavenly joy of
the soul grow by yajna and be dedicated to the Divine,
may the ultimate question and desire of the soul be
answered and fulfilled by yajna and divine grace and
be surrendered to the Divine. May the yajna of life and
age grow to completion by constant yajna and
meditation and terminate in the interminable and infinite
divine super-existence, which is the last oblation of


34. (Yajna Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


wem vemel venie vemel 113411




[Names: Ekasmai, Sataya]
By yajna in truth of thought, word and deed,
homage and surrender to the One, Supreme Soul of the
universe. Homage to the two, Purusha, the supreme spirit,
and Prakriti, one the efficient cause and the other the
material cause of the world. Homage to the hundred (years
of life and countless things). Homage to the hundred
(years of life) and the one beyond. Homage to the fire,
the reckoning and the dawn. Homage to Svarga, the joy
of the next world.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


726






(Parameshvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






The Great Golden Egg, the mighty original womb


of the lights of the world such as the sun and moon,
exists by Himself before the world comes into existence.
He is the sole lord manifest, preserver, creator and
guardian of the world of forms. He holds this earth and
Heaven, and to that lord of bliss and majesty we offer
our homage and worship with the surrender of our mind
and soul.


d.


(Parameshvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Haya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Lord of this great universe, through the discipline
of yoga you are realized and consecrated in the heart
and soul, and loved in faith for the sake of Prajapati,
protector and guardian of the people. I accept and
surrender to you.


This Prakriti and the world of forms is your seat
of immanence. The sun is the manifestation of your
grandeur. The glory of yours which manifests in the
day and in the year, the glory which manifests in the air
and in the sky, the glory which manifests in the sun and
in heaven, to that glory and to you we offer our homage
and worship for the sake of Prajapati, guardian of the
people, and the devas, noble and generous powers of
nature and humanity.


3. (Parameshvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Hedas]
faràn nau




The sole one lord who, with His own might, creates
and rules over the world of those who breathe and see,
the lord who rules over men and animals, to that sovereign
lord of bliss and majesty we offer our homage and
worship with our heart and soul.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




4.  (Parameshvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


sammis ward cum we were a



[Names: Tabu]
Lord of the universe, seated and consecrated you
are in the heart. Loved and worshipped you are in faith.
I surrender to you for the sake of Prajapati, protector
and guardian of the people.


This world is your space of immanence and
omnipotence. The moon is the symbol of your glory.
The grandeur of yours which manifests in the night and
in the year, the generosity of yours which manifests in
the earth and in the universal fire vitality, the glory of
yours which manifests in the stars and in the moon, to
that glory of yours and to you we offer our homage and
worship for the sake of Prajapati and the noble and
brilliant powers of nature and humanity.


5.  (Parameshvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Yunjanti, Rocante]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Those who join their mind and soul to the great
and glorious presence of God vibrating like electric
energy in the moving and non-moving forms of
existence, shine like the sunlight in heaven.


6. (Surya Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Yufijantyasya, Sona]
Just as they yoke to the chariot two strong,
handsome, reddish horses worthy of ride by men and
loved by all, so do the yogis join their senses, mind and
soul to Ishvara, lord and light of the world.


(So do the scientists use the carrier currents of
solar and electric energy, i.e., the energy of Surya/sun
and Indra/electricity, in the service of humanity for the


7. (Indra Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Yadvato, Etain]
nah.


O man of the science-mantra, the celestial horse,
mighty carrier, flies across the waters of the sky and the
wondrous oceans of space on the wings of the winds.
The same horse, by the same paths of energy, you bring
us back and take us round.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




8. (Vayu & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


saaa maa ode i ya:
vadaag USAT ed




[Names: Vasavastvarnjantu, Rudrastvanjantu]
Prajapati, guardian and protector of the people,
may the scholars of the Vasu order of twenty-four years
celebrate you with the joy of the gayatri verses. May
the scholars of the Rudra order of thirty-six years
enlighten you with the knowledge of the trishtubh
verses. May the scholars of the Aditya order of forty-
eight years beatify you with the vision of the jagati
verses. Receive the homage and be pleased by this


Brilliant men of knowledge and vision, take the
food from the fields of barley and milk of the cow and
reach across the regions of the earth to the sky and the
heavens orbiting in their own courses in space.


9.  (Jijnasu-researcher Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






Who moves alone (by itself, self-lighted)? Who


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




is born again (in another’s light)? What is the antidote
of cold? What is the great field for the sowing of seeds
and the great store for things?


10. (Surya Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Agnirhimasya, Agnirhimas]
mahat.

The sun moves alone (self-lighted, on its own axis).

The moon is born again (in the light of the sun). Fire is
the antidote of cold. The earth is the great field for the


sowing of seeds (and the great store-house of things, with


11. (Jijnasu-researcher Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Ratatat]
What is the first object of perception and thought?


What is the great bird of motion? What is soft, smooth
and beautiful? What is it that devours light and form?


12. (Vidyut, energy Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Dyaurasit, Avirasit]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Heaven is the first object of perception and
thought. Energy, electricity and light, is the greatest bird
of motion. Protective mother earth is soft, smooth and
beautiful. The night of darkness devours light and forms.


13. (Brahmadaya Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


E Goa Asad Hir ues




Seeker of knowledge, may the air protect you with
maturation and perfection. May the fire nourish and
protect you with the milk of goats. May the banyan tree
strengthen and protect you with ladlefuls of juice. May
the shalmali plant protect and advance you with growth.
May this strong and virile chariot horse on its four legs


Brahma, brilliant star of knowledge, guide and
protect us. All homage, respect and support for Agni,
light of knowledge and yajna.


14. (Brahma Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Samsito, Somapurogavah, Somapurogava]
The chariot is refined by the light of sunbeams.
The horse is refined by sensitive reins of steering. The


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




expert man of knowledge born of the energy of prana,
working on energy, is refined by advancement in the
knowledge of health, peace and value of honour.


15. (Vidvan Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: User]
"f&ur asa A HAN eau




[Names: Svayam, Mahima]
Man of knowledge, seeker of advancement,
develop your self by yourself. Do the yajna of joint work
by your own choice. Serve the scholars and society by
yourself. Your eminence and value must not be destroyed
by others.


16. (Savita Devata, Prajapati Rshi)








[Names: Refs, Yatrasate]
Man of knowledge and yajna, you go to meet with
the seers and sages by the straight and right paths of


Where dwell the men of right action and where
they realize lasting peace and joy, there may Savita,
lord of light and life, establish you.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




17. (Agni and Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)








[Names: Usud, Sofa, Serta, Jesyasi]
Agni, fire, is the soul of yajna, a direct participant.
The divines perform yajna with agni. Who ever does
the yajna with agni wins the sphere where agni is
supreme. The same will become your sphere too, you
would conquer it if you do yajna. Drink deep at the
fount of knowledge and joy purified by agni.


Vayu, wind, is the soul of yajna, a seer and
participant. The divines perform yajna by vayu.
Whoever does the yajna by vayu wins the sphere where
vayu is supreme. The same will become your sphere
too, you would conquer it if you do yajna. Drink deep
at the fount of breath and energy purified by vayu.


Surya, the sun, is the soul of yajna, a seer and
participant. The divines perform yajna with the sun.
Whoever does the yajna with the sun wins the sphere
where the sun is supreme. The same will become your


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




sphere too, you would win it if you do yajna. Drink
deep at the fount of light and energy purified by the
sun.


18. (Prana etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)





[Names: Sras, Ambe, Sasastyasvakah]
Best of thought, word and action in truth for prana,
for apana and for vyana, the energy of breath, the energy
for systemic cleansing, and the overall health and vitality
of the body system.


Mother, grand-mother, and great-grand-mother,
none can retain and sustain me or anyone in the splendid
good fortune and peaceful settled seat of the man of
prosperity, who, though he might have been as fast and
impetuous as a war-horse, goes to sleep in sloth after
getting the wealth and comfort.


19. (Ganapati Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Gananam, Ahamajani]
Lord of the universe, you are the presiding and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




protective fatherly presence over all the groups,
communities and republics of the world. Such as you
are, we accept, realise and surrender unto you.


You are the darling life-giver and protector of all
things of existence which are so dear to you. We
recognise, realise and worship you in love and faith.


You are the giver, protector and promoter of all the
wealths of the world. We surrender to you in worship
and gratitude and pray to you for all the wealth, prosperity
and happiness of life.


Lord omnipresent in every particle of existence,
every particle of existence exists in you. You are my
haven and home too. You are the father of all forms of
existence. I pray that I may know you, the father, that I
may know Prakriti, the mother; and that I may know all
the forms of existence, as you do.


20. (Raja & Praja Devate, Prajapati Rshi)


qat ari tater tat sara uon




Let both of them, the ruler and the people, protect
and support each other. May both realise and extend
the four values of life: Dharma, righteous living, Artha,
worldly well-being, kama, self-fulfilment, and Moksha,
ultimate freedom. May the ruler, wielder of power, swift
in action and advancement, strengthen the people with
power, and the people, in return, strengthen the ruler
with power.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




21. (Raja, judge Devate, Prajapati Rshi)
sasad We ate aaa aia qun |




[Names: Shon, Utsakthya]
O Ruler, man of strength and power, if there is
anyone evil who plays with the life and honour of
women, punish him. Establish peace among the people.
Establish the rule of law. Eliminate immorality and
wantonness from the state.


22. (Raja Praja Devate, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Pretercitfe, Yakasakau, Ahanti]
Where the ruler strikes at the people, he strikes at
the nation and the state because there the people, though
otherwise they enjoyed comfort and happiness before,
grow weaker and weaker now and fade like a helpless
bird. When such a ruler exacts taxes from the farmers,
he only cheats the nation.


23. (Raja Praja Devate, Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Gents]
— Eo =


fadaasza d yane m aeaa wiwem: esi




[Names: Yako, Vivaksata]
Ruler, high-priest of the yajna of the state, make


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




no false promises to us. Let your mouth be not like a
boaster’s. If you tell lies, you will grow weaker and
weaker like a helpless bird and end up, cheating yourself.


24. (Bhumi and Surya Devate, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Pratilamiti]
Ruler, the earth your mother and the sun your father
rise to the top of the world. The sun strikes at the treasure
of space-waters with his light and power, the earth
receives the showers and shines. Celebrate them with
the people in yajna: It is beautiful, it is joyous. I am happy.


25. (Bhumi and Surya Devate, Prajapati Rshi)


vado bahu.


People of the land, your mother-land like the earth
and the ruler, father of the nation, like the sun, both
joyous, play on top of the world in the midst of beauty
and prosperity. Ruler, Brahma, presiding priest of the
national yajna, your mouth seems eager to shout with
pride and joy. At that time, speak not much, control


26. (Shri Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Urdhvamenadmucchrapaya, Athasyai]
Ruler of the land, lead this rising nation to the
heights of beauty and prosperity like a mountaineer
bearing his banner to the top of the mount, and, in the
midst of this people, being sanctified as if in the cool
mountain breezes, move on higher and ever higher.


27. (Shri Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Urdhvamenamucchrayatad, Athasya]
Man of knowledge, enlightened citizen, support
this rising ruler to the height of glory and power as a
mountaineer carrying his burden to the top of the mount,
and, in the midst of this nation, and sifting the truth
from falsehood, as if, in the cool breeze, shine on in the
beauty and prosperity of the land.


28. (Prajapati Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Yadasya, Muskavidasya]
When the small and great acts of the people who
clear out sin and crime from the society are appreciated
by the ruler and the enlightened officers, they, the ruler
and the elite, captivate the heart of the people and they


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




shine in their eyes as shakula fish shine in a little pool
of water.


29. (Scholars Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


wer aa uw fedem: i




[Names: Yaddevaso, Sakthna]
Just as noble people approach an eminent and

reasonable judge for justice, just as a woman is
distinguished by her body, so the men of reason find out
the truth by direct observation of evidence.


30. (Raja Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


"fum wen wee uy ata |
Vet wed cT Urata earafa oN



[Names: Yaddharino]
When the deer eats up the barley it does not care
for the field but destroys it. A servant woman who is
the mistress of her master loves money but not for the
well-being of her master or of her family. So when a
ruler exploits his people, he does not care for their well-
being, he destroys the nation.


31. (Raja Praja Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Sudro]
The deer that eats up the barley cares not for the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




crop and the field. The servant who is a paramour of his
mistress cares not for the well-being of the family. The
ruler who exploits the people destroys the nation.


32. (Raja Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Raros, Jisnora]
The hero is on guard, holdi and E iny the
land and people. Like a knight of horse panting for victory,
fast advancing in the battle, I place him at the head of the
gracefully, and may he carry us across the field of life.


33. (Scholars Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


geafuret mapa: Ve aT !a3!


[Names: Brhatyusniha]
May the scholars with research and action perfect
and stabilize you in peace and tranquillity with the
joyous gayatri, the stable trishtup, the protective
anushtup, the comprehensive pankti, the expansive
brihati, the lovely ushnih, and the charming kakup verses
of the Veda.


(May the scholars perfect the ruler.)


34. (Praja Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


fedar maduara area wader: |


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Vicchanda]
O citizens of the nation, may the learned and the
wise, with their knowledge and acts, perfect and stabilise
you in peace and tranquillity with two-part, four-part,
three-part, or six-part, or various or regular verses of
the Veda.


35. (Praja Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Maighirvidyuto]
Seekers of knowledge, citizens of the nation, may
the universal words of wisdom, golden rich, great and
sublime, ringing in all directions, raining like the clouds,
roaring like thunder, and blazing as lightning — may
all these great voices perfect you with their integrative
and elevating message of peace and stability.


36. (Women Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Naryaste]
Ruler, citizens, teachers, may the women, virgins
and wives of the noble people, protectors of the nation,
listen and gather your words with care and understanding,
and may they, like the pure transparent quarters of space,
stabilise and perfect you with their integrative words


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


and acts of love and wisdom.


37. (Women Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Rajata, Samyantu, Samyantih]
Women in love, lovely, captivating, arresting with
love and loyalty, exciting and dedicated, are joined in
marriage to the protection and embrace of handsome,
virile and generous young men by their own will and
action. Bound in the discipline of matrimony, may they
be at peace in security, and may they provide for the
love, peace and security of the young men of their choice.


38. (Sabhasad Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






Dear Sabhasad, eminent member of the council,
just as farmers blest with rich barley harvest the grain
with discrimination, some plants separately and some
together, so do the teachers sit on seats of grass, receive
food and water, and carry on the yajna of education
accomplishing their work with the disciples with
judgement. Here in this school, provide for their food
and maintenance.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


39. (Adhyapaka Devata, Prajapati Rshi)





[Names: Samyati]
Young learner, who cuts, grinds and shapes you
into form? Who teaches, directs and controls you? Who
exercises your body-parts to suppleness and equipoise?
Who is the sage and seer, high-priest of your education,
giving the last oblation of completion?


40. (PrajaDevata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Paced, Rtavasta, Samvatsarasya]
Learner, seeker of knowledge and expertise, may
the seasons and the teachers training you in peace and
action instruct and temper you according to the needs
of the time and the stage of your life, and may they
complete and perfect you with the splendour of the sun
round the year and peaceable action and refinement.


41. (Praja Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Teste]
adua med ë fefe: o a se




[Names: Ardhamasah, Samyantah, Ahoratrani]
Learner, seeker of knowledge, may the days and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




nights, fortnights and months developing you refine and
strengthen your body parts and life’s periods, and may
the learned soften your roughness and eliminate your


42. (Adhyapaka Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Seulsareerdenemesud, Gatrani]
Learner, seeker, ruler, citizen, may the divine high-
priests of the yajna and development of the nation instruct
and refine you and develop the parts of your body, life
and community from every joint and transition onward.
May the loving motherly women wholly dedicated soften
your heart and refine your mind.


43. (Raja Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


det uferepafias ages um wi




[Names: Hild, Vayusschidram, Vayusschidra]
May the heaven (with its light), the earth (with his
generosity and stability), the sky (with its expanse), the
wind and air (with speed and energy) make up your wants
and repair your weaknesses. And may the sun, lord of
light and life, with the stars and planets, create for you a
straight and simple world of beauty, freedom and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


746
44.


(Raja Devata, Prajapati Rshi)
vi d uis mia: mea: |




[Names: Teal, Samasthabhyo]
Peace and health to the higher parts of your


personality. Peace and health to the lower parts of your
body. Peace and strength to your bones and marrow.
Peace and well-being to your body and mind all over.


45.


(Jijnasu-Seeker Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






Who moves alone? Who is born again and again?


What is the antidote of cold? And what is the great field
and hold of life, seed and sustenance?


46.


(Surya etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Stadt]
mahat.


The sun moves alone. The moon is born again and


again. Fire, heat, is the antidote of cold. And earth is the
great field and hold of life, seed and sustenance.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




47. (Jijnasu Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


faxed uro fenem: |


[Names: Kiin, Suryasamam, Suryasama]
What is the other light like the sun? What is the
vessel-hold of water like the sea? What is larger than
the earth? What is without limits in the world?


48. (Brahma etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


wd: uferetr asian cire are a feler «zu




Brahma is the light like the sun. The sky is the
great vessel-hold of waters like the sea. The sun is
greater than the earth. Word, divine speech, has no limits.


49. (Question-Answer Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Prcchami, Yesu]
Friend of the divine, I ask you for my
understanding, if with your mind you can reach the
answer: Does the living world exist in those three
regions of the universe — the earth, the sky, and the
heavens, wherein Vishnu, universal lord of the world,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


748
50.




(Ishvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


YER KON




[Names: Sadyah]
I am there, sure, in those three regions of the


universe wherein the whole living world exists. I
instantly and universally pervade the earth, the sky and
the vault of heaven, each with one existential part of


51.


(Purusheshvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi)

[Names: Geass]
ad uu




[Names: Kesvantah, Purus, Etad]
Who and how many does the Purusha, supreme


spirit, pervade? Who and how many reside in the
Purusha? This, O man of knowledge, we ask you so
that we too may excel. What do you say to us on this


52.


(Parameshvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Gstaad, Reams]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Pancasvantah, Etattvatra, Puruse]
In five (elements of Prakriti) does the Purusha
pervade. These five elements reside within the Purusha.
This I say on the question believing and asking you to
accept and believe. Not by maya, nor by mere science,
nor by knowledge alone of existence would you go farther


[Names: Purusha]
53. (Prashta-Questioner Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Rearing]
What is the first original structure in time? What


is the great womb of the forms of life? What is the finest
pliant material? What is the universal devourer?


54. (Samadhata-Wise Devata, Prajapati Rshi)





[Names: Tease]
Heaven, light, i.e., divine vibration of thought
energy is the first original step in creation. Mahat, the
first mutation of original Prakriti, was the great womb of
the forms of creation. Manifested Prakriti is the finest
pliant material for creation. Pralaya, the night of
annihilation devours the universe.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




55. (Prashta Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Hiss]
What is the cover of the forms of existence? Who


destroys the beauty of the crops? Who moves jumping
in leaps? Who creeps on the path?


56. (Samadhata Devata, Prajapati Rshi)





[Names: Herz, Ajare]
Prakriti is the cover of forms. Porcupine is the


destroyer of the beauty of crops in the field. Energy moves
in currents. And the clouds sail upon their path.


57. (Prashta Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Katyasya]
How many permanent materials? How many
operations? How many fuels and modes of lighting? I
ask you these questions on the subject of yajna for
knowledge. How many priests perform it according to
the seasons?


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




58. (Samidha Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


wa eel




[Names: Sadasya]
Six seasons are the pillars of yajna. Hundreds are
the materials of permanent nature. Eighty are the
operations. Three are the fuels. I speak to you of the
knowledge of yajna. Seven priests carry on the yajna
according to the seasons.


59. (Prashta Devata, Prajapati Rshi)







Who knows the centre-hold of this world? Who
knows the earth, the sky, and the heaven, region of light?
Who knows the great creator of the sun? Who knows
the moon and wherefrom it was born?


60. (Samadhata Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Vedahamasya]
I know the centre-hold of this world. I know the
heaven and earth and the middle regions of the sky. I
know the great creator of the sun. I know the moon and
wherefrom it was born. (The man of real knowledge is
one who knows Brahma, creator and sustainer of the
world, and the world itself, who knows the efficient cause,
Brahma, and the material cause, Prakriti, and the
beneficiary, the jiva. The speaker is such a man of
knowledge. Alternatively, the speaker is Brahma Itself.)


61. (Prashta Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


I ask you: What is the highest end of the earth and
where? I ask you: What and where is the centre of the
world? I ask you: Where and what is the seed of the
virility and fertility of the male? I ask you: What and
where is the haven and home and ultimate preserve of
the Word, universal speech?


62. (Samadhata Devata, Prajapati Rshi)
eH" ug


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






This yajna-vedi is the supreme and ultimate end
of the earth. This yajna is the centre and centre-hold of
the world. This soma is the seed and source of the virility
and fertility of the male. And Brahma is the haven and
home and birth and preserve of the Word, divine speech.


63. (Samadhata Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Subhuh, Dadhe]
Gracious and glorious, self-existent and at the very
centre in this grand ocean of the universe is Brahma. He
plants the seed of creation into Prakriti according to the


season of the creative cycle, and thence is born Prajapati,
the sun, lord of life.


64. (Ishvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Jusatam]
The man of yajna performs the yajna in honour of
Prajapati, father and sustainer of the world of creation


by the grace and glory of Soma, lord of life and
omnipotence. May he ever dedicate himself to the lord


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and drink the nectar of life and immortality by divine


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna, relent not ever.


65. (Ishvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Uday]
Prajapati, lord of creation, no one other than you
is supreme over and beyond all these and other forms
of existence.


Whatever our ends and aims for which we offer
our homage to you, may all that come true for us.


May we, by Grace, be masters, promoters and
preservers of the wealths of the world.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1.  (Prajapati Devata, Prajapati Rshi)
sda thre uran: egeunitessmritr are




[Names: Agerra, Asvastuparo]
The horse, the wild ram, the wild cow, these are
sunny in character and quality, they belong to Prajapati;

the black-necked animal foremost among the
beasts is fiery in character and quality, it belongs to

the sheep with twisted hair in the forehead has
the quality for speech and intelligence, it belongs to

the goats having black spots below the jaws and
on the lower parts of front legs have the qualities of the
sun and moon, they belong to the Ashvinis;

the animal which is black round the navel has
the qualities of Soma and Pushan;


those which are white and dark on the sides have


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the qualities of the sun and air, they belong to Surya
and Yama;

those with long hair on the thighs have the
qualities of Tvashta;

those which have a white tail belong to the wind,
Vayu;

the small animal and the barren cow belong to

Let all these be deployed in the service of Indra,
the ruler, man of high values and action.


2. (Soma & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Heise, Bitar, Saagad]
SiTemuu: us




[Names: Rohito, Sitibahuh]
The red, smoky red and red-berry animals belong
to Soma;


the brown, red brown and parrot brown belong
to Varuna;


those with white holes in the wool on the one
side or all over belong to Savita;


those with white fore-legs, white on one side or


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




white on all sides belong to Brihaspati;


those with spots on the limbs, small ones, or large
ones, belong to Mitra and Varuna.




3. (Ashvins and Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)





[Names: Gers, Suddhavalah, Parjanyah, Parjanya]
The animals with bright hair, wholly bright hair,
and jewel-bright hair belong to the Ashvins. The white,
the white eyed, and the red ones are for Rudra, lord of
the animals. Those which are specially serviceable
belong to Yama. Those of strong limbs belong to the
pranas. And those which are sky-grey belong to the


4.  (Maruts etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Alsat, Piaras, Prsnistirascinaprsnirurdhvaprsniste, Phalgurlohitorni, Sitikakso, Usasyah, Usasya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Soft and dappled ones, those with transverse
speckles, or upward speckles are of the quality and
character of the Maruts; fruit-lovers, those with red hair,
and those of quick quivering eyes belong to Sarasvati.
The spleen-eared, white-eared, and the golden eared
belong to Tvashta. Those of black neck, white flanks
and heavy thighs are of the quality and character of Indra
and Agni, wind and electric energy. And those of
brilliance belong to the dawns.


5.  (Vishvedevas Devata, Prajapati Rshi)








The animals useful in arts belong to all the noble
people, all the divinities. Three kinds of mountain sheep
used in climbing high are for knowledge and speech.
The unknown breeds are for Aditi, the earth. Those of
similar form are for the Protector, and the young calves
are for the wives of the learned to look after.


6.  (Agnietc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)
[Names: Pumas, Krsnagriva, Sitibhravo, Rudrana]
Black-necked animals have the quality and
character of fire. Those with white brows are of the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Vasus such as earth. The red ones are of the quality and
energy of pranas. The white ones and brilliant ones are
of the nature of Adityas. And those of the colour of
water and the sea are of the element of the clouds.


7. (Indra and Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)





[Names: Unnata, Sitiprsthasta, Agnimarutah, Agnimaruta]
The tall, strong animals with supple and tortuous
limbs are of the quality Indra and Vishnu, electricity
and wind. The tall ones of razor-sharp stroke and
adamantine back have the quality of Indra and
Brihaspati, wind and the sun. Those of the form and
colour of the parrot, fast as horse, white and black have
the quality of Agni and Maruts, fire and the winds. The
black ones have the quality of Pushan, energising as
the cloud.


8.  (Indragni etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)



[Names: Suremusr, Agnisomtya, Agnisomt]
These animals of two colours or qualities are of


the nature of Indra and Agni, wind and electric energy.
Those of supple and tortuous limbs and the sturdy


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




bullocks are of the nature of Agni and Soma, and of
Agni and Vishnu. The barren cow is of the nature of
Mitra and Varuna, pranic energy. The rest anywhere are
of friendly nature, wherever they are and wherever they


go.
9. (Agni & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)
[Names: Fantasma, Weisz]
The black-necked animals are fiery, the brown
ones are cool and gentle as soma, the white ones are
airy. The unknown are for the earth, those of like form


for the Protector, the young calves for the wives of the
divines and for the sun-rays to foster.


10. (Antariksha etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Krsna]
The black ones, the farming animals, are for the
earth. The brown ones are for the sky. The big,


wonderful, whitish are live wires like electricity. The
gentle ones are for the alleviation of suffering.


11. (Vasanta etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Dhumran]
For the spring season, you get the brown ones; for
summer, whites; for the rains, black ones; for autumn,
red ones; for freezing winter, thick ones; and for the cool
season, you get yellow and orange.


12. (Agni & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)
eut mÀ waaa aad nici




[Names: Tryavayo, Anustubhe, Anustubh]
Animals of three six month periods of life are for
the gayatri metre to sing; those of five periods are for
trishtup; the burden bearing ones are for jagati; those
with three calves are for anushtup; and those of the
fourth stage of life are for the ushnih metre to sing.


13. (Virajadaya metres Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Massa, Pasthavaho]
Those which bear the burdens on their back are
for the virat metre to sing; the virile bulls are for brihati;
the sturdy and most excellent bulls are for kakup; the
cart-bullocks are for the pankti; and the cows are for
the ati-chhanda metre to sing of.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




14. (Agni etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)



[Names: Puniassirma, Anss]
Black-necked animals are fiery. The brown and
generous ones are gentle. The weak ones close at hand
are of Savita, children of the sun. The cows with young
calves are of Sarasvati. The dark ones are darlings of
the cloud. The dappled cows are favourites of the
Maruts. The multi-coloured ones are for Vishvedevas,
the noblest people. And the brilliant domestic animals
are gifts of earth and heaven.


15. (Indra & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)

[Names: Hansas, Uktah]
These animals described here and moving around
are of Indra and Agni, airy and fiery. The black ones
are of Varuna, most excellent lord of choice. The richly
speckled ones are of the Maruts and for the stormy
people. And the violent ones are for and of Prajapati.
16. (Agnietc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)

Were regen AA afeher egi:


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






The man of wisdom and discrimination favours
and selects first-born heroes for admirable Agni, fiery
commander of the army, acclimatised animals for the
disciplined heroes of the speed of the winds, well reared
animals for the homely yajnic people, well-trained
animals for the sportive fun-loving people, and
domesticated animals for the quiet settled people.


17. (Indragni & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






Described are these animals and the ways of raising
and training them. Of divine care and purpose, they are
of varied hue and beautiful horns, favourites of divinities
and for divine purpose. Of Indra and Agni they are, of
Mahendra and Vishvakarma.


18. (Pitarah Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


pom: Geel: uci


[Names: Dhumra, Somavatam, Somavata]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Smoky grey and dark brown animals are for kind
and loving soma-natured parents and seniors. Brown and
smoky dark are for the senior councillors. Black and
brown are for those seniors who are experts of the science
of fire. And black and spotted are for those who have
three-fold responsibilities. (Honour the seniors with pet-
gifts and protect the animals for them.)


19. (Vayu Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


vam: Hasut: FARA: year alaeM: ver:



[Names: Svetah]
Described are these animals, white, beautiful,

moving around, dedicated to the plough and the share,


sustaining as the air, bright as the sunlight. They have
the elements and virtues of the air and the sun.


20. (Vasanta Devata, Prajapati Rshi)
are airtariedd tare enerfergrt-t aut
[Names: Raai]
Tat RON


[Names: Vasantaya]
The bird specialist takes up the sparrow for the
season of spring, the cuckoo for summer, the partridge
for the rains, the quail for autumn, the kakara for freezing
cold, and vikakara for the frosty season.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




21. (Varuna Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


"gare Pianeta weiter agaaa rect


[Names: Rard, Samudraya, Parjanyaya]
The water-life specialist takes up the alligator in
relation to the sea, frogs for the clouds, fish for the waters
of lakes and rivers, kulipaya in relation to the sun and
waters, and crocodile in relation to the oceans.


22. (Soma & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)

[Names: Indragnibhyam, Indragnibhya]
The bird-expert takes up the hansa, geese, in
relation to Soma, beauty and joy, the she-crane in
relation to Vayu, breeze and pleasure, the krauncha in
relation to Indragni, the warmth of fire and vibrations
of energy, the madgu in relation to Mitra, sun and water,
and the chakravaka in relation to Varuna, the love and
vastness of space.


23. (Agni etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Harry]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




The specialist in birds and bird behaviour takes
up the cocks for Agni, the owls for the Vanaspati, trees,
the blue jays for Agni and Soma, the peacocks for the
Ashvinis, and the pigeons for Mitra and Varuna.


24. (Soma etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


He takes up the laba birds for Soma, kaulikas for
Tvashta, goshadis which hurt the cows for the wives of


the nobles, kulikas for the sisters of the nobles, and
parushnas for Agni of the homestead.


25. (Kalavayavah, periods of time Devata, Prajapati Rshi)





[Names: Ahne]
He takes up pigeons for the day, sichapus for the
night, jatus for the morning and evening twilight, the
crow for the months, and the big suparnas for the year.


26. (Bhumi etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






The expert studies the rodent holes for the earth,
the rows of flying birds for the sky, the kasha birds for
the light, the mungoose for the directions and the
ichneumon for the interdirections.


27. (Vasus etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)





[Names: Vasubhya]
For the Vasu order of scholars, take up the study
of the white footed rishya antelopes; for the Rudra
scholars, take up the ruru antelopes; for the Aditya
scholars, take up the nyanku antelopes; for the eminent
and generous scholars, take up the prishata antelopes;
and for the advanced researchers on yoga, the sadhyas,
take up the kulunga antelopes.


28. (Ishana etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)



[Names: Isanaya]
For the man of ruling power take up the parasvan
antelopes of the forest, gauras for Mitra, the buffaloes
for Varuna, wild cows for Brihaspati, and camels for


[Names: Tvashta]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




29. (Prajapati and Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


Wed Geary shears att chad are ragà
Uses set: usu


[Names: Purusan]
Take up male elephants for Prajapati, flying white
ants for speech, mosquitoes for the eye and moths for
the ear.


30. (Prajapati etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)





[Names: Varunay]
For Prajapati and Vayu, the wild cow; for Varuna,
the wild ram; for Yama, black deer; for the ruler of
people, the monkey; for the lion, red deer; for the bull,
the wild cow; for the swift eagle, the partridge; for the
blue-bodied, the insects; for the sea, crocodile; and for
the snowy mountainous region, the elephant.


31. (Prajapatya etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Mayuh]
The wild human (gorilla, yati, etc.) is the care of
Prajapati; the little creatures, lion and wild cat for Dhata,
master controller; the heron is for the directions;
dhunksha bird is fiery; the sparrow, red snake and tank-
creatures are for Tvashta; and the crane is for speech.


32. (Soma & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Srutkayai]
The antelope is for Soma; the forest-goat,
mungoose and the bee are for Pusha; the jackal is for
the wild human; the white deer is for Indra; the pidva,
nyanku and kakkata are for Anumati; and the
chakravaka is for Echo.


33. (Mitra & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Year, Sauri, Purusavak, Svavidbhaumi, Purusavak]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




The female crane is for the sun; the sharga, the
srijaya and the shayandaka, these birds are for Mitra;
the human voiced parrot is for Sarasvati; the porcupine
is for the earth; the lion, the wolf, and the snake, these
are for Manyu (anger); and the human voiced male
parrot is for the sea.


34. (Agni & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)





[Names: Hinad, Suparnah, Parjan]
The eagle is for the cloud; the aati (an aquatic
bird), the serpent and the wood-pecker, these are for
Vayu, the air; the paingaraja is for Vachasapati
Brihaspati; alaja is for the sky; the pelican, the cormorant
and the fish, these are for the lord of streams; and the
tortoise is for the earth and light.


35. (Chandra & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)







[Names: Purusamrgascandramaso]
The buck belongs to the moon; the alligator, the

kalaka, the wood pecker, these belong to the trees; the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




peacock belongs to Savita, the sun; the hansa is of the
air; the iguana, crocodile, and the dolphin, they are of
the sea, and the porcupine is for timidity.


36. (Ashvinis & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Seal, Meta, Weert, Enyahno]
The doe is of the day; the frog, mouse and
partridge, these are of the serpents; the lopasha is
Ashvins’; black animal is for the night; the bear, the bat
and the sushilika are for other people; and the hedgehog
is for Vishnu.


37. (Ardhamasa etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Xrfacbugumeit, Anyavapo]
sitah.


The cockoo belongs to the fortnights; the rishya
deer, the peacock and the swan belong to the gandharvas
(musicians); the crab belongs to the waters; the tortoise
belongs to the months; the red deer, the house lizzard
and the golattika belong to the water nymphs and the
sunbeams; and the black deer is for death.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


772
38.




(Varsha & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Poke]
anual AG: use

[Names: Varsahurrtunamakhuh, Varunayaranyo]
mesah.


The frog is for the seasons; the mouse, the rodents


and the flying fox, these are of the pitaras; the serpent
is for strength; the partridge is for the Vasus; the pigeon,
the owl and the hare are for adversity; the wild ram is
for Varuna.


39.


(Aditya and Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)
[Names: Rasati, Hemrsari]
fen: use



[Names: Svitra, Adityanamustro]
The white domestic animal is of the Adityas; the


camel, the bright and tender animal and a big goat with
streaks on nose are for intelligence; the wild cow is for
the forest; the red deer is of Rudra; the kvayi, the cock
and the crow, these are for the Vajins (speed); and the
cuckoo is for love and desire.


40.


(Vishvedevas etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)



All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Khadgo, Sakuniste, Saravyayai]
The rhino is for Vishvedevas; black dog, long-
eared ass, the tiger, these are for the demons; the boar
is for the king; the lion is for the winds; the chameleon,
pippaka and the vulture are for the marksman; the
spotted deer is favourite of the noblest persons.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1. (Sarasvati & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)
[Names: Sharassinast]
Baca Panel Pure tater ureter uagutuerarais-




[Names: Sadam]
By the teeth, test the efficiency of chewing and
the texture of food, the strength of the teeth by the roots
and gums, the protective enamel by the cavities, biting
force by the fangs, the ease and elegance of speech by
the fluent sweetness and suppleness of the tongue at
the tip, the palate by the roll of the voice, the sweetness
and energy by the action of the jaws, the deliciousness
of drinks by the mouth, the maturity of manhood by the
scrotum, the roll of years of maturity by the beard and
moustache, the paths and manners of living by the
eyebrows, the sense of heaven and earth by the orbits
of movement, the inner light and energy by the pupils


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


of the eyes.


For the perfection of brahmacharya observe sexual
and mental discipline. For the completion of the
acquisition of knowledge observe the discipline of study.


The actions for going across the river of life are
indispensable like the lovely sugar-cane at hand this
side of the river. And the actions this side of the river of
life too must be like the lovely sugar-cane across the
river.


2. (Pranas etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)
sitas siahai nuit eidem: aa




[Names: Vatam, Srotrabhyam, Sirsna]
Receive the energy of the winds by the incoming
breath of prana and the outgoing breath of apana by the
nostrils. With the lower and upper lips observe the self-
control of truth and the discipline of yama and niyama.
With the light of higher knowledge illumine the inner


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




personality. With cleanliness, purify the outer
personality. Take in the light of divinity by the brahma-
randhra, top aperture of the head. Hear the voice of
[Names: Create]
the flash of lightning with the brain. Let the light shine
by the pupils of the eyes. Develop hearing by the ears
and the ears by hearing. Take in the food smoothly by
the lower throat. Value the drinks by the parched throat.
Develop the mind and memory by reflection and
meditation. Realize the boundless in freedom with the
imagination. Move on to the existential void with the
head and speech unimpaired.


Develop the pranas with invocations to universal
energy, facing the storm with shouts of joy.


3. (Indra & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Qaia, Masakan, Pusanam, Pusana]
dorbhyamasvinavainsabhyam rudra in


Ward off mosquitoes and insects with hair.
Achieve the power and greatness of Indra with hard
work and great action. Reach Brihaspati, great lord of
knowledge and wisdom, by the ordeal of fire and
patience. Get to the tortoise and the earth with the speed


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of the eagle. Shoot to the target on the hoofs of a horse
and power of arms. Get to the kapinjala birds by stout
action and double speed. Get to speed and cover the
road with strong legs. Get to the forest with the grape
fruit. Get to Agni, fire, by will and desire, to Pusha,
good health, by strong arms, to Ashvins, ruler and
people, by strong shoulders, and to Rudra, power of
justice, by listening and discussion.


4. (Agni & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






The body-politic of the nation of humanity has
thirteen ribs on the right side of the chest. The first is
Agni's for light and fire. The second is Vayu's for air
energy. The third is Indra's for sunlight and energy.
The fourth is Soma's for coolness and life of vegetation.
The fifth is Aditi's for the vastness and generosity of
the sky. The sixth is Indrani's for electric energy. The
seventh is Marut's for the winds. The eighth is
Brihaspati's for cosmic energy. The nineth is Aryaman's
for the working people. The tenth is Dhatri's for the
cosmic law. The eleventh is Indra's for national honour,
power and prosperity. The twenfth is Varuna's for the
enlightened citizens. The thirteenth is Yama's for justice


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


and administration.


(The world system thus is organismic. Every part
is a living member, and every man, woman and
community should play their part in the life of the system.)


5. (Indra & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Imre]
SATA 1




[Names: Indragnyoh]
The body-politic of the nation has thirteen ribs on
the left side of the chest. The first belongs to Indragni for
air and fire. The second belongs to Sarasvati for speech
and education. The third belongs to Mitra for friendship.
The fourth belongs to Aps, waters. The fifth belongs to
Nir-riti, the earth. The sixth belongs to Agni-soma for
fire and water. The seventh belongs to Sarpas,
subterranean creatures. The eighth belongs to Vishnu,
cosmic spirit. The nineth belongs to Pusha, health and
nourishment. The tenth is Tvashta's for brilliance and
refinement. The eleventh belongs to Indra, the soul, for
self-culture. The twelfth belongs to Varuna, enlightened
people. The thirteenth belongs to Yami, nation's women.
The right side is for Dyava-prithivi, heaven and earth


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




for light and life. The left side belongs to all the nobilities
of nature and humanity for the joy of enlightenment.


6.  (Maruts etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Rudranam, Sronibhyamindrabrhaspati]
The shoulders of the nation belong to the Maruts,
that is, the stormy troops of defence are the shoulders
of the nation. The first and top part of the spine belongs
to Vishvedevas, that is, the generous and enlightened
people are the top of the nation's spine. The second
part of the spine belongs to the Rudras, men of law and
justice. The third part belongs to the Adityas, brilliant
people and children of the earth. The tail end belongs
to Vayu, breath and fragrance of the nation. The hips of
the nation belong to Agni and Soma, the heat of fire
and coolness of water in the national mind. The poets
and artists, two beautiful hansa birds, are comparable
to the loins of the nation. Indra and Brihaspati, ruler
and teachers, are comparable to the thighs. Mitra and
Varuna, friendship and discrimination, are comparable
to the groins. Develop force and advancement by the
strength and suppleness of the thighs. Judge the strength
and vitality of the nation by the slopes of the groin.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




(Note here that the rashtra/nation/Samraat
purusha is compared to the individual purusha (Eka-
raat purusha), and also to the universal purusha, i.e.,
the Viraat Purusha. Life thus is an organism at every
stage from the individual to the universe.)


7. (Pusha etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)







Compare national health to food digestion and
assimilation, blind serpents to large intestines, snakes
to the bowels, crooked people to the intestines, water
storages to the bladder and lower abdomen, vital rains
and clouds to the scrotum, passion to the virile seed,
food consumption to the bile, clearances to wind
discharges, and judge the force of governance by the
concentrations of power.


8. (Indra and Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






You are in the bosom of Indra, father of light, let
not the light sink into darkness.


Stand firm, the food and fertility of the earth is
where you stand. The meeting of the directions of space
is in the joints of the ribs. The light within is the light of
heaven. Know the shower of the clouds by the joy of
the soul in the blood, the broadness of the skies by the
coronary artery, the soothing liquidity of atmospheric
water by the serum juices of the belly, the energy of
life, like the love of chakravaka birds, by the pulmonary
arteries, the purity of light by the cleansing action of
the excretory organs, the hardness of mountains by
digestion and assimilation, the cloud-generosity by the
spleen, the paths of movement by the blood vessels,
concentrations and enlargements by the veins, streams
and rivers by the blood-streams, gulfs and bays by the
womb and ovaries, the sea by the stomach, and universal
fire by the heat of the body system.


(Note the correspondence of the microcosm (eka-
raat-purusha) and the macrocosm (Viraat-purusha) and
the correspondence of the working of the two systems.
The individual system works within the universal system
as a unit. And this correspondence is worth knowing.
The human individual is in the bosom of the universal


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




9. (Pusha & Others Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


Tasha feraraergr-tatarfur vett uféreit are Sara
wet usu




[Names: Vidhrtim]
Know the centre-hold of the universe by the
navel, liquid life of existence by the sap of nature, the
waters of life by soup and decoctions, particles of light
in rays by drops in a streams of oblations, the morning
mist by vapours of steam, solid energy by frozen fat,
precipitation of clouds by the tear glands, hail storms
by shocks of disturbance, natural protections by
immunity in the blood, wonders and mysteries by the
limbs of the body, stars and planets by light and form,
the crust of the earth by the skin of the body.


Honour and homage to the Lord Supreme with
surrender in truth of word and deed.


10. (Hiranyagarbha Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Rouat]
The Great Golden Womb of the brilliant forms of

existence, sole lord of the universe, existed by Himself


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




long before the world was born. He it is who holds this
earth and Heaven. To Him we offer our homage and
worship in libations of praise in words and deeds in


11. (Ishvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Aiad]
It is He who was and is the sole lord of the living,
breathing and moving world of the eye (and ear). It is
He who, by His own might, rules over the world of the
humans and the animals. To that same lord of power
and bliss we offer our homage and worship in libations
of praise and fragrant havi in truth of word and deed.


12. (Ishvara Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Gest, Yasyeme, Yasyemah]
By whose might, they say, these snow-covered
mountains have come into existence and the oceans roll
with floods of water, and who by His arms of
omnipotence wields these quarters of space, to Him we
offer our homage and worship with oblations of praise
and havi.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




13. (Paramatma Devata, Prajapati Rshi)
fades



The Lord who is the giver of birth to the soul with
its power and potential, whose glory all the divinities of
the world celebrate in song, whose shade of protection
is immortality and falling off is death, to Him we offer
our homage and worship in hymns with havi.


14. (Yajna Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Shee]
feafea nex




May thoughts of wisdom and acts of yajna come
to us from all directions—thoughts and actions noble
and auspicious, pure and free from violence, irresistible
and unobstructed, bursting forth and fruitful, so that
young, energetic and brilliant people of divinity may
arise in this assembly of ours and be the protectors and
promoters of our advancement.


15. (Vidvans Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


wired nea


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




jivase.


May the auspicious wisdom of brilliant visionaries
come to us. May the wealth and knowledge of simple,
sincere and generous people come to us from all sides.
May we enjoy the favour and friendship of noble and
dedicated people of faith and excellence. And may all
these nobilities thrive and promote our life for good and


16. (Vishvedeva Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Tada, Mitramaditim, Mitramaditi, Somamasvina]
Those we invoke and honour in yajna with the
ancient, eternal and self-proclaimed voice of the Veda:
Bhaga, giver of glory, Mitra, universal friend, Aditi,
mother of indestructible wisdom, Daksha, lord versatile
and inviolable, Aryama, sustainer of creation, Varuna,
best and highest, Soma, giver of peace, prosperity,
knowledge and happiness, Ashvinis, givers of health
and well-being, and all the teachers and scholars of the


May mother Sarasvati, benevolent and beatific,
give us all the good and gracious gifts of life.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




17. (Vayu Devata, Gotama Rshi)


Rowa Fay ug




[Names: Somasuto]
May the joyous wind blow for us with the breath
of life. May mother earth be green and fruitful for her
children. May the fatherly sun bless us with light and
brilliance. May the blissful clouds replete with the
waters of life be generous with showers. And may you,
Ashvinis, both sustaining powers of all round growth
of body, mind and spirit, listen to our prayers and be
kind and gracious.


18. (Ishvara Devata, Gotama Rshi)






[Names: Tamisanam]
For our protection, we invoke and worship the lord
and ruler of the moving and the unmoving world who
inspires our intelligence, dedication and devotion, so that
He, lord supreme inviolable, may be the protector,
sustainer and promoter of all our wealth of life for the
sake of advancement and well-being.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




19. (Ishvara Devata, Gotama Rshi)






May Indra, great is His glory, be kind and grant
us honour and greatness. May Pusha, lord sustainer and
wielder of universal wealth, be generous and bring us
health and wealth. May the inviolable lord of speed and
security be watchful and grant us progress and freedom.
And may Brihaspati, lord of the great world of existence,
be gracious and bless us with all the good and well-
being in life.

20. (Vidvans Devata, Gotama Rshi)
anaia ata: ataerat fase at gasaat-


Taf IR ou




[Names: Prsadasva, Agnijihva]
Great are the scholars, vibrant as the winds and
brilliant as children of sunbeams. Riding on flying
horses, they are ever on the move to goodness and glory
in the battles of life.


Fiery is their tongue and blazing are their eyes,
and yet they are human, dedicated to thought and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




May all the scholars of the world come to bless
us with protection and progress to our goal here in this


21. (Vidvans Devata, Gotama Rshi)


[Names: Bhadram, Sthirairangai]
yadayuh.


Devas, men of knowledge and divinity, dedicated
to yajna, may we hear only good with our ears, may we
see only good with our eyes. Singing songs of praise
with strong and stable limbs, may we live our full span
of life, enjoying with strong and healthy bodies in the
service of God and the divines.


22. (Vidvans Devata, Gotama Rshi)
Gara eri ficit dia ar it gear Tea PAT UR




[Names: Sataminnu, Putraso]
Scholars of knowledge and wisdom, while we are
close to you, help us to live a full life of hundred years in
good health of body wherein our children too may grow
to be fathers of their children. Let not our life be hurt or
injured. Let it not perish on the way in the middle of the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




23. (Dyau etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


ifie 3 t



[Names: Aditirdyauraditirantariksamaditirmata, Aditih]
In the essence: Light is indestructible; sky is
is indestructible; Father, the Cosmic Spirit is
indestructible; Son, the soul (jiva), is indestructible; all
the divinities of nature and humanity are indestructible;
[Names: Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra]
others, are indestructible; whatever is born is
indestructible; whatever will be born is indestructible.
(All that was, is and shall be is indestructible in the


24. (Mitra & Others Devata, Gotama Rshi)






[Names: Rbhuksa, Yadvajino, Aryama]
and leader, Indra, ruler, Ribhuksha, mighty, and Maruts,
powers of the world, never overlook and ignore our life.
And we shall praise and celebrate the warlike exploits
of the divine-born and tempestuous hero of the world
of yajnic character.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




25. (Vidvans Devata, Gotama Rshi)



[Names: Gaisst, Yannirnija, Supranajo, Indrapusnoh, Indrapusno]
The persons who gratefully receive the gifts of the
lord giver and with that pure and sacred wealth move the
cycle of charity on ward; and also the self-developing
man of immortal spirit with initiative and versatile
potential in many fields; they all go forward on the
favourite path of Indra and Pusha, blest with power and


26. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi)




[Names: Abhipriyam]
When this aggressive leader, distinguished among
equals of divine quality and loved of Pusha (the
President), is advanced to the front by the dynamic
nation, then Tvashta, maker of men and nations, receives
him as a lovely gift of national yajna and, alongwith
the nation, refines him with sanctification for honour
and glory.


27. (Yajna Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Yaddhavisyamrtuso]
When three orders of people take the man at the
head of national yajna round the national vedi (the land)
according to the seasons and circumstances of the
country, then the man of immortal spirit, prime agent
of the divinities of progress and development, Pushan,
speaking in loud accents, takes the yajna forward for
all the noble citizens.


28. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi)






[Names: Rasa, Agnimindho]
By the national yajna, cherished and well
performed with dedication and grace, may all the
functionaries, the hota with oblations, adhvaryu with
meticulous organisation, agnimindha with lighting of
the fire, gravagrabha with handling of soma stones,
shansta with invocations, expert suvipra with vedic
hymns, and all the other participants refresh, replenish
and overfill all the streams of national life.


29. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi)


a reir where eutufirdftriss-m usu


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Yupavraska, Vayupaya, Vayupa]
(We thank) the cutters of wood for the yajna post,
the carriers of the post, the shapers of the ring for the
post and all those who collect the materials and complete
the preparations for yajna, and, (we pray), may all their
efforts be for our good and success.


30. (Vidvans Devata, Gotama Rshi)


[Names: Garbo]
aAa NoN


[Names: Anvenam]
May the man of broad yajnic potential, the man
able to realise the hopes of the learned, come to us
spontneously and bear the wisdom of knowledge for
us, so that the visionaries and intellectuals may rejoice
with him and we may create a community of
brotherhood among the brilliant scholars.


31. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi)


"grfsritr ard Gass at ur SATA THAT TST
[Names: Sirsanya, Yadva]
Whatever the waistband or the leg fetter or the
bridle, or the reins over the head or strings of control,
and whatever kind of grass is held in the mouth of the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




fast and powerful horse (of national yajna), all these
too should be under the control of the learned and the
wise people, for you.


32. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi)




[Names: Yadasvasya, Yaddhastayoh]
Whatever fly stings and eats of the flesh of the
fast running horse of the yajna of the nation, whatever
smears the tempered steel, or whatever soils the hands
and nails of the performers of ritual, all these too should
be under the control of the learned and the wise for you.


33. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi)


[Names: Yaduvadhyamudarasyapavati, Sukrta]
Whatever undigested waste is discharged from
the stomach, and whatever are the gases of the half
digested food, all that the expert yajamana (physicians)
should relieve and rectify and they should also have
delicious foods and fragrant materials prepared.


34. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






If your person is on the stake being developed
and matured by fire, and you feel strained, exhausted,
almost dead, then whatever cry of pain escapes your
lips, let it not fall into the dust, nor let it be lost in the
straw, but let it be a valuable subject of study for the
noble scholars who are keen to rectify it.


35. (Vishvedevas Devata, Gotama Rshi)
[Names: Rasdan]
gaq NZU
Those who watch the nation's food grow to
ripeness, and those who say: It is fragrant, harvest it,
and those who serve their share in the growth of the


nation on the move, may all their effort be for the benefit
of us all.


36. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi)
[Names: Bass, Saar, Yanniksanam, Usmanya]
Watchful stirring (replenishment) of the earth's


fertility for the growth of grain and fruit, whatever
containers and reservoirs of water there be for growth


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and irrigation, the clouds for showers and alleviation
of heat, and beauty spots from place to place: these
beautify and add to the grace of a nation on the march.


37. (Vidvans Devata, Gotama Rshi)
vay us




May the fire enveloped in smoke never extinguish
or diminish your light. May the shining and fragrant
dawn never disturb you into isolation. The noblest
generous divinities accept and honour you as a hero,
dear, brilliant, industrious, sanctified and marching


38. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi)






[Names: Nikramanam, Yacca]
The start and gallop of your horse, the stop and
sitting, turning round and rolling, halting and the fetters,
what it drinks and the grass that it eats, may all these be
good and graceful, and may they be appreciated by the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


39. (Vidvansah Devata, Gotama Rshi)






[Names: Yada, Sandanamarvantam]
The cloth for the horse, the overcloth and the
golden ornaments which adorn it, the head-band, and
the fetters which control this fast-moving steed, may
all these be beautiful, good and appreciable among the


40. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi)





[Names: Sruceva]
Swift and brilliant as you are with mighty strength
and power, still if ever you feel weak and weary and
someone hits you from the back with a whip (to hurt
you or spur you on), then I replenish all your weaknesses
and animate you to full form with the Vedic wealth just
as we rekindle the fire in yajnas with ladlefuls of holy


41. (Yajna Devata, Gotama Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Catustrimsadvajino, Acchidra, Sasta, Vayuna]
Just as a man of innate expertise and intelligence
controls the thirty-four movements of a tempestuous
horse, which is a favourite friend of the nobles, so should
the leader, a man of innate and rightful intelligence and
power, a friend of the noble and brilliant people, control
the dynamic governance of a vibrant nation and maintain
all the parts of the national machine in a faultless order
of efficiency, having examined the system step by step
and declared, every part as perfect and approved.


42. (Yajamana Devata, Gotama Rshi)


[Names: Tasted, Maung]
ETÈ anxia



[Names: Ekastvasturasvasya]
One is the marker of the sun's horse/chariot of
time, that is the year, the annual cycle of seasons. Two
are the guiding controllers, the summer solstice and the
winter solstice. I take the divisions of your course, O
sun, O ruler, O nation, according to the seasons, and I
dedicate them to the fire of national yajna according to
the seasons and the circumstances of the nation.


43. (Atma Devata, Gotama Rshi)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






While you are on your way up in life, may your
tempered steel fix itself in your person, nor your own
power arrest you. Nor must the covetous pervert mutilate
your limbs, nor tear your body asunder with the sword,
for no cause or weakness whatsoever.


44. (Atma Devata, Gotama Rshi)





[Names: Hari]
This way, with this knowledge, you will not die,
nor suffer wrong. Instead, you would rise to the state of
the immortals by the straight paths of the divinities. Yoke
your strong horses to the chariot, and let the fast horse
be close to the bearer of the burden.


45. (Praja Devata, Gotama Rshi)
[Names: Pres, Arsstvat]
Bae S&H




[Names: Sugavyam, Anagastvam]
May our dynamic ruler work and provide for the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




development of cows, horses, men and women, children
and all round health and wealth of the nation.


May the freedom of the land and abundance of
the earth lead us to a state of freedom from sin and crime.
May the leader, high-priest of national yajna, ever ready
and well-provided with holy materials, build a great
social order for humanity.


46. (Vishvedeva Devata, Gotama Rshi)






[Names: Adityairindrah, Adityairindra]
Just as the sun and all the divinities of nature hold,
sustain and bless these worlds, so may the ruler and the
noblest powers of humanity govern and sustain the
regions of the world. May they and we all realise the
joy of life.


Just as the sun with its light and planets and the
winds through the months and seasons of the year
blesses us with herbs and juices for health and vitality,
so may the physician with all his aids, light and air
provide us with tonics and medication for health.


Just as the sun and cosmic energy through the
movement of the months and seasons carry on the
creative and restorative yajna of nature for the earth
and her children, so may the ruler with the brilliant leaders


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of the nation carry on and accomplish the social yajna
for the health of the body-politic and the children of the
nation.


47. (Agni Devata, Gotama Rshi)




Agni, light of life, closest friend and saviour, be
good to us, be the very spirit of our home. Pure and
immaculate, warmth and vitality of life, rest and haven
of all, universal creator and giver of wealth, come and
bless us with the most brilliant knowledge and wealth
of life.


48. (Agni Devata, Gotama Rshi)






Lord of the universe, most briliant power, blazing
with the light of knowledge and Dharma, we pray to
you for the good and well-being of life sincerely for
our friends and for ourselves. Such as you are, enlighten
us, listen to our prayers, save and protect us from all sin
and crime against Dharma and Society.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1. (Agni & Others Devata, Yajnavalkya Rshi)


aasa ufereit er ada a iri aA emqseun-«afisi
a ada aa ou mara satara diva ada d




[Names: Sakaman]
Agni, vital heat, and Prithivi, earth, go together in
harmony (for this side of life, for Dharma, righteous living,
[Names: Artha, Kama]
they be harmonious and favourable for me for the other


Vayu, the air, and Antariksha, the sky, go together
in harmony for this side of life. May they be favourable
for me for the other side too.


Aditya, the sun, and Dyau, heaven, go together
in harmony for this side. May they be favourable for
me for the other side too.


Apah, spatial waters, and Varuna, the oceans, go
together in harmony for me this side of life, may they
be favourable for the other side too.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Seven are the conjunctions between oceans,
waters, sun, heaven, air, sky, heat and earth, which hold
the world. The eighth, mother earth, sustains the forms
of life. May all the conjunctions and the sustaining
mother's lap help us realise our aims of life.


O ruler, act well so that our aims of life be fulfilled
and the paths of life be straight and clear.


By dedication to the other side, may I have full
knowledge of existence and beyond.


2.  (Ishvara Devata, Laugakshi Rshi)


[Names: Brahmarajanyabhyam, Priyo]
tamupa mado namatu.


Just as this blessed Word of the Veda I speak for
the people, all without exception, Brahmana, Kshatriya,
Shudra, Vaishya, master and servant, one’s own and


May I be dear and favourite with the noble
divinities and the generous people for the gift of the


May this noble aim of mine be fulfilled here in
this life. May the others too follow and come my way
beyond this life.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




3. (Ishvara Devata, Gritsamada Rshi)





[Names: Yaddidayacchavasa]
Brihaspati, lord of the great universe, master of
universal wealth, lord of light and yajnic actions among
humanity, you shine by virtue of your own glory.
Manifest in the law and order of existence and in the
Veda, you blaze with your own omnipotence. Such as
you are, Lord, bless us with the wonderful knowledge
and wealth of the world.


Man of knowledge, consecrated you are in the
yajna of knowledge as if you are an oblation in the
sacrificial ladle, upayama. I accept you in the service
of Brihaspati, lord of the world and its knowledge, for
the sake of Brihaspati, enlightenment of the scholars
with divine knowledge. This now is your haven and
home, your end and aim of life.


4. (Indra Devata, Ramyakshi Rshi)



[Names: Vidyadbhirgravabhih]
gomate.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Indra, lord of the earth and the divine Word,
highpriest of a hundred yajnas of life, come here and
drink of the soma extracted by the existent scholars with
the sacred stones and distilled by the clouds.


Man of divine knowledge, master of your mind
and senses, consecrated you are to Indra, lord of earth
and Veda. I accept you for the service of Indra and
education of the people. This service and dedication is
now your haven and home, the end and aim of your life.


5. (Surya Devata, Ramyakshi Rshi)




vem Maa uuu


[Names: Satakrato, Gomadbhirgravabhih]
gomate.


Indra, lord of sunbeams, breaker of the clouds and
high-priest of a hundred yajnas of creation, come and
drink of the soma extracted by brilliant men of knowledge
and wealth of self-control with the voice of thunder and
showers of clouds.


Man of brilliance and knowledge, accepted and
consecrated you are like an oblation held in the
sacrificial ladle for the service of Indra, lord of the sun
and clouds. This service and dedication now is your
haven and home, the very reason and justification of your
existence. I accept you for Indra and the man of wealth
and self-control.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




6.  (Vaishvanara Devata, Pradurakshi Rshi)


maat serene verfeaeaída | srshei are






[Names: Aand, Ajasram]
We love Vaishvanara, eternal fire, lord of the laws
of truth and light of the world, and we pray for the vital
fire of life acting on waters within the laws of nature.


Man of knowledge and science, you are
consecrated like an oblation held in the sacrificial ladle
for service to Vaishvanara, fiery vitalizer of life. I accept
you for service to the fire and waters of nature. This
service and dedication now is your very haven and
home, the very meaning of your life.


7.  (Vaishvanara-Agni Devate, Kutsa Rshi)







[Names: Asame, Asant, Well, Vaisvanarasya]
Let us abide by the laws and wisdom of
Vaishvanara, leader of the universe. Glorious light of the
world, He creates the joy, beauty and glory of the worlds
in existence. Manifesting from the world itself, He


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




watches and energises this whole universe and, as the
vital heat energy of life, works with the sun for the
sustenance of life and growth.


Man of science and knowledge, accepted and
consecrated you are by the laws of life and nature for
the service of Vaishvanara. This service now is your
haven and home. I accept you for the sake of
Vaishvanara, science of heat and energy.


8.  (Vaishvanara Devata, Kutsa Rshi)


SmerWrchsmuussm uw ate used: is fTes8ra




[Names: Agnirukthena, Agnirukth]
Vaishvanara Agni, brilliant power of light and
knowledge, come from afar for our protection and
advancement, with the Uktha Vedic verses, by a
beautiful chariot.


Brilliant man of knowledge and science,
consecrated and dedicated you are like an oblation in
the ladle for Vaishvanara, the fire of social yajna. This
dedication is now your life and aim. I accept you for
the sake of advancement in the field of science and


9.  (Vaishvanara Devata, Kutsa Rshi)


[Names: Terre]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Agnirrsih, Agnirrsi, Tamimahe]
varcase.


We worship Agni that is the light and vision of the
world and knowledge, purifier of life, friend and protector
of universal humanity, front leader of the yajnas of
existence, and lord of wealth and home of all.


Man of knowledge, vision and leadership,
consecrated and dedicated you are to Agni, lord of light
and life and advancement. This dedication is your haven
and home. I accept you for the sake of enlightenment
and progress of knowledge, purity and prosperity of life
and all sections of society.


10. (Indra Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)






[Names: Hantu]
Indra, great and glorious ruler of the world, perfect
with full sixteen virtues of nature and spirit, may, we
pray, grant us peace and joy. Thunderbolt in hand, may
He strike off and remove him who commits the sin of
hate and hostility against us.


Leader of power and perfection, consecrated and
dedicated you are to Indra, Supreme ruler, like an
oblation for the yajna of peace and friendship. This


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




dedication now is your end and aim of life. I accept and
honour you for the sake of the unity of humanity and
conquest of hate and fear.


11. (Agni Devata, Nodha Gotama Rshi)






[Names: Aase]
Just as cows in their stalls every day call forth the
calf for the feed and rejoice, so do we, for you all, in
songs of love and joy, invoke and celebrate Indra, the
ruler, dynamic lord of wondrous deeds and felicity who
takes delight in the food and nourishment of his people
and loves to see them settled in good homes in a state
of comfort and prosperity.


12. (Agni Devata, Nodha Gotama Rshi)






[Names: Yadvahistham, Mahisiva]
Vibhavasu, lord of brilliance and power, ruler of
the world, honour and celebrate him who carries the
highest and heaviest burdens of the state in the service
of Agni, self-refulgent glory of the human nation. Like
the queen of magnificence, all the wealth of food, power
and prosperity of the nation issues forth from your palace
and personality. Honour Him (Agni), let us honour Him.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




13. (Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)
[Names: Ardaas, Ehyu, Ebhirvardhasa]
Agni, seeker of light, come gently without
reservation. I would speak to you other words (than I


have yet spoken) and you would then advance with these
sparks of light and drops of soma (in health and wisdom).


14. (Samvatsara Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)





[Names: Rtavaste, Samvatsaraste]
Man of knowledge, seeker of light, may the
seasons expand your yajna. May the months protect and
increase your holy materials of yajna. And may the year
uphold your yajna, and may it sustain and advance our
people in all directions.


15. (Vidvan Devata, Vatsa Rshi)


[Names: Upahvare]
In the lap of mountains where flow the streams to
meet and join, there with the dawn of holy intelligence
the man of light is born.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




16. (Agni Devata, Mahiyava Rshi)






[Names: Ucca]
Man of knowledge, up on high is your home in
the light of heaven risen from holy food and soma juice,
blazing, great and admirable. I watch it with reverence
and pray it be as firm with the earth as it is in the light
of heaven.


17. (Indra Devata, Mahiyava Rshi)





[Names: Wess, Varivovit]
Man of knowledge, light and power, knowing what
is good and disposed to oblige, come overflowing like
soma for elevating company for the sake of Indra, man
of power and dominion, Varuna, man of excellence, and
the Maruts, men of tempestuous speed.


18. (Vidvan Devata, Mahiyava Rshi)






[Names: Aaron, Sisasanto]
The lord and master of the world rules and
watches all these powers, wealths and honours of men
and women. Wishing to serve the master and humanity,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


we pray for His grace and favour for all these.


19. (Vidvanso Devata, Mudgala Rshi)






May the powers of divinity and the noblest people
guide and conduct our yajna according to the seasons
so that we may grow strong and powerful with healthy
children and brave heroes, with fertile cows, with strong
horses, with all other things, with all men and animals


20. (Vidvan Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)








[Names: Tvastaram, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
Agni, master of knowledge and power, bring up
the nobles’ wives, women of love and desire, bring
Tvashta, lord maker of human forms, here to the yajna
for a life-giving drink of soma.


21. (Vidvan Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Man of holy speech, leader and high-priest of
yajna, drink the soma and praise and celebrate our yajna
alongwith the season. You alone are the creator and giver
of the wealth of the world.


22. (Soma Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)






[Names: Dravinodah, Nestradrtubhirisyata]
The generous man of wealth and honour wants to
drink the soma of health from the flask with humility
according to the seasons. Feel the desire, you too search
and you shall find the juice. Perform the homa, abide
and win honour and settlement.


23. (Vidvan Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)






[Names: Viva, Tavayam]
Indra, man of knowledge in search of honour and
power, this soma is yours. Come straight on here and,
happy at heart, protect, preserve and advance this eternal
Dharma of joy in action.


In this yajna, sit on the holy seats of blessed grass,
take this nectar of life and light and hold it in your vital


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




24. (Vidvan Devata, Gritsamada Rshi)


[Names: Totes, Water]
SAT: GAT: usu




[Names: Ameva]
Tvashta, man of knowledge, maker and shaper of
men, centre of a happy company of scholars, loved,
honoured and cordially invited, accept our hospitality and


enjoy with the generous and brilliant people of divine


Come ye all, feel at home, sit on the holy seats of
grass in our yajna and rejoice. Rejoice and enlighten us
with knowledge and wisdom.


25. (Soma Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi)




[Names: Svadisthaya]
Soma, come, spirit of life, distilled for the drink
as well as the protection of Indra, leading powers of
knowledge, honour, peace and prosperity, flow in in
the most delicious and inspiring streams of nectar. Flow
on and on freely.


26. (Agni Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Raksoha, Drone]
Agni, man of fire and yajna, destroyer of evil and
watchful saviour of the world with light, finds his haven
and home safe and secure with others on the golden altar
of yajna consecrated by the showers of soma from the




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1. (Agni Devata, Agni Rshi)






[Names: Samastva]
Agni, man of knowledge and light of the world,
may the years, seasons, year cycles, visionaries of truth
and acts of absolute truth whatever and wherever they
be: may all these take you forward in life. Shine with
celestial light and illuminate all the directions and
interdirections of the world with your knowledge and


2.  (Samidhenis Devata, Agni Rshi)




Agni, brilliant power of knowledge, light up and
rise and enlighten this yajamana, seeker of light and
knowledge, and rise and stay up high for honour and




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




while scholars of the Veda and your admirers, not others,
shall win honour and brilliance.


3.  (AgniDevata, Agni Rshi)


[Names: Gate]
PER UB




[Names: Sapatnaha]
Agni, brilliant lord of light and knowledge, these
Brahmanas, dedicated scholars of divinity, choose and
elect you as guide and leader.


Agni, in this position of eminence, be good to
us. Destroyer of negativities, subduer of the proud and
insidious, you are watchful, awake and alert in your
own home. Keep us too awake, alert and ever watchful.


4.  (AgniDevata, Agni Rshi)






[Names: Rekaan, Preatkat, Gaya, Ihaivagne, Ksatramagne]
Agni, brilliant lord of light and power, here itself
hold and rule over the power and prosperity you have.
Let not the veterans, experienced, alert and watchful of
yajna, either ignore or denigrate you. May the social
order be well-governed for your sake so that you and
your devotees, supreme and unviolated, may move


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


forward and rise high.
5. (Agni Devata, Agni Rshi)






[Names: Ksatrenagne, Sajatanam, Mitradheye, Mitradhey]
Agni, bright and blazing like light and fire, youthful
and golden is your age. Take over and start well here
with this world-order of humanity.


Agni, mighty intelligent ruler, rule and work with
the spirit of friendship in the world state which is a
covenant of friends. Go forward, seated in the centre of
an assembly of equals who are like brothers and sisters.


Agni, elected, invited and installed in office by
the sovereign nations of the world, rule, shine and
illuminate the world here.


6.  (AgniDevata, Agni Rshi)
sahaviram rayim dah.


Agni, lord of light and wealth, repelling the false,
eliminating the wicked, dispelling darkness and
ignorance and fighting out all the evils of the world,
give us a republic of brave good heroes overflowing
with plenty, prosperity and generosity.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.



7. (Agni Devata, Agni Rshi)
[Names: Brahive]
aT aà mon




[Names: Anadhrsyo, Sivebhiradya]
Agni, lord and ruler of the world, undaunted,
omniscient, inviolable, self-refulgent, holder and
sustainer of the world-order, remove all human fear,
hate, disease etc., shine and illuminate all the regions
of the world, and now protect us for advancement with
peace and benevolence.


8. (Vishvedeva Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Ahma, Vardhayainam]
Brihaspati, guardian of all, Savita, giver of light
and knowledge, educate and enlighten this intelligent
and honourable ruler as well as the people in every way.
Let him grow and advance for the greatness and
prosperity of the nation. Let all the noble powers of
divinity and humanity rejoice with him.


9. (Ashvinis etc. Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Bearers]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Amutra, Pratyauhatamasvina]
Brihaspati, lord and saviour of all, guard the ruler
against any curse or calumny or evil that may tarnish
him in the life to come, and save him from any accusation
or damnation of the law or constitution or Yama, the
supreme and universal judge of human performance.


Agni, lord of life and light, may the Ashvinis,
nature's powers of health, teachers, preachers and
physicians, with their best actions and research, keep
off the onslaughts of ill-health and fatality from him.


10. (Surya Devata, Agni Rshi)
xe dam usu dedu gon




Let us rise beyond the dark, watching the heavenly
light above, high and higher, and reach to the sun, highest
light and most generous divinity of the saviour divinities
of the world.

11. (Agni Devata, Agni Rshi)




[Names: Socimsyagneh, Dyumattama]
May the holy fuels of fire be great and best, may
the flames of fire be blazing high and pure—fire, most


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




brilliant in splendour, most beautiful of form, dynamic
impeller of life and life's growth.


12. (Vishvedeva Devata, Agni Rshi)






[Names: Tanunapadasuro, Patho]
Vayu/Agni, which allows not the body to fall,
which is breath of life, replete with universal vitalities,
divine among divinities, and most generous, may that
Vayu/Agni sprikle our path of life with the sweetest
nectar of ghrta.


13. (Yajna Devata, Agni Rshi)




[Names: Sukrddevah]
Agni, with honey sweets you come to yajna, Agni,
loved and inspiring, celebrated by yajniks, benevolent,
brilliant, creator and sustainer, and universal treasure
of life's wealth.

14. (Vahni Devata, Agni Rshi)




[Names: Acchayameti]
In the yajnas conscientiously conducted with love


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and non-violence, the high-priest comes gracefully to
the fire holding the ladle, celebrating Agni, the deity,
with brilliant power of knowledge, water and ghee, and
food for the fire.


15. (Vayu Devata, Agni Rshi)


a dae wear: ase uer quae: |




Let the high-priest, seated and seating others in
yajna, conscientious and richest in yajna materials,
worship the grandeur of generous Agni and offer
fragrant exhilarating oblations into the fire. And he
would know and feel and enjoy the gift of bliss.


16. (Devyah Devata, Agni Rshi)
mereut Met Uta: NAN




[Names: Uruvyacaso]
By the light and splendour of this expansive fire
emanating from its abode (vedi), the scholars of yajna,
dedicated to the protection and promotion of life and
nature, open the celestial doors, and reveal the laws and
functions of this universal power.


17. (Yajna Devata, Agni Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






May the two divine mothers, the morning and the
evening (the twilight, and the dawn), guard and expand
this holy non-violent yajna of ours in the home of this
fire in the vedi.


18. (Agni Devata, Agni Rshi)






[Names: Rafn, Krnutam]
May the two divine priests (seeker and teacher,
fire and air) expand our holy non-violent yajna to the
heights, raise and praise the flames of fire and
propitiously do us the desired good.


19. (Ida & Others Devata, Agni Rshi)






of omniscience in the eternal mind in heaven, Sarasvati,
speech of eternal knowledge of the Veda flowing across
the space, and Bharati, actualized speech of knowledge
articulated in the shastras, may these, great and holy,
adoring the Supreme Lord and highly adored by us,
consecrate our seats of yajna and the home.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




20. (Tvashta Devata, Agni Rshi)






[Names: Tannasturipamadbhutam, Puruksu, Rayasposam]
May Tvashta, divine artist of the world, generous
to all, gain for us fast-maturing, wonderful and virile
health, wealth and noursihment, place it at the hub of
the nation's movement and relieve us of want and


21. (Scholars Devata, Prajapati Rshi)





[Names: Vanaspate, Agnirhavyam, Agnirhavya]
Vanaspati, scholar and researcher of the science
of yajna, just as the holy fire of peaceful yajna refines
and universalizes the holy materials, so you, rejoicing
at heart among noble and generous scholars, create
refined and powerful holy materials for the fire of
natioinal yajnas of production and purification.


22. (Indra Devata, Prajapati Rshi)






[Names: Hulls]
Agni, lord of world knowledge, take this holy
offering and, in truth of word and deed, refine and raise


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




it to the grace and glory of Indra, spirit of power and
prosperity of the world. And may all the noble people of
the world and divinities of nature share this holy gift and
rejoice.


23. (Vayu Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)






[Names: Ulatsstan, Rafa, Paar, Pivo]
All the leading scholars of the world, well-provided
for living, of equal mind and noble intelligence,
concentrating on the knowledge of Vayu, wind and
energy, promote the wealth of the world and produce a
new generation of noble descendants. And Vayu, pure
and immaculate spirit and essence of life, blesses these
dynamic enterprising people with grace and dignity.


24. (Vayu Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)






[Names: Vadis, Raye, Vayum]
The Heavan and the earth generate Vayu for the
wealth of energy. The divine intelligence activates Vayu
to reveal the wealth of the divine Word. And then, that
same Vayu, pure treasure of energy, all the living beings
in existence together seek, enjoy and pursue (for the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


sake of wealth and energy).


25. (Prajapati Devata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi)


[Names: Seay]
faðm Rei




When the cosmic waters of existence (that is,
tanmatras, subtle elements of Prakriti, material cause
of the universe, or, we can say, Mahan, the existential
form of Prakriti) appear on the cosmic scene, holding
the vishva-garbha, seed form of the universe in their
womb, and give birth to Agni (vital heat of nature and
mother of stars such as the sun), then arises Vayu, the
one life-breath of the divine forms of existence. To that
divine breath of life, let us pay homage with love and
action in faith.


26. (Prajapati Devata, Hiranyagarbha Rshi)


faðm een




[Names: Yascidapo]
The One Supreme Lord over all the divine forms
of Prakriti, who overwatches the cosmic waters with
His own might of immanence and omniscience —
waters (tanmatras) conducting the great yajna of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




evolution and producing various forms of life, to that
One Lord of Bliss let us pay homage and offer worship
with acts of love and faith in yajna.


27. (Vayu Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)


tet: un




Vayu, by the waves of your own energy you fly
so gracefully to the house of the generous yajamana for
the desired objects. Bless us with enjoyable gifts of wealth
and food. Bless us with brave heroes, wealth of cows
and horses, and the power and dignity of life.


28. (Vayu Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)


Gat A: Re




[Names: Vayo]
Vayu, tempestuous power of divine nature, by a
hundred modes of action and a thousand currents of
energy in this mighty yajna of creative evolution, you
come to our holy yajna of love and action in the world.
Come, rejoice in this yajna and bless us too with joy.


Sages of knowledge and yajna, you too protect
us with your knowledge and your blessings for peace,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


prosperity and well-being.
29. (Vayu Devata, Gritsamada Rshi)





[Names: Raah, Niyutvan, Gantasi, Divine]
of the universe, primary leading light of nature and
humanity, just as this wind, pure and immaculate, moves
and blesses the house of a devotee of soma and yajna,
so you, pure and immaculate, come in response to my
invocation. Here I come to you.


30. (Vayu Devata, Purumeedha Rshi)


[Names: Sukro]
Vayu, brilliant power divine, honey-sweet and
pure, worthy of emulation and admiration, I come,
invoke and invite you, leading light of holy gatherings
of yajna. Come at the speed of the wind, and join here
for a drink of soma.


31. (Vayu Devata, Ajameedha Rshi)






[Names: Sait, Vayuragrega]
Vayu, leader ever in the forefront of the noble


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




activities of life, lover of yajna, come with your heart
and soul to the yajna. Blissful you are, come with all
your sagely acts and blessed powers.


32. (Vayu Devata, Gritsamada Rshi)


Raar 113211




[Names: Niyutvantsomapitaye]
Vayu, leader and scholar of the speed of the winds,
thousands are the paths and modes of your movement
forward. Take them all and come for a wonder-work of
joy with a holy drink of soma.


33. (Vayu Devata, Gritsamada Rshi)


[Names: Rania]
feu 1330



[Names: Tisrbhi]
Vayu, master of your own innate powers and
knowledge, you conduct the yajna of life by one and
ten, two and twenty, three and thirty paths and modes
and speeds for the desired end and aim of life. Come
here and conduct the yajna, and then release everything
and be free.


34. (Vayu Devata, Angirasa Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Avainsya]
Vayu, sustainer of truth and the laws of nature,
wonderful power, maker of new forms and shaper of the
new generations for Tvashta, lord creator, we pray for
your gifts of protection, sustenance and advancement.


35. (Vayu Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)






Indra, fearless and brave, lord and ruler of the
moving and the unmoving world, it is bliss to see you!
Like unmilked cows yearning for their calves, we invoke
you to pay homage to you.


36. (Parameshvara Devata, Shamyubarhaspatya Rshi)




Indra, supreme lord of power and glory, destroyer
of pain and suffering, there is none other like you on
earth or in heaven ever born or yet to be born in future.
Blest with horse and speed, food and power, cows and
wealth of holy Word, still yearning to move faster and
higher, we come and offer homage and worship to you.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




37. (Indra Devata, Shamyubarhaspatya Rshi)


varus cated mÀ ae aad: od


[Names: Udit, Tvamiddhi]
Indra, lord of power and commander of the forces,
sun among the clouds and defender of truth, we, leaders
of men and achievers of success, invoke you in the
battles of science and knowledge and do homage to you
advancing into all directions like a horse on the wing.


38. (Indra Devata, Shamyubarhaspatya Rshi)






[Names: Gamasvam]
Indra, wonderful lord of the thunderbolt in hand,
lord of the clouds and strong as adamant, highly praised
and celebrated by virtue of your own glory, give us
abundant wealth of cows, horses, chariot bullocks as
well as true knowledge of science for the sake of victory.


39. (Agni Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)


[Names: Yagi]
wa ea Fat use




[Names: Sacisthaya]
Lord of light and knowledge, wonderful and awe-
inspiring, be a friend of the progressive, bless us with


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




protection and help us join with blissful and powerful
mode of action and advancement.


40. (Indra Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)




[Names: Drdha]
Indra, the real soothing, genuine and most powerful
essence of efficacious soma and herbal food which
relieves and exhilarates you, that surely is the valuable
and unfailing panacea for the cure of ill-health.


41. (Indra Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)
ya tarea ise it



Indra, lord of power and knowledge, you are the
over-all saviour and protector of our friends and
admirers. Be gracious to us in a hundred ways for our
protection and well-being.


42. (Yajna Devata, Shamyu Rshi)




In every yajna, by every word, for the sake of Agni,
power of light, energy, intelligence and expertise, we


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




invite, honour and celebrate you. Let us all together
celebrate and sing in praise of Agni, immortal and
omniscient lord, as a darling friend of ours.


43. (Agni Devata, Bhargava Rshi)




Agni, lord of knowledge, action, love and
freedom, master of life, energy and food, home and
shelter of all forms of existence, protect and promote
us by one voice, voice of the Riks, for knowledge.
Protect and promote us by the second voice, voice of
the Yajus, for action. Protect and promote us by the three
voices of Riks, Yajus and Samans for knowledge, action
and worship. Protect and promote us by the four voices
of Riks, Yajus, Samans and Atharvans, for Dharma,
Artha, Kama and Moksha.


44. (Vayu Devata, Shamyu Rshi)






[Names: Roana, Bhuvadvajesvavita]
Scholar, sage, teacher, learner, promote the child
of life and energy, vayu, agni and knowledge, which
allow not the grandeur of life to diminish, so that nature
and knowledge may be our friends, protect us in the
battles of life and continue to be the saviours of our
persons and people. Friends as they are, we invoke them


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


for the oblations of holy offerings in yajna.
45. (Agni Devata, Shamyu Rshi)


[Names: Herds]
CROUdTH | AASTA ure Wt are | qt




[Names: Fadia, Samvatsaro, Usasaste, Usasast, Pretya, Suparnacidasi]
by the law of nature like the current year, give up the
weaknesses like the year gone by. You are wide-awake
and comprehensive like the universally present year,
and definite like the year cycle. May the dawns flourish
and be favourable to you. May the day-night cycle be
flourishing and favourable to you. May the fortnights
flourish and be favourable to you. May the months
flourish, may the seasons flourish, may the years flourish
and be favourable to you.


For coming and going, advancement and return,
collect, expand, control and contain.


You are the winner of life's golden beauties. Move
forward in unison with that divinity of Time like the
breath of life and stay fast and firm with Dharma like
the fixed stars.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1. (Indra Devata, Brihaduktha Vamadeva Rshi)




Let the hota, man of yajna, offer faithful libations
of holy materials, research and study in honour of Indra
(agni, i.e., energy, heat and light) enshrined in the divine
Word, latent at the centre of the earth, blazing on top of
heaven and thundering in the clouds.


And such a yajna, shining with lustre and most
brilliant among men of might and valour, would enjoy
the most delicious gifts of life.


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna, never relent.


2. (Indra Devata, Brihaduktha Vamadeva Rshi)


ie CABE QU DESAIN lu gat-
[Names: Aeae]
Amit TEXT




Let the man of yajna offer service and oblations


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




to Indra, ruling power of the world, preserver and
protector of the forms of life, victorious, unviolated,
brilliant and generous, and heavenly, with oblations of
defensive actions along the sweetest paths of virtue ; and
with his own lustre and valour, celebrated in songs of
praise in society, and he would attain the best gifts of
life.


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna in honour of


3. (Indra Devata, Brihaduktha Vamadeva Rshi)






Let the man of yajna, with the holiest words and
oblations offer yajna and service to Indra, immortal ruler
of the world, honoured and worshipped by the noblest
powers. And he, brilliant and generous, mighty of
strength, wielder of the thunderbolt in hand, destroyer of
the enemy forts, would lead you to the best and sweetest
gifts of a prosperous society.


Man of yajna, maintain the yajna, don't relent.


4.  (RudraDevata, Brihaduktha Vamadeva Rshi)






[Names: Vasubhi, Rudrairadityaih, Rudrairadityai]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Let the devotee of national yajna offer service
with yajna to Indra, virile hero of manly deeds and chief
of the council, sitting on the vedi along-with his
colleagues of the Vasu, Rudra and Aditya order of
education and national discipline. And Indra would
grace the yajna of the people and lead them to the highest
state of power and prosperity.


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna, never relent.


5. (Indra Devata, Brihaduktha Vamadeva Rshi)





[Names: Suprayana]
Man of yajna, perform the yajna in honour of
Indra, powerful and glorious personality of the nation.
Just as wide open gates augment the flood of waters so
may the doors of yajna augment the vigour, valour and
brilliance of the nation. And in this national yajna, may
the saints and sages going by the paths of rectitude and
extending the bounds of truth open wide the gates of
glory and advancement for the bountiful Indra.


Man of yajna, go on with the yajna, relent not.


6. (Indra Devata, Brihaduktha Vamadeva Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Savatarau]
Let the hota, man of yajna, perform yajna in
honour and service of the morning dawn and the evening
in the open air of universal energy, nourish Indra, the
sun, like a calf and feed it with light and augment its


Hota, do the yajna, increase and extend the beauty
and glory of the world and enjoy. Never relent.


7. (Ashvinau Devate, Brihaduktha Vamadeva Rshi)


I3 eR MISIT




[Names: Kavi]
Let the hota offer the oblations in honour and
service for the Ashvinis, two high-priests of nature in
the fields of health and well-being. They are the
physicians, friends, who carry on the yajna for the health
of Indra, the soul in body. Both of them, wise visionaries,
brilliant and generous, masters of divine science, work
for and extend the health and well-being of Indra.


Hota, carry on the yajna, augment and extend the
health and well-being of humanity and enjoy yourself
too.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




8. (Indra Devata, Brihaduktha Vamadeva Rshi)





[Names: Erat, Indrapatnirhavismatirvyantvajyasya]
Let the hota, man of yajna, offer yajna for the

sake of the health and happiness of the soul to the three
great divinities, Ida, potential speech of divine
omniscience, Saraswati, divine Word of knowledge, and
Bharati, language of the world-knowledge of science.


Let the three, teacher, preacher and physician
(agents of great actions and creators of three supreme
humors of body-health), as three servants of the regions
of earth, sky and heaven, serve with yajna the three
divinities of Ida, Saraswati and Bharati.

And the three, teacher, preacher and the
physician, and the three mother-sustainers of the soul,
generous with the wealth of life, would bless the soul
and the world with plenty of health and well-being.


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna, never relent.


9. (Indra Devata, Prajapati Rshi)





[Names: Weder, Pururupam]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Let the hota, yajaka, offer yajna to Tvashta, maker
of refined forms beyond weaknes. He blesses, Indra,
valorous, glorious and generous, physician, honourable
in yajna, abundant and graceful, versatile in various fields
and nobly virile, lord of power and grandeur. And Tvashta
would bless you with the excellence of mind and sense
and create all the knowledge of sense and mind and
culture for you.


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna, never relent.


10. (Brihaspati Devata, Prajapati Rshi)




[Names: Tags, Blast]
Let the man of yajna offer homage and honour to
Vanaspati, lover of nature and brilliant as the lord of
sunbeams, dedicated to peace, man of a hundred noble
acts and admirer of intelligence and culture, and he
would, thereby, moving ahead by the simple paths of
honesty and virtue, adding sweetness and grace to the
beauty and glory of life, he would taste the rapturous


Let the man of yajna extend and expand the yajna
of life with honey and sacred water and ghee and add to
the prosperity of society for all and for himself too.


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna, relent not.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




11. (Indra Devata, Prajapati Rshi)





[Names: Aans]
Let the noble man of yajna offer libations of
richest materials of truth of word and deed for the sake
of Indra, universal power and honour of the world,
libations of oils and fats with the best of words and
actions, of the truthful actions of the children, of the
young generations, of the truth of social conduct and
behaviour, with the sacred words of yajna according to
the Vedas and Shastras.


And the noblest people, Indra and divinities
enjoying the offerings in truth of word and deed with
love and admiration would extend and expand the
glories of life and humanity.


Hota, dedicated man, carry on the yajna.


12. (Indra Devata, Ashvinau Rshi)


aa aR Aida eit eeneenzu d



[Names: Adea, Vastorvrtam]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Let the fire and splendour of yajna blazing in the
vedi, invoked in the morning and preserved at night,
advance Indra, power of world knowledge, divine
among divines, surrounded by the noblest presences like
a hero. Let the fire rise to the heavens across the air and
waters in the sky and advance Indra with wealth and


Hota, man of yajna, carry on the yajna, advance
the wealth and knowledge of the world for the world of
humanity and enjoy yourself too.


13. (Indra Devata, Ashvins Rshi)






[Names: Devirdvara]
Let the strong and celestial doors of the nation's
march open wide and advance Indra onward in the social
dynamics of progress, removing the whirlwinds of the
dust of time and urging him on like a horse spurred on
by a darling youthful prince brilliant as the rising sun.


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna, let the wealth
and honour of the nation rise for all, and enjoy.


14. (Ahoratre Devate, Ashvinau Rshi)




[Names: Waaa]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Daivirvisah]
May the brilliant dawn and the starry night inspire
and call forth the youthful yajamana, Indra, to the yajnic
endeavour of the world, and may the two, loving and
beneficent, bless the noble people and help them create
and expand the wealth of the earth for all the people.


Hota, man of yajna, carry on the creative


15. (Indra Devata, Ashvinau Rshi)




[Names: Gefirdusuidr, Jesena, Ayavyanyagha, Siksite]
Two divine powers of nature, the dawn and the
day, and the evening and the night augment the light
and beauty of the sun. One, the evening, wards off the
hate and sins of the mind and the other, the morning,
proclaims and points to the choicest wealths of the
world. May both create, promote, and bring down the
wealth of heaven for the world and the yajamana.


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna.
16. (Indra Devata, Ashvinau Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Isamurjamanya, Ssiksite]
Two sacred divinities of nature, day and night,
holding strength and energy, both generous and
abundant in joy and fulfilment, nourish and advance
Indra, spirit of humanity and prosperity of the world.
One of them, the night, begets food and replenishment
of energy and the other, the day, begets a common meal
and common drink for us. Full of peace and joy, they
hold and join the old with the new, and the new with
the old.


Replete with the spirit and wisdom of divinity,
blest with wealth of energy, blessing all with energy,
they hold the choicest gifts of life in store for the
yajamana, the human soul, and bring us showers of
peace and grace of God upon the earth.


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna in unison with
the night and day.


17. (Ashvinau Devate, Ashvinau Rshi)




[Names: Hataghasainsavabharstam, Ssiksitau]
vitam yaja.


Two high-priests of nature and yajna, wind and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




fire, generous and brilliant, full of divine properties,
feed the sun-beams with the fragrance of yajna and the
smell of earth and add to the prosperity of the world.
They eliminate the agents of sin and crime (by the
elimination of poverty) and burn out the causes of
disease. Full of the spirit of nature's wisdom, they beget
choice gifts of wealth and water and promote the
blessings of God upon the earth for the yajamana.


Man of yajna, carry on with the yajna in unison
with nature, never relent.


18. (Indra Devata, Ashvinau Rshi)






[Names: Sifters, Asprksadbharati, Rudrairyajnaim, Rudrairyajnai]
Three divine powers serve, strengthen and elevate
Indra, the human soul, their master and servant both,
with three sacred processes of action: Bharati, the speech
and light of sattva, with the energy of the Rudra pranas,
reaches the light of heaven. Sarasvati, the speech and
currents of nature’s dynamics, with sacred chants
through fire and wind, expands the yajna and refines
the business of living. And Ida, the earth and holy
libations, bear worldly wealth and bless the homes with
prosperity. Thus the three divinities bring down the riches
of the Divine Giver into the life of humanity, the receiver,


Hota, devotee of yajna, carry on the yajna in tune


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


with Ida, Sarasvati and Bharati.


19. (Indra Devata, Ashvinau Rshi)




[Names: Haamea, Sitiprsthana, Mitravaru]
yaja.

The divine human soul, Indra, in pursuit of
greatness, in love and admiration of humanity, in control
of three councils, bound by three disciplines of
knowledge, action and worship through Riks, Yajus and
Samans, should dedicate himself in yajna to Indra, lord,
life and energy of the universe. Such a person, favoured
by a hundred forms of refined energy, moves forward
in a hundred ways. His fastest food is the energy of
prana and udana. Brihaspati, universal voice of
sustenance is his song of divine praise. The Ashvinis,
sun and moon, are the divine priests of his yajna. And
these divine powers bring into the life of this devotee
in search of wealth the blessings of the lord of the


Man of yajna, keep up the yajna, relent not.


20. (Indra Devata, Ashvinau Rshi)




[Names: Roll]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Sakhah, Divamagrenasprksadantariksam]
The lord of sun-beams, the Tree of life, brilliant
with its lustrous virtues, of golden leaves, honeyed
branches and delicious fruit strengthens and elevates
the divine Indra, power of generosity and eliminater of
poverty. With its top it reaches the light of heaven,
energises and expands the skies, and strengthens and
enriches the earth. And thus it brings for the dedicated
world of humanity the riches as blessings of the lord of
the treasures of the universe.


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna in unison with
the sun and the Tree, never relent.


21. (Indra Devata, Ashvinau Rshi)


I9 9 I


[Names: Svasasthamindrenasannamanya]
vetu yaja.


The divine ether worthiest among the choicest
aspects of nature sustains and elevates Indra, brilliant
human soul, as well as natural energy, well-nestled and
happily placed with Indra, the Divine Presence. It holds,
sustains and pervades the other parts of space and brings
the wealth of the universe for the yearning human soul


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Man of yajna, carry on the yajna in tune with space


and nature and enjoy. Never relent.


22.


(Agni Devata, Ashvinau Rshi)






[Names: Reaveprafiduadeq, Rena, Svistam]
Blessed Agni, brilliant and generous divine fire


energy, which purifies and sanctifies everything, may
bless and elevate Indra, the human soul, turning
everything to good and auspicious for us today. Power
of good and blessedness, may it bestow the wealth of
the world on the dedicated man of yajna yearning for


23.


Man of yajna, keep the fire burning.


(Agni Devata, Ashvinau Rshi)






[Names: Adyattam]
This yajamana, cooking the foods, preparing the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




delicacies, collecting the herbs and goat's milk,
cleansing and strengthening, invokes the fire and selects
the priest to-day.


The lord of sun-beams and herbs, the sun, joins
in presence with the herbs and the goat milk for the honour
of Indra (through the fire).


The fire receives the holy delicacies in response
to the yajamana and advances his wealth and honour.


O Rshi, man of vision and knowledge, may Agni
advance your wealth and honour too.


24. (Agni Devata, Sarasvati Rshi)






[Names: Gayatrim]
Let the man of piety offer yajna in dedication to
Agni, lighted, blazing, great and glorious, worthy of
choice, and to Indra, lord of power and grandeur, giver
of good health and long life. Let him chant the Gayatri,
treasure of joy and giver of the freedom of thought, and
he would be blest with wealth of mind and senses, riches
of the thrice protective earth mother, good health and


Man of yajna, extend and expand the yajna and
enjoy the best of knowledge and honour in the world.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




25. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi)






[Names: Usniham]
Let the devotee of yajna, seeker of knowledge,
perform yajna for Indra, light of the rising sun, bright
and pure, life-giving, self-preserving and self-risen as
if through the folds of the earth, whom Aditi, mother
nature, had borne in the womb of the Night. Offer
libations to Indra like the first feed of an innocent new-
born baby and you would create, promote and enjoy
wealth of knowledge, wisdom of the ushnik verses of
the Veda, strength and joy, brilliance of mind and sense,
self-regeneration, sweetness and power of speech, health
and long age, and the very nectar of life.


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna. Relent not.


26. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi)


am eager ene een




[Names: Somamindram, Anustubham, Anustubha]
Let the man of yajna offer oblations to Indra, the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Great Soul, worthy of love and praise, celebrated in
sacred hymns, admirable breaker of the clouds of
darkness, lord of courage and endurance, peace and bliss
and the beauty and grace of life. And holding on to
freedom and joy of the Anushtubh verses of the Veda,
sensitivity of mind and senses, five streams of pranic
energy and the beauty and poetry of life, the yajaka would
create, promote and enjoy the wealth and prosperity of
the world.


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna, relent not!


27. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi)


aaae erat uu




[Names: Brhatim]
Let the devotee of yajna offer yajna to Indra, the
Great Soul, lord of vast spaces, everflowing with
nourishments, indestructible, graceful on the seat of
cosmic yajna, dear, immortal and ever young. And
holding on to the grand Brihati verses of the Veda, joy
of freedom, sensitivity of sense and intelligence,
devotion to knowledge, action and worship of the divine,
nobility of speech and awareness and the beauty of life,
he would create, promote and enjoy the wealth and
prosperity of life.


yajaka, carry on the yajna. Relent not.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




28. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi)


diag m aà aapear Aet een




[Names: Panktim]
Let the man of yajna consecrate the wide, open
and spacious golden gates of heavenly truth for the
expansion of divine virtue, offer reverence to the scholar
of the Vedas and do yajna in honour of Indra, lord of
grandeur and knowledge. And, holding on to the
scientific truth of Pankti verses of the Veda, freedom,
worldly wealth, and strong fourfold burden bearing bulls
for transport, create, promote and enjoy the beauty and
graces of life in this world.


Man of yajna, keep up the yajna, never relent.


29. (Ahoratre Devate, Sarasvati Rshi)






[Names: Ered, Tristubham]
Let the hota, devotee of yajna, join and consecrate
the night and day, both well shaped, beautiful, great


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and pleasing to the eye and, like them, offer yajna to
Indra, lord of the world's life and age, and holding on
to the wisdom of the Trishtubh verses, strength, speed
of progress, wealth and sensitivity, and strong burden-
bearing bulls in this world, create, promote and enjoy
the beauty and grace of life as do the night and day.


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna in unison with
the night and day.


30. (Ashvinau Devate, Sarasvati Rshi)






[Names: Jagatim]
Let the hota join Prachetas, two wise and brilliant
high-priests (such as the fire and the sun or the teacher
and the disciple), both of divine nature, creative, and
friendly as brothers, and offer yajna to Indra, most
glorious among the generous powers of brilliance and
giver of health, wealth and long age, and, holding on
to the wisdom of jagati verses, freedom and joy of life,
sensitivity and intelligence, bulls of the chariot and the
wealth and beauty of life, create, promote and enjoy
the sweetest graces of the world as the Prachetas do as


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna in unison with
the friendly divinities of nature and society.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




31. (Vanyah Devata, Sarasvati Rshi)




[Names: Virajam]
Let the hota invoke and join three divinities of
the universal language of knowledge, beauteous, golden
gracious, rich and elevating, vast and abundant as space,
generous and compact as earth, and offer yajna to Indra,
lord protector and giver of health and wealth in life,
and, bearing the varied wisdom of virat verses, powerful
joys of life, beauties and graces, good sense and
intelligence, and wisdom of the universal Word like a
generous cow, increase and enjoy the beauty and graces
of knowledge, action and piety of life in this world as
do the divinities of the Word.


Hota, carry on with the yajna and promote life in
unison with the universal knowledge of the sacred Word.


32. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi)


yes ad | gue wesztaguami uou




[Names: Dvipadam]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Let the hota offer yajna to Tvashta, generous
creator, lord giver of growth, maker and bearer of fine
forms and their sustenance in the various world, and let
him do honour to Indra, lord of the beauty and wealth
of the world, and, holding on to the wisdom of the two-
part verses of the Veda, freedom, honour and fame and
the joy and generosity of life like a virile bull, increase
and enjoy the beauty of the world.


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna.


33. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi)






[Names: Samitaram]
Let the hota do yajna in honour of Vanaspati, lord
of sunbeams and greenery, inspiring hero of a hundred
actions, golden winged, celebrated in Uktha verses,
holding the reins of time, keeping the world to order,
lord of glory, wielder of power and giver of life. And
holding on to the kakubh verses, freedom of thought,
power of sense and mind, dry cows and cows in season,
and beauty of life, he may increase, promote and enjoy
the wealth and sweetness of life.


Man of yajna, carry on the yajna.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




34. (Agni Devata, Sarasvati Rshi)






[Names: Aticchandasam]
Let the hota, man of yajna, join and offer yajnic
acts of piety for one and all of Agni, the light and fire of
life, grihapati, master of the home, Varuna, the highest
power of his choice, health and medicine, the man of
wisdom and vision, the social order, Indra, ruler and
master giver of life and joy. And, enjoying and holding
on to the wisdom and knowledge of Atichhanda verses
of the Veda, joy of freedom, great wealth of mind and
sense, strong bulls and cows, and the health and vigour
of living, may he and all increase, promote and sanctify
the beauty and graces of life.


Hota, keep up the yajna.


35. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi)






[Names: Gayatrya]
The splendid fire, the sacred grass around the
vedi, and the wide space of the sky exalt the divine Indra,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




sun, ruler of the world and giver of life and beauty,
and, inspiring and investing Indra, the soul, with the
joyous vision of the Gayatri verses of the Veda, freedom
of spirit, wealth and sensitivity of mind and intelligence,
vision of reality and the beauty and dignity of life, bring
down the blessings of heaven to the earth for dedicated


Man of yajna, keep the fire burning. Let it never
go out.


36. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi)






[Names: Aiekin]
The wide auspicious doors of yajna and the yajnic
home bring in, vitalize and exalt Indra, divine air, pure
and sacred, bearing the breath of life, and, inspiring and
investing Indra, the soul, with pranic energy, health and
good age, sensitivity and brilliance of mind and
intelligence with the wisdom of the Ushnik verses and
the beauty and joy of life, create and promote the beauty
and graces of heaven on earth for the yearning soul.


Pious soul, carry on the yajna, never relent.


37. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi)




[Names: Gemiensani]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




vitam yaja.

The glorious dawn and the starry night, both
divine of spirit, exalt the noble and generous Indra, the
soul, blest with the light and love of living, and, vesting
it (the soul) with strength of will and vision, beauty and
dignity, by the freedom and joy of the Anushtubh verses
of the Veda, create and promote the bliss of heaven on
earth for the dedicated soul.


Man dedicated to yajna, carry on the yajna.


38. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi)






[Names: Brhatya]
Two brilliant motherly powers of nature, earth
and heaven, both loving, generous and rich with the
treasures of life, cherish, advance and exalt Indra, great
and liberal lord sustainer of life, good health and well-
being of society. And vesting him with the gift of hearing
of the Word and the beauty and dignity of life by the
grandeur and beauty of the Brihati verses of the Veda
create and promote the beauty, prosperity and sublimity
of heaven on earth for the yearning humanity.


Dedicated man of yajna, carry on the yajna in


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


unison with the earth and the environment, relent not.


39. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi)


aay | uar sAn at augu




[Names: Panktya]
Rich and generous oblations of refined and
excellent holy materials into the fire like fertile motherly
cows nourish and promote, with the rain of nectar-like
water, Indra, brilliant and generous humanity blest with
health and wealth. And vesting the soul with vitality
and virility, beauty and dignity of life by the power and
joy of Pankti verses, they create and promote the beauty
and prosperity of heaven on earth for the dedicated soul.


Man of yajna, offer the richest oblations without


40. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi)






[Names: Tristubha]
Two divine priests, hota and adhvaryu (like fire
and wind, sun and moon, the Ashvinis, the teacher and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




preacher) both generous and brilliant, promote and exalt
Indra, the living soul blest with the divine spirit, life
and joy, and, vesting sensitivity of mind and intelligence,
beauty and dignity, and the fire and brilliance of
lightning into the soul by the freedom and power of
Trishtubh verses of the Veda adorn the earth with the
beauty and majesty of heaven for cherishing humanity.


Hota, keep up the blazing fire of yajna without
let up.


41. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi)


at seu




[Names: Jagatya, Susamindre, Executive]
Legislature or Dharma Sabha and Council of Education
or Vidya Sabha) help, guide and exalt Indra, the ruler
(Samrat), lord of dignity and regality, protector of the
commonwealth of humanity, and, vesting him with
power and prosperity, sensitivity of mind and
intelligence, dignity of excellence and resounding songs
of celebration by the felicity of the jagati verses of the
Veda, create, promote and universalize the beauty and
majesty of heaven on earth for the people.


Man of yajna, maintain the excellence of yajna
and never neglect the sacred fire of the commonwealth.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




42. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi)








[Names: Viraja]
The resounding songs of praise and the brilliant
tributes of the noble scholars exalt Indra, the great ruler,
lord of power and prosperity and protector of the world,
and, vesting him with the vitality of body and mind,
beauty and grace of person, and the dignity and majesty
of living by the sublimity of the Virat verses of the Veda,
create, promote and universalize the kingdom of heaven
on earth for the people.


Noble citizen, sustain the yajna without rest or


43. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi)






The brilliant lord of sunbeams and the forests
proclaim and exalt the great Indra, the ruler and the
enlightened people blest with the wealth of health and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




education, and, vesting the ruler and the people with
sensitivity of mind and soul, beauty and prosperity of
society and the art and excellence of happy living by
the grace of the Dvipada verses of the Veda, they
stimulate and advance the desire and dignity of the land
from the earth to the heights of heaven for the dedicated


Noble citizen of the yajnic commonwealth,
sustain and promote the fire of yajna without rest or


44. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi)




[Names: Kakubha]
The divine splendour of fire in the vedi, the sacred
grass around the vedi, and the celestial oceans of water
in the spaces of the skies sustain and exalt Indra,
generous, brilliant and enlightened lord of life, and
protector of the earth, and, vesting him and the people
with the greatness of mind and soul, health and wealth
for a long age, and honour and renown of life in life by
the dignity of the kakubh verses of the Veda, create,
promote and exalt the glories of heaven upon the earth
itself for the dedicated souls.


Dedicated soul, keep the fire burning.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




45. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi)






[Names: Riepas, Aticchandasa]
Agni, lord omniscient of light and life, who turns
all our endeavours to good, may advance and exalt Indra,
brilliant and pious living soul and ruler of divine
potential and possibility, and, vesting that human power
with the strength of body, mind and soul, wealth of
existence and a grand social order of humanity by virtue
of Atichhanda verses of value beyond the words, may
invoke, create and promote the bliss of heaven on earth
for the dedicated souls.

Dedicated soul, enlightened citizen, servant of
Agni, keep the fire burning and blazing. Never relent,


46. (Indra Devata, Sarasvati Rshi)






[Names: Jakaa, Aghattam]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




To-day this yajamana, cooking the holy food,
cooking the pudding, and tending and binding the goat
for the holy milk of health for Indra, lord of life and
wealth, may choose to honour the divine Agni, brilliant
scholar, as the high-priest of yajna.


To-day may the divine Vanaspati, lord of sun-
beams and the fascinating forest and meadow come
close to grace the yajamana with the goat for milk and
with catalytic holy materials of yajna in honour of Indra,
lord of the commonwealth and the social order.


O Rshi, man of vedic vision, may the yajamana
invite and entertain you to-day with the holy food being
cooked and seasoned with delicacies.


And may the yajamana and the priest and the Rshi
and you all partake of the holy food today and grow
higher and ever higher.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1. (Agni Devata, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi)






[Names: Vaji]
and materialising the ideas and imagination of the
learned, consuming lots of precious fats and waters for
fuel and, as carrier, bearing the rider at the speed of the
wind, take us to the favourite assembly of the divines.


2.  (AgniDevata, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi)






[Names: Ghrtenanjantsam]
Agni, fire energy, generated and fed on fuels and
holy waters, lighting up and opening the paths traversed
by generous and brilliant scholars, rises up at top speed
to the divinities on high.


Scholar of the science of fire and energy, fast
advancing like a winged horse in pursuit of knowledge,
rise up to the heights of space in all directions and bring


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


wealth and power to this yajamana.
3.  (AgniDevata, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi)


[Names: Sever]
det: ut




[Names: Idyascasi]
Vajin, scholar technologist of the speed of the
of praise you are, a celebrity, quick in action and revered
on the vedi of science-yajna. May Agni, lord omniscient
of light and life, lover and admirer of His devotees,
reveal to you the secrets of fire and energy cherished
by you, alongwith the treasures of the powers of devas
and Vasus such as earth, air and sky.


4. (Agni Devata, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi)


Sag ul




[Names: Stirnam, Devebhiryuktamaditih]
We collect and develop in proper order the
expansive over the earth, and immanent in all the natural
powers of the universe. May Aditi, infinite and eternal
mother spirit of creativity, loving, loved and admired
by her devotees, always doing good to her children,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




strew our paths of progress with the energy sought for
by us.


5. (Agni Devata, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi)
[Names: Wars, Beta, Curae]
WaT UG




[Names: Srayamana, Rsvah]
(By the grace of the Mother Spirit of the world)
may these doors of movement along the paths of
progress be divinely blest, various and manifold, wide
open with flexible leaves, lofty, high and sublime, strong
and stable, resounding, bright and beautiful, auspicious,
and pleasant for easy movement, for all of you.


6. (Manushya Devata, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi)






[Names: Raae, Usasa]
The splendid dawn and the beauteous twilight,
both rejoicing with the light of the day and resting in
the oceanic womb of the starry night, and both heading
towards the wide open doors of the yajna of humanity
to join in the celebration, I consecrate you in the golden
glorious divinely sculpted seat of nature's law in the
vedi of eternity.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


7.  (Ashvinau Devate, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi)





[Names: Apiprayam]
I love and admire you both, lights of the world
(teachers like the Ashvins or like the dawn and the
twilight), first and foremost to move, riding the same
chariot, handsome of form, brilliant in bearing, watching
the entire regions of the world, inspiring, measuring
and ascertaining the facts of life, two high-priests of
life and learning, and filling the quarters of space with
light for both of you (learners).


8.  (Sarasvati Devata, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi)




[Names: Adityairno, Idopahuta]
May Bharati, voice of the knowledge of the
world, alongwith the scholars and sages of the pre-
voice of science and prayer, alongwith the scholars of
the eminent Rudra order protect and promote our yajna.
May Ida, voice of the spirit and meditation alongwith
the sages of the noble Vasu order grace and extend our
yajna. May the three divinities of the divine voice


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




invoked and worshipped elevate our yajna to the regions
of the immortals.


9.  (Tvashta Devata, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi)




[Names: Tvastedam]
Tvashta, lord creator, creates and shapes the brave
hero, lover and loved of the divines. The bright sun as
the windy horse is born of Tvashta. Tvashta it is who
creates the entire worlds of the universe.


Man of yajna, honour and serve the great creator
by yajna — through worship, charity and good


10. (Surya Devata, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi)




[Names: Asvo, Vanaspatirdevalokam, Agnina]
May Agni, in unison with ghrta and waters,
moving at the speed of sunbeams and by virtue of being
what it is in itself, carry food to the divinities according
to the seasons. May Vanaspati, the sun and the sacred
Tree, conscious of the regions of the divinities and
nobilities of humanity, by subservience to the eternal


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




law, carry to them by agni delicious foods worthy of
the sacred fire.


11. (Agni Devata, Brihaduktho Vamadevya Rshi)






[Names: Prajapatestapasa, Svahakrtena]
Agni/brilliant and sagely scholar, rising and fast
advancing by the austere discipline of Prajapati, lord of
creation and the people, carry on the yajna by offers of
refined and sanctified foods to the fire.


Go on, and may the noblest of humanity, leaders
and pioneers, and the divinities of the higher regions of
the world partake of the libations offered by you into
the fire.


12. (Yajamana Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi)
AAT NQR


[Names: Yadakrandah]
Man of knowledge of the speed of sun-beams,
whether you emerge from the depths of meditation or


from the consciousness of the Divine like energy of the
wind, first-born of nature, then whatever you speak or


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




do becomes great and worthy of celebration like flights
of the hawk or bounds of the deer.


13. (Agni Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi)






[Names: Rasiah, Trereissler, Wrarhpuneniasd, Gandharvo]
The Vasus, abodes of life and life energy, receive
the heat of sunbeams from the sun. Indra, universal
electric energy, first controls this heat energy given by
yama (vayu, wind) from three sources, i.e., earth, water
and sky. Gandharva, the sun, which holds and supports
the earth holds the reins of the flow. And the vasus,
scholars of the first order of natural knowledge,
receiving it from the sun, refine and develop it further
for use in life.


14. (Agni Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi)
wee esi




By the intrinsic law of your own existence, you
are Yama, controller and judge; you are Aditya, sun and
source of light; you are Arvan, moving fast as light.
You arise from three because of three, earth, water and
sky. You are one with, undivided from, Soma, peace,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




prosperity and joy. And they say your bonds are three
in heaven.


(You are Agni, the sun, therefore you have to be
brilliant because you cannot be the sun without the light.
You are at peace in security as one member of the galaxy
family of suns and stars. And you are happy with the
prosperity of your own solar family. You have to observe
this triple bond.)


15. (Agni Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi)




[Names: Trini, Uteva, Varunasch, Varunasc]
Arvan, lord of the dynamics of existence, three
are your bonds in heaven, they say, three in the waters
of space and three in the womb of the sea. Wherever,
presence as Varuna, lord of our choice and lord of
judgement and approval.


16. (Agni Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi)


[Names: Ygrassfusauae, Saphanai]
Warlike hero, lord of spirit and speed, I see these
tools of the cleansing and freshening of your war-horses.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




I see the treasures of the beneficiaries of their hoofs. I
see the auspicious reins of your power and force which
are all-round defenders of truth and law and which
protect the law-abiding.


17. (Agni Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi)




Agni, fire energy, with my own mind and
knowledge, I know your soul in body form so close
being flown from down below through space to the sun.
I see your head soaring up, voraciously sucking the air
and struggling to ascend by clear and dustless paths of
the sky.


18. (Agni Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi)






splendid form eager to win the wealth of food and energy
of the earth. Only when your people have received their
portion of the food, only then you, most voracious
though, take your share of the nourishing foods and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




19. (Manushya Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi)






Arvan, tempestuous victorious hero, the chariot
follows you. The humans and cows follow you. The
power and passion of youth follows you. Multitudes of
people love to be friends and followers with you. Even
the divinities have watched, measured and admired your
courage and valour.


20. (Agni Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi)






[Names: Hiranyasrngo]
(Who can ride and control the tempestuous horse
that is agni, fire power of nature and humanity?)


Indra, master ruler, youthful and new. Golden is
his crown. Of golden steel are his legs moving at the
speed of mind. New and youthful, he is supreme. The
noblest of humanity share power with him and partake
of his holy food. First among all, he alone can ride and
control the speed and power of agni.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




21. (Manushyah Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi)




[Names: Irmantasah, Hainsa]
Warriors of horse, with steeds which are broad-
chested, full-haunched and sensitively trained, slim in
the middle, fiery, superb, of electric speed, when they
are ranked like swans in battle array and fight, then they
penetrate the enemy defences and clear the paths to


22. (Vayavah Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi)
[Names: Fetter, Purutraranyesu]
Arvan, tempestuous hero, your body loves to soar
like a bird's, your mind moves at the speed of the wind,


the flames of your glory are various and blazing, and


23. (Manushyah Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi)




[Names: Ajah]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




The tempestuous horse, fast as the wind, worthy
of the gods, fiery within and rushing to the heat of battle
at the speed of mind, instant like a beam of the sun, is
shot forth by the rider on the back, and then poets and
singers follow with songs of praise.


24. (Manushya Devata, Bhargavo Jamadagni Rshi)





[Names: Unio]
The man of knowledge, will and action who goes
to the highest assembly, who does homage to father,
mother and brilliant holy people, and offers liberal gifts
of service and reverence to generous teachers and
philanthropists, is worthy of highest love and

O seeker of knowledge and virtue, such a person
is worthy of company. Go straight and meet him.


25. (Vidvan Devata, Jamadagni Rshi)


wer uu




You are the man, jataveda, light of the day as Agni,
brilliant inspired and generous, in company with the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




noblest at yajna in the home. Call upon the divinities,
best of friends, bring them to the yajna. Wide awake
you are, harbinger of light and good fortune, poet
creator, wise and luminous.


26. (Vidvan Devata, Jamadagni Rshi)






[Names: Tanunapatpatha, Manmani]
Sagely scholar, self-preserver, protector of the
good things of life, sweet of tongue and speech,
sprinkling the paths of truth and modes of progress with
honey, enjoy the march to freedom and prosperity. And,
surrounded by the noblest saints and scholars, leading
our plans and prayers to resounding success, render our
yajna of life free from hate and violence with your
guidance.


27. (Vidvan Devata, Jamadagni Rshi)


[Names: Gerda, Narasainsasya]
We celebrate with songs of praise and yajnas the
greatness of the man of universal honour and admiration


and the greatness of these brilliant scholars of
exceptional intelligence and noble action, pure at heart,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




who taste the sweets of success in matters both material
and spiritual (on way to freedom and prosperity by the
paths of Truth and eternal Law).


28. (Agni Devata, Jamadagni Rshi)


savigasien wavaatera ad: wei: 1




Agni, brilliant power of light and life, challenging
and inviting, adorable, admirable, delighted to be with
the generous lovers of life, you are the most fluent and
dynamic of divinities, giving and sacrificing. Excellent
power of yajna, cherished and implored, come and join
these sacrificers at the yajna.


29. (Antariksha Devata, Jamadagni Rshi)






[Names: Pracinam]
Just as sacred grass, old and ancient, is gathered
at dawn, in the early morning, before the rise of the
day, from the sacred quarters of the earth, grows further,
softer and more excellent for the yajnics and the earth,
so realized awareness of Brahma, Eternal Spirit, vast as
space, is distilled from the inspiring regions of silent
nature in the sacred hours of dawn before the rising of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the day and, by the mystique of the Veda grows further,
higher and more blissful for the pious souls for their
rise towards Divinity and Infinity.


30. (Striyah Devata, Jamadagni Rshi)




[Names: Vyacasvatirurviya]
ample unlimited joy and solace to the husbands, so may
the divine doors of yajna, wide open, grand, all-
embracing, provide free access and universal movement
to the dedicated divines of yajna.


31. (Striyah Devata, Jamadagni Rshi)
aat nagu



[Names: Divye, Sukrapisam]
The day and the night, like two heavenly women,
wearing light and dark, inspiring and comforting,
adorable, great and sublime, wielding and commanding
the wealth of the world, may, we pray, come in unison
and grace the vedi, seat of yajna.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


32. (Vidvan Shilpis Devata, Jamadagni Rshi)


wae feast are weit A: ufavn



[Names: Pracodayanta]
Two divine high-priests of the first order, scholars
of the language (of science and architecture), masters
of measurement and design, and expert builders,
pointing to the directions of the ancient and eternal light
(of the Veda) inspire people to join in scientific yajnas
of development and construction.


33. (Vag Devata, Jamadagni Rshi)






May Bharati (bearing the knowledge of science)
come soon to advance our yajna of development. May
Ida, the Vedic vision, shine, enlightening us like a
human teacher. May Sarasvati, bearing the knowledge
of the Shastras, come and inspire us.


May three supernal divinities of the Word of the
Veda, light and inspiration of the Shastras, and
knowledge of science and technology, Ida, Sarasvati,
and Bharati, mothers of noble yajnic acts, come and
grace this auspicious seat of yajna.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




34. (Vidvan Shilpi Devata, Jamadagni Rshi)
[Names: Enfre]
ofa fera "avi


[Names: Tamadya]
High-priest of shilpa (science and technology),
scholar, inspired and dedicated, offer yajna here and now
in honour of that divine artist, Tvashta, creator of the
universe, who made all these worlds of existence, carved
out the generative heaven and earth, and adorned them
with all the beautiful forms of life and nature.


35. (Agni Devata, Jamadagni Rshi)


Tet Uae




[Names: Upavasrja, Vanaspatih]
Scholar, sprinkling and seasoning the holy
materials of yajna, food for the divinities, with honey
and ghrta, offer the libations yourself with your heart
and soul so that Vanaspati, lord of light and vegetation,
the sun, the generous cloud, giver of the showers of
peace and prosperity, and Agni, the holy fire, may relish
their food seasoned with delicacies.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




36. (Agni Devata, Jamadagni Rshi)





Agni, lord of light and life, brilliant scholar,
instantly responsive, ever young, going ahead of the
divines, enacts and accomplishes the yajna of the
business of life within the word and spirit of the laws of
truth. May all the divinities of nature and humanity taste
the sweets of the holy offerings of this sacrificer.


37. (Vidvan Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)
od puaka A nas |



[Names: Ketum, Samusadbhirajayathah]
Agni, lord of light and life, man of knowledge,
creating light for the man in the dark, providing plenty
for the man in adversity, as mortals do, you arise with
the light of the dawns and the fires of the generous
yajamanas.


38. (Vidvan Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)




[Names: Siea, Jimutasyeva, Anaviddhaya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




A very image of the cloud he seems to be when
the hero in armour goes forward to join the ardent
warriors in the raging battle. Come victorious, warrior,
with your body unscathed. May the mighty grandeur of
the armour protect and promote you.


39. (Viras Warriors Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)
was | er: ska chuirfa erem uet: ufavil
WaT sen


[Names: Dhanvana, Dhanuh]
jayema.


Let us win the earths by the bow, win the battle
by the bow, win the violent wars by the bow. The bow
it is that shatters the enemy's ambition for evil. Let us
win in all directions by the bow.


40. (Viras, Devata, Bharadwaja Rshi)
aariat cuf fuere wate utara
am | ada fire aaa ease gax unu




[Names: Vaksyantivedaganiganti, Yoseva, Sinkte]
This string stretched on the bow is drawn close

to the ear and, like a young woman embracing her dear


husband and whispering love into his ear, twangs,
carrying the warrior across the battle to victory.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


41.




(Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)





Behaving as a beloved wife one at heart with her


husband, the two ends of the bow joined together by
the string may hold the arrow like a mother holding her
baby in her arms, and, shaking the enemies with fear,
may pierce them with the arrow and scatter and drive
them away with the twang.


42.


(Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)





[Names: Fret, Bahvinam, Isudhih]
Father protector of many forces, mighty are his


sons. His arrow clangs when he engages the enemy.
Hero of the bow and arrow and the quiver inspired and
shooting forth, he takes on the once organized but now
scattered forces of the enemy and comes out victorious.


43.


(Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Rathe, Abhisunam]
An able and expert driver sitting on the controls
in the chariot drives the horses wherever he wants to.
Know and admire the great value of the reins: the reins
(controlled by the driver on the wheel), those which
control the movement and direction of the mind from


44. (Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)




[Names: Tivran, Avakramantah]
Warriors Heroes of war manned with strong-
hoofed horses flying by the chariots raise frightful cries
of war while the horses, unremitting in their force,


trampling upon the enemy with their hoofs, destroy his


45. (Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)


[Names: Pier]
«T vend yr Han favatet Gas GATT: Is li




[Names: Rathavahanain, Tatra]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




The warrior is ‘Rathavahana’, hero of the chariot,
and the chariot is whereon the armour, arms and
ammunition of this hero are safely kept. And that mighty
protective chariot, we, people of positive and faithful
mind, love, and wish to ride every day, all time.


46. (Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)






[Names: Svadusamsadah, Saktivanto, Citrasena]
Let us honour senior veterans of war, of pleasant
company, mature and widely experienced, facing and
challenging dangers, strong and brave, serious and wise,
commanding wonderful armies, trained in powerful
weapons, invincible of body, equally valiant, broad-
chested and muscular, and conquering hosts of armies.


47. (Dhanurveda teachers Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)




[Names: Brahmanasah]
1$ata.
May the Brahmanas, scholars of Veda and divine
vision, parental seniors, lovers of peace, joy and yajna-


soma, defenders and promoters of truth and Law, guide
and protect us. May Heaven and earth, auspicious, pure


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and sinless, be kind to bless us. May Pusha, lord giver
of health and growth, protect us from sin and promote
us. May no sinner and supporter of evil rule over us.


48. (Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)






[Names: Suparnam]
The army of the brave wears the battle array of a
falls upon the game. Equipped with shields and mailed
in armour, passionate for the kill, it falls upon the enemy.
The warriors there fall upon the enemy in united strength
as well as attack in different directions. May the arrows
of this army bring us peace and well-being.


49. (Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)






[Names: Raefa, Atsvat, Arsteta, Rjite]
May the spirit of health, peace and progress ward
off ills from us all round. May our body be strong as
granite. May soma, spirit of life, inspire us from above.
May the earth as well as the sky bring us peace and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


50.


(Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)






The warriors spur the horses on the sides and


strike them with the goad on the shanks. Expert teacher,
the horses are intelligent and responsive, train them in
quick curves and movements of battle.


51.


(Mahavira Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)

fagat: 1&2 u





[Names: Ahiriva, Hastaghno]
Like the hand-guard warding off the strikes of


the bow-string with its coils and protecting the hand of
the archer, the expert commander of the army and the
man of laws and ways of the world, by the blows of his
arms and himself facing the challenges, protects the
people from all round and, like the cloud, showers all
the peace and comfort on them.


52.


(Suvira Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)



[Names: Aedan, Beats]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Gobhih]
Hero and protector of the land and forests,
brilliant as the sun, our friend and heroic leader crossing
over crises and challenges, be strong of body and power.
Committed you are to the earth and traditions of
humanity. Grow stronger and expand in power. And
may your commander win all the battles for you.


53. (Vira Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)


[Names: Anaa, Apamojmanam]
yaja.

Man of knowledge and power, receive, cultivate
and socially promote the light and energy emanating
from the sun and earth. Receive, cultivate and promote
the strength, courage and endurance emanated from the
trees. Cultivate and promote the energy of the waters.
Refine and strengthen the chariot invincible as thunder


and blazing with the rays of the sun, and develop it
further by sacrifice and investment.


54. (Vira Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)


[ura gxi


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Marutamanikam, Marutamanika, Semam]
Brilliant leader and warrior, devoted to the
thunderbolt of Indra, army of the winds, light of the
sun and depth of the sky and the ocean as ideals, in love
with the power of lightning, inner thoughts of friends,
and conscience of the best man, and enjoying our love
and trust, may now receive our gifts and homage for
further growth and development.


55. (Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)





Heroic leader, loud and bold, let the war-drum
of action, your clarion-call to the nation, resound over
earth and sky. Let the wide world, moving and non-
moving, know you and hear the call. And, in unison
with the power and grandeur of the nation and the best
of nobility, let the call drive off the enemies farthest
away.


56. (Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)


erede ua




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Thunderous hero, rally the forces with the beat
of the war drum. Loud and bold, instil and inspire us
with passion for action. Resisting and suppressing evil,
let the call resound as thunder. Fight and throw off the
dogged enemies far from here. You are the measure and
concentration of the power and glory of Indra, lord of
humanity. Grow, expand and glorify the human nation.


57. (Viras Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)






[Names: Amiuraja]
Indra, mighty hero, rout those enemy forces to
annihilation. Bring our armies back home with flying
colours. The drum, with the flag flying, resounds.
United, our men on the wings of horses fight on. May
our heroes of the chariot be ever victorious.


58. (Vidvans Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)

ama: panita: reet Hat ay: rer: aro:



[Names: Riya, Aralas, Agneyah]
The animal with black neck is holy, it has the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




qualities of fire immanent in nature, so it is the favourite
love of Agni. So the sheep is the favourite love of
Sarasvati. The brown one is favourite of Soma. The dark
one is favourite of Pusha. The one with white back is
favourite of Brihaspati. The one of varied colour is
favourite of Vishvedevas. The red one is favourite of
Indra. The black and white is favourite of Maruts. The
strong-bodied is favourite of Indra and Agni. The one
which is white below is favourite of Savita. And the
black one with one leg white and swift of speed is
favourite of Varuna. (Know this, and take advantage of
nature.)


59. (Agni & Others Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)






[Names: Xrfdarfssrrgaraeindr, Tahi, Utada]
The bull with a red mark on the forehead is for
Agni, front rank of the army. Two animals with white
below are for Savita. Two animals with silver navel are
for the Pushas. Two animals of yellow colour and
without horns are for Vishvedevas. The multicoloured
is for Maruts. The black goat is for Agni. The sheep is
for Sarasvati. And the fast one is for Varuna.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




60. (Agni & Others Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)


Were fereutucst erexit Semen ETAT




For Agni, sung in Gayatri metre and worshipped
in three-part Stoma Rathantara Sama, eight-bowl

For Indra, sung in Trishtubh metre and
worshipped in fifteen part Stoma Brihat Sama, eleven-

For Vishvedevas, sung in jagati metre and
worshipped in seventeen-part Stoma Vairupa Sama,

For Mitra and Varuna, sung in Anushtubh metre
and worshipped in twenty-one part Stoma Vairaja Sama,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





For Brihaspati, sung in Pankti verses and
worshipped in twenty-seven part Stoma Shakvara Sama,
charu oblations of rice, barley and pulses boiled in milk
and butter.

For Savita, sung in Ushnik metre and worshipped
in thirty-three part Stoma Raivata Sama, twelve-bowl

For Prajapati, caru oblations.

For Aditi, sustained by Vishnu, caru oblations.

For Vaishvanara Agni, twelve-bowl oblations.

For Anumati, eight-bowl oblations.


[Names: Note, Forpractical]
interprets the Devatas as:-


Agni: brilliant scholar of science with knowledge
of matter, energy and mind, specialist in modes of travel
over land, sea and sky.

Indra: man of power and glory who is dedicated
to the power and glory of humanity.



[Names: Vishvedevas]
Brihaspati: guardian of the great and seniors.

Shakvara: man of potential and action.

Raivata: relating to wealth.


Prajapatya: relating to the guardian of creation.

Aditi: earth and sky.

Vishnu: of extensive power and potential.




[Names: Anumati]
JARAS: N


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1.  (Savita Devata, Narayana Rshi)


Waq e




May Savita, generous lord creator of life, expand
our yajna of light and action. May He inspire and bless
the master of yajna for the achievement of wealth and
honour. Glorious is Savita, sustainer of the earth and
purifier and sanctifier of knowledge. May the lord
sanctify our knowledge. Lord of Speech Divine, may
He sweeten, sanctify and bless our tongue and speech.


2.  (Savita Devata, Narayana Rshi)


feet at 4: were usa




That blazing splendour of lord Savita, self-
refulgent giver of light, which is the sole light worthy
of choice, we perceive, meditate upon and absorb in
the soul. May He inspire, enlighten and bless our vision
and intelligence to follow the path of light and rectitude.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




3. (Savita Devata, Narayana Rshi)


dag masada uad




[Names: Visvani, Yadbhadram]
Savita, glorious lord of inspiration, light and life,
remove all the evil of the world from us, and bless us
with all that is good.


4.  (Savita Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)
aaam qaen inei




[Names: Vibhaktaram, Savitaram]
We invoke Savita and sing in praise of the
ultimate judge and dispenser of the fruits of Karma and
giver of the wondrous joys of life, who makes everything
possible, who creates all and watches over all (what
they are and what they do).


5.  (Parameshvara Devata, Narayana Rshi)



[Names: Brahmane]
Give us, we pray, the Brahmanas for education


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and research, culture and human values; the Kshatriyas
for governance, defence and administration; the
Vaishyas for economic development, and the Shudras
for assistance and labour in the ancillary services.


Remove, we pray, the thief roaming in the dark,
the murderer bent on lawlessness, the coward disposed
to sin, the armed terrorist bent on destruction, the harlot
out for pleasure of flesh, and the bastard fond of scandal.


Note: In mantras 5-22 in which various aspects
of organised life are listed, there is repetition of *asuva'
and ‘parasuva’ from mantra 3, which means: ‘Give us,
we pray, what is good’, and, ‘Remove, we pray, what is
evil'. This is the prayer.


Also, there are echoes of ‘havamahe’ from mantra
4, which means: ‘We invoke and develop’, and, ‘we
challenge and fight out’. This is the call for action under
the divine eye.


6. (Parameshvara Devata, Narayana Rshi)






[Names: Adta, Nrttaya]
For dance, the dancer; for song, the singer; for
dharma, the active councillor; for social morale, the
mighty man; for refinement, the poet; for fun, the
comedian; for pleasure, fair company; for indulgence,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the child of wantonness; for finesse, the chariot-maker;
for patience, the carpenter.


7. (Vidvans Devata, Narayana Rshi)
Rer woes nere yeaa vara wei




[Names: Tapase, Svaninam]
For heat-treatment, the potter or metallurgist; for
furnishing, the decorator; for ornament, the jeweller;
for beauty, the beautician; for archery, the arrow-maker;
for shooting, the bow-maker; for the target, the bow-
string maker; for marking and delimitation, the string-
maker; for killing, the hunter; for the border, the watch-
dog.


8. (Vidvans Devata, Narayana Rshi)






[Names: Rean, Nadibhyah]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




For the rivers, the fisherman; for the fast she-
bears, the forester; for the tiger-man, the drunken fool;
for the musicians and dancers, the brute; for the farmers,
the demented; for the snakes and nobles, the neurotic;
for the desirables, the gambler; for the retiring, the non-
gambler; for the frustrated, the cynic; for travellers, the
thorns; for the sake of these former ones, keep off the


9.  (Vidvan Devata, Narayana Rshi)






[Names: Sandhaye]
Keep off the paramour out to meet his mistress;
the adulterer heading to the house of his married love;
the unmarried elder brother with his eye on the wife of
his younger brother; the younger brother grabbing and
encroaching upon the elder brother’s share of land; the
husband of younger sister entertaining love for the
unmarried elder sister-in-law; the self-decorated sex-
doll impatient to make up for lost opportunities; the
amorous woman excited for sex; the inmate intending
to abuse the house-mate; the solicitor trying for
acceptance; the corrupt official in search of gratification
for work.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




10. (Vidvan Devata, Narayana Rshi)




[Names: Yara, Utsadebhyah]
Remove the crooked on way to destruction, the
small man addicted to gaiety, disease spreading to house


doors, the man blind to dreams, and the deaf in love
with adharma.

Develop medicine for health and purity, help and
encourage the astronomer for science, inquisitive learner
for education, the seminary for confirmation and
application of learning, and analysis and discrimination
for the judgement of truth and value.


11. (Vidvan Devata, Narayana Rshi)
Welarssrarerfartór enamel terete wenn were

[Names: Speer, Armebhyo]
Create, develop and promote the elephant keeper
for tourists, the horse keeper for fast movement, the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




cowherd for nourishment, the sheep-keeper for virility,
the goat keeper for lustre, the farmer for food, the soma-
maker for vitality, the house keeper for good living, the
treasurer for honour and credit, the burser for financial
distribution and control.


12. (Vidvan Devata, Narayana Rshi)
THAT ug 2



[Names: Bhayai]
For light, the wood-man, for illumination, fire
and fuel, for the horse-course, the water sprinkler, for
high satisfaction and comfort, the cook and steward,
for a vision of heaven, the scholar visionary, for a vision
of humanity, the well-wisher, for the public, the public
servant, for get-togethers, the launderer, for happy turn-
out, the printer and dyer, and fearsome guard to ward


13. (Ishvara Devata, Narayana Rshi)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Rtaye]
Remove the thievish hypocrite bent on envy and
attack, and the slanderer bent on enmity and attack.


Give us the saviour for judgement and
discrimination, the loving guide for vigilance, the
supporter for strength, virile generosity for expansion,
sweet talker for love, the horse rider for good news and
safe arrival, just commonalty for a joyous community,
and enlightened superintendence for all round


14. (Rajeshvara Devata, Narayana Rshi)


[Names: Mafisi, Freer, Manyave]
kosakarim yamayasum.

For moral passion, give us the heat of the furnace
of steel, for cooling anger, the generous giver, for yoga,
the persuasive teacher, for moral lustre, the man of
foresight, for peace and well-being, the paternal
protector, for the ebb and flow of water, the man who
knows both and surveys from above, for good of the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




body form, the man of thought, for the good of character,
the giver of right vision, for the avoidance of adversity,
the economic budget maker, for proper control, impartial


15. (Rajeshvarau Devate, Narayana Rshi)
— -— CON — 23 I — —


[Names: Tere, Hanta, Rman, Yamaya, Rbhubhyo]
For the man of law and order, give the law-maker
; for the men of peace and meditation, the protective
force; for the first year of a five-year plan for women, a
woman who knows how time passes; for the second
year, an unmarried woman; for the third year, a dynamic
woman; for the fourth year, a white-haired woman; for
the fifth year, an extremely wise woman; for any year,
a woman of long age and experience; for the experts,
an indefatigable man; for the men of achievement, a
man of super-knowledge.


16. (Rajeshvarau Devate, Narayana Rshi)
[Names: Weta]
feas arisen eeh cease: Teer ea


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Sarobhyo]
For the lakes, the ferryman; for the tanks close
by, a knowledgeable caretaker; for the pools, a forest
man; for the reed beds, a dryer; for crossing over, the
knowing forester; for damps and marshes, the man of
marshes; for tourist and sacred places, the bridge and
dam maker; for unknown lands, the man of self-
discipline; for forest sounds, the man specialising in
leaves; for the caves, the caveman; for the mountain
peaks, the ferocious guard; for the mountains, the hill


17. (Rajeshvarau Devate, Narayana Rshi)


[Names: Bibhatsayai]
Remove the brute bent on cruelty, the non-
performer suffering from faultfinding, the slothful


heading to adversity, the slanderer causing mischief and
injury, the pessimist inviting poverty, the saboteur


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




causing damage and destruction.


Give us the sun and the goldsmith for beauty of
form, the measurer for correct measurement, all round
capability for all living beings, wakefulness for
prosperity, the public voice against adversity.


18. (Rajeshvarau Devate, Narayana Rshi)




[Names: Aksarajaya]
Remove the gambler playing for his den-master,
the tormenter of the cow to death, the butcher who
slaughters the cow, the man who impairs the cow to
satisfy hunger, the man who approaches the beef carver
asking for food, the beggar serving his master of the
den, and the robber out for sin and crime.


Give us the man of original vision for the age of
truth (Krita-yuga), the man of imagination for the age
of thought and resolution (Treta-yuga), the man of
imagination and resolution for the age of thought and
passion (Dvapara-yuga), and the man-pillar of the
council for speedy progress and development.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




19. (Rajeshvarau Devate, Narayana Rshi)


i geet UR Sq do qe, Vi





[Names: Pratisrutkaya]
For promise and agreement, simplicity of
language and content, for proclamation, the announcer,
for conclusion, the comprehensive speaker, for the
endless talker, silence, for loud proclamation, the beat
of the drum, for celebration, the notes of the lute, for
sentiment, the flute player, for far and near, the conch
blower, for the forests, the protector of the forest and
gardens, for large heaths and forests, the fire-guard.


20. (Rajeshvarau Devate, Narayana Rshi)


areata Veram i01





[Names: Narmaya, Sabalyam]
Remove the flirt disposed to sport, the buffoon

disposed to farce, and the courtesan disposed to


Give us for reverence and honour the village


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




headman, the statistician, and the leader who gives the


Give us the music of the lute, the drum player, the
flute player, and song and celebration for dance and joy.


21. (Rajeshvarau Devate, Narayana Rshi)
and ah uferet deao ara osre-




For fire and heat work, the strong man and solid
materials; for ground work or earthwork, the carrier on
the back; for work in the wind, a man of special strength;
for work in the sky, a bamboo dancer; for work on and
in space, a man who knows the dynamics of space; for
work on the sun, a man with green eye-glass; for work
on stars and planets, a man with orange eye-glass; for
work on the moon, a clear glass; for work on day-light,
aman in white with brown eyes; for work on the night,
a man in black with brown eyes.


22. (Rajeshvarau Devate, Narayana Rshi)


[Names: Wbsmucgr]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Athaitanastau, Magadhah]
The good human being accepts and works with
these eight classes of people of different forms and
colours: too tall, too short, too fat, too thin, too white,
too dark, too hairless, too hairy. Also they are neither
Brahmanas nor Shudras (nor the others). They too, all
of them, are children of God, Prajapati. Even the bastard
and the ‘despicable’, the wanton, the gambler, and the
coward and the eunuch, neither Shudras nor Brahmanas
(nor the others), they too are children of God, Prajapati,
father of all.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1.  (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi)





[Names: Sahasrasirsa]
Purusha, the Cosmic Soul of Existence, is the soul
of the universe of a thousand heads, a thousand eyes
and a thousand feet. It pervades the universe wholly
and entirely and, pervading and sustaining the universe
of ten constituents of living Prakriti, It transcends the
world of existence.


2.  (Ishvara Devata, Narayana Rshi)




[Names: Utamrtatvasyesano]
rohati.


All this that is and was and shall be is Purusha
ultimately, sovereign over immortality and ruler of what
grows by living food.


3. (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi)






[Names: Gorder, Etavanasya, Pado]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




So great as the universe is the grandeur and glory
of It, and yet the Purusha is greater. The entire worlds
of existence are but one fourth aspect of Its reality (just
like the foot-stool of a mighty monarch). Three parts of
Its mystery are in the transcendental heaven of
immortality, Infinity, beyond the created universe of


4.  (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi)






[Names: Tripadurdhva]
Thrice more glorious arises the Purusha above
the created universe wherein one measure of His
greatness and grandeur manifests again and again,
pervading all the eating and non-eating world, and
thence remains transcendent across and over the


5.  (Srashta Devata, Narayana Rshi)
a aisaen usua yaa Te: GU



From Purusha arises Virat, the cosmic form,
Prakriti. The Purusha manifests therein and remains
sovereign over the Virat. Yet, even while manifest in
the Virat, He remains apart and uninvolved before and
after the creation and then creates the earth and human
habitations. (That is cosmic yajna.)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




6.  (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi)


[Names: Ways, Terum, Tasmadyajnatsarvahutah, Pasunstanscakre]
From that cosmic yajna was born the sacred ghrta,
universal material of creation. He created the animals,


all those birds of the air, rangers of the forest and inmates
of the village.


7.  (Srashteshvara Devata, Narayana Rshi)





[Names: Dashes, Tasmadyajnat, Chandamsi]
From that Lord of universal yajna were born the


Riks and the Samans. From Him were born the
Chhandas, and from Him were born the Yajus.


8. (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi)






[Names: Tasmadasva]
From That yajna were born the horses, and ee
which have two rows of teeth up and down. From That
were born the cows, and from That were born the goats
and sheep.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




9. (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi)




ye.


The Rishis of universal vision, and sages of
universal achievement, and scholars of the Veda invoke
and worship the eternal Purusha, self-manifested in
advance of everything else. They sprinkle and
consecrate the sacred grass of yajna in their mind and
offer the oblations in the fire with Vedic mantras.


10. (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi)




[Names: Yatpurusam]
ucyete.

How do the Rishis visualise the various
manifestive modes of the Purusha? What was His
mouth? What the arms? What the thighs? What are the
feet as they are said to be?


11. (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi)


Mesa quura ae viue: sa:

[Names: Tastes, Brahmano]
ajayata.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




The Brahmana, man of divine vision and Vedic
Word, is the mouth of the Samrat Purusha, the human
community. The Kshatriya, man of justice and polilty,
is created as the arms of defence. The Vaishya, who
produces food and wealth for the society, is the thighs.
And the man of sustenance and support with labour is
the Shudra who bears the burden of the human family.


12. (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi)
[Names: Candrama, Srotradvayusca]
The moon is born of the cosmic mind, the sun is


born of the eye, the air and prana energy is born from
the ear, and the fire is born from the mouth.


13. (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi)

[Names: Nabhya, Padbhyam]
The Rishis visualise that the sky was born of the
navel of the Cosmic Purusha, that is, the sky is the navel
part of the universe, the heaven of light arose from the
head, the earth solidified from the dust of the feet, the
space directions emanated from the ear, and similarly
the other regions of the universe arose from the Purusha.


14. (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi)




[Names: Seated]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Yatpurusena, Vasanto, Saraddhavih]
When the saints and sages visualise the universal
yajna in terms of nature and enact it in the mind with
universal materials in communion with the Cosmic Soul
in meditation, then the spring season is the ghrita
(clarified butter), summer is the fuel of fire and winter
is the havi (fragrant materials) for oblations.




[Names: Narayana, Reana, Saptasyasan]
purusam pasum.


Seven are the bonds and bounds of the vedi (altar)
of the mental yajna in meditation, thrice seven, i.e.,
twentyone are the samidhas (fuel sticks) ordained. When
the saints and sages enact the yajna within, they
concentrate on the Purusha, the universal observer,
whose presence they crystallise and fix upon in the soul.


Note: Seven bounds and thrice seven samidhas
is the mystique of yajna which has been explained in


Seven bounds are the seven chhandas (metrical
compositions) of the Veda-mantras such as Gayatri.


[Names: Twenty]
material cause of the universe), Mahat (actualised
material cause), Ahankara (individualized identity of
the universe), five subtle elements or Tanmatras, five


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




gross elements, five faculties of perception, and three
qualities of the material universe which are Sattva, Rajas
and Tamas (Thought/intelligence, energy and matter).


In Rgvedadi-Bhashya-Bhumika, his Introduction
to the Commentary on the Vedas, he explains the same
thing in a different and detailed manner in the chapter


[Names: Creation]
For an average reader, the simpler way to
understand is to refer to the seven stages of creative
[Names: Ahankara, Tanmatra]
Perception faculty, Volition faculty, and gross elements.
These stages of evolution are the seven bounds of
creative yajna performed by Purusha. These are also
the Samidhas because each succeeding evolute arises
from yajnic consumption of the previous one. And each
one has three orders of quality, Sattva, Rajas and Tamas.
That makes it thrice seven.


This is the Sankhya order of evolution, and
‘Sankhya’ is the word from which comes the English
word ‘Science’ through Latin in which it is written as

[Names: Scienkia]
Another way to realise the seven boundaries is
to refer to the seven Vyahritis: Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svah,
Maha, Janah, Tapah and Satyam which are the boundaries
of each loka or region in ascending order.


16. (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi)


x eh ae: Gerd aa us ure: Ut Sar: eg ul


[Names: Yajnena]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




By that yajna of the mind the sages worship the
master of cosmic yajna and realise the eternal and
original Dharmas of existence. Blest with the light of
the Divine they experience that heaven of freedom
which the primeval sages of the world enjoyed at the
dawn of creation.


17. (Aditya Devata, Uttara Narayana Rshi)


at | tea eret aaga aaeter tac




Before the essence of the waters was distilled by
Vishvakarma for the creation of the earth, the model of
the universe existed in the eternal mind of the Purusha,
Prajapati Vishvakarma. Tvashta, the maker-
manifestation of Purusha, sculpted that form of the
universe. The origin of the divinity of the human being
too existed in the eternal mind. (That too Tvashta


18. (Purusha Devata, Narayana Rshi)


aea gaa ara: user aesa ec




[Names: Vedahametam, Tameva]
I know this great and glorious Purusha of the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




brilliance of the sun beyond the dark. Having realized
Him only does man transcend the world of existence,
birth and death. There is no other way than this to the
final freedom of Moksha.


19. (Aditya Devata, Uttara Narayana Rshi)






Prajapati, father spirit of the created universe,
immanent deep in the soul, moves everywhere, and
although ever unborn He variously manifests Himself with
all the forms of life. Men of thought and wisdom feel His
presence manifest all round. In Him alone do all the
worlds of existence find their haven and repose.


20. (Surya Devata, Uttara Narayana Rshi)






[Names: Purvo]
That which blazes with the sun for the divinities
such as the earth, who is the high-priest and prime mover
of the generous excellencies of the world, who rises
first and foremost for the nobilities of the world, to that
divine light our homage and offer of reverence.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


21.




(Vishvedeva Devata, Uttara Narayana Rshi)

"reb Ae p ded aso aaa d

aad sarai feram Rasa usu


[Names: Yastvaivam]
deva 'asan vase.


The sages of yore rising in vision of the divine


glory saw the light of the dawn and proclaimed of that:
Oh! the Brahmana who would know you thus ! The
lights of the world would be at his command.


22.


(Aditya Devata, Uttara Narayana Rshi)





[Names: Srisca, Isnannisa]
Beauty is yours. Glory is yours. The day and night


like consorts are at your sides. The stars and planets are
your form incarnate. The sun and moon are your open


face.


Kind, loving and generous, give me that bliss of


freedom, that supreme wealth of joy. Wish me all well
and the world is mine.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1.  (Paramatma Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi)






[Names: Tadevagnistadadityastadvayustadu, Tadeva]
The One Eternal Lord Supreme is Agni, self-
effulgent and omniscient. That is Aditya, all-consuming
on annihilation. That is Vayu, omnipotent, all-
sustaining. The same is Chandrama, blissful giver of
joy. The same is Shukra, instant and immaculate. That
is Brahma, greatest and infinite. That is Apah, immanent
and omnipresent. And He is Prajapati, lord of creation
and father of all His children.


2.  (Paramatma Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi)






[Names: Sayed, Sarve, Purusadadhi, Nainamurdhvam]
From the brilliant supreme Purusha are born all
the divisions of time from the moment onward, and all
the movements from the twinkling of the eye onward.
No one can ever catch or hold this Lord from above or


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.










[Names: Hiranyagarbha, Paramatma, Svayambhu, Hiranyagarbha]
There is none and nothing like Him, no picture,
no icon, no simile, no metaphor. Great is His Name,
mighty His glory. “He is the Golden Seed of the
universe", it is apparent. *No, no, do not kill me, do not
punish, I pray”, such is the prayer of humanity to Him.
^No one ever born is greater than He or beyond Him",
such is clearly the voice of the Veda.


4. (Atma Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi)


Taf saiet:| asya Id: U Streator: Were Sat
fasi udaa: we




Children of divinity, verily this glorious lord of
the universe pervades all regions and quarters of space.
First born, i.e., manifested, of existence, in truth, He is
at the very centre of the universe and in the depths of
the soul. Existent and manifest, He continues to manifest
every moment and abides everywhere in everything
facing forward in all directions.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




5.  (Paramatma Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi)








[Names: Yasmajjatam]
The glorious lord is He, nothing whatever was
born before Him, none of all those worlds of the universe
which came into existence later. Father and sustainer,
abiding and rejoicing with His creation, lord of sixteen
powers of perfection, He pervades and feeds the three
lights of the earth, sky and heaven, i.e., fire, electric
energy and sunlight.


Note:- Sixteen seems to be the number of kalas
(qualities, attributes, virtues and faculties) which
comprise the model of perfection from different points
of view. From Prashnopanishad, 6, 4, for example, we
learn that ‘sixteen kalas’? means the sixteen creative
powers of the Purusha, sixteen evolutionary stages of
the created universe, and sixteen virtues, qualities and
faculties of both cosmic and individual existence. These
kalas are : Prana or energy and the Hiranyagarbha or
the universally fertilized golden seed of the universe,
agni or fire and light, apah or waters, prithivi or earth,
indriya or faculties of perception and volition, mana or
mind, anna or food, virya or vitality of generation, tapa
or discipline of inviolable austerity, mantra or
knowledge or the art of living, karma or action, loka or
world regions of the universe, and nama or individuality
and identity.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




In Atharva-veda, 13, 4, 47-54, the divine virtues
are described as: Shachipati or omnipotent, vibhu or
infinite, prabhu or lord of all, ambha or cool as water,
raja or brilliant, lovely and glorious, uru prithu or vast,
highest and best, vyacho loka or omnipresent, bhavad-
vasu or lord of universal honour, idadvasu or lord of
controlled, and ayat-vasu or ever lustrous and


Reference may be made to Satyarth Prakash,
chapter I, in which Swami Dayanand has listed 108
attributive names of Ishvara. ‘Sixteen’ refers to an ideal


6.  (Paramatma Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi)


aa dren dirt at get aa ta: eae We ATH: |




By Him the heavens blaze, by Him the earth is
firm, by Him the heaven of bliss is sustained, by Him
the ecstasy of Moksha is constant, and He is the creator
of the worlds in space. Let us worship that lord of glory
and eternal bliss, and let us sing in honour of Him with
the fragrance of yajna.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




7. (Paramatma Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi)




[Names: Yatradhi]
To Him the heaven and earth, both constant and
moving in ecstasy at heart, do homage with awe and
reverence. Under His eye does the sun rise and blaze
with light. To that Lord of awe and glorious bliss let us
offer our homage of praise and worship with love and
faith. Whatever the vast oceans of water, and whatever
the expansive spaces, all exist in Him.


8.  (Paramatma Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi)


amada Wa daa feme serus i




[Names: Venastatpasyannihitam, Tasminnidam]
The man of vision and wisdom sees that eternal
spirit hidden in mystery where the universe lies nestled
in His presence. Therein all this comes into being
together, and therein it falls asunder. Infinite is He,
immanent and omnipresent in the created beings.


9.  (Vidvan Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi)


u agai q fae eret ara fede Wer a |


[Names: Trarsda]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






The man of knowledge gifted with the divine
voice may speak of this immortal haven and eternal spirit
covered in mystery yet shining in the soul. Three parts
of it are hidden in the cave. He who knows them is the
man of super-wisdom, father of the paternal wise.


10. (Paramatma Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi)





[Names: Sanastrttye]
He is our father and our brother. He is our
sustainer and controller. He knows all the worlds of
existence which are home to the created beings. There
in His supreme presence, third haven of being (the other
two are Prakriti and jiva), the divine souls tasting of the
immortal joy of heaven roam around at will.


11. (Paramatma Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi)




[Names: Wired, Paritya, Upasthaya]
Having known and crossed over the material
forms of existence, having gone over the regions of the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




world, having crossed through directions and sub-
directions all, and reaching the original voice of eternal
truth in the Veda by the soul, the man of knowledge
and vision attains to the supreme soul of the universe
and, one with it in union, abides.


12. (Paramatma Devata, Svayambhu Brahma Rshi)


«idi ue3u



Having known and crossed over earth and heaven
simultaneously, having gone over the regions of the
universe, having crossed through the directions and
subdirections, and having transcended even the visions
of paradise, and having over-seen the network of reality
constituting the structure of the universe, the
transcendent soul sees that Supreme Soul and finally
grows one with That.


13. (Indra Devata, Medhakama Rshi)





[Names: Tepid, Sadasaspatimadbhutam, Sanim]
In truth of word and deed with all sincerity of
mind and spirit I invoke the Lord of the universe,
wondrous great, loved and worshipped by the human
soul, and, pray for a gift of that intelligence which


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


distinguishes between the temporary and the permanent.


14. (Paramatma Devata, Medhakama Rshi)


wur ure Rear Aef ene caret ueuwu



Agni, lord of light and knowledge, I pray,
enlighten me here and now with that discriminative
intelligence which the noblest people of piety and senior
guardians of humanity value and pray for.


This is the voice of the heart in truth of word and
deed.


15. (Paramatma & Vidvan Devate, Medhakama Rshi)
[Names: Bera]
ARa aree uen area dara À xem usu




[Names: Medham, Medhamindrasca]
May Varuna, supreme lord of the universe, and
the scholar of highest knowledge, bless me with supreme


May Agni, lord of universal light, and the eminent
scholar and teacher, bless me with discriminative


May Prajapati, guardian sustainer of creation, and
the generous scholar, bless me with generous and life-


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




May Indra, lord of universal grandeur, and the
leader of honour and power, bless me with honourable


May Vayu, lord of universal energy and power,
and the scholar of science and technology, bless me with
intellectual and vitalizing intelligence.


May Dhata, lord preserver of the universe, and
scholar of life-sciences, bless me with life-preserving


This is the divine voice from the heart.


16. (Vidvan & Raja Devate, Shrikama Rshi)






May this knowledge of mine and the Brahmana
fellowship, and this power and honour of mine and the
Kshatra organisation, both grow to excellence and grace.
May the noblest people bless me with the best of
excellence and grace.


All the best for you in truth of word and deed.
This is the divine voice of the soul.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1.  (Agnayah Devata, Vatsapri Rshi)




[Names: Padre, Asyajaraso, Sviticayah]
The fires (such as heat, light, electricity, lightning
and yajna fire) of this lord of the universe are unaged
and unaging, homely, protective and promotive, bearing
sacred and fragrant flames of brilliance, purifying, holy
white, invigorating bringers of wealth, dynamic energy,
riding the sun-beams, cooling and exhilarating like the
breeze and a drink of soma.


2.  (Agnayah Devata, Vishvarupa Rshi)


ada gehe: usu




[Names: Harayo, Yatante]
Fast as sunbeams, with banners of flame flown
by the winds, the fires arise, each in its own way, upto
the heights of heaven.

3.  (AgniDevata, Gotama Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Yaja, Sagely]
for us, for the sake of our friends and the best people,
for the divine powers of nature, in honour of the
universal law, and for your own home. (Kindle the fire,
develop the light, let the flames arise for all.)


4.  (AgniDevata, Vishvarupa Rshi)






priest of the science of fire, taught by eminent masters,
rise like a heroic warrior of the chariot, yoke the fastest
horses consecrated by the divinities and carry on the
pursuit of yajna relentlessly.


5.  (AgniDevata, Kutsa Rshi)
& aa ura: wasasa eed aaa
gaci: uu




[Names: Hariranyasyam]
Two powers of nature (the night and day), both
different in form and colour, are busy doing good work.
[Names: Both]
child. In one develops and arises the moon, soothing
and brilliant, bearing its own bliss and beauty. In the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




other develops and arises the sun, a blazing radiant
power which illuminates and purifies everything.


6.  (AgniDevata, Kutsa Rshi)


vise.

This agni (in the form of heat, light and
electricity), wonderful and omnipresent energy of prime
importance in this world and first kindled in the vedi
by the pioneers of yajna, is the high-priest of the
dynamics of existence, worthiest of develoment by joint
effort and adorable in the creative projects of life.
Generous and intelligent fore-fathers of humanity and
dedicated sages of yajna kept it safe in the woods and
burning in the light of sun-beams for all classes of their


7. (Vidvans Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)
[Names: Beyra]
aa-T gel


[Names: Auksan]
Three hundred, three thousand and thirty three
divinities of nature and nine serve this universal energy
of agni, feed it with holy fuels of ghrita and waters,
spread the holy grass for its seat on earth and in the sky


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and kindle this high-priest of universal yajna to move
all round across the spaces.


8.  (Vidvans Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)


EXTAT


[Names: Kaviin]
Noble scholars of the science of fire energy
generate this power present everywhere from the top of
heaven to the surface and body of the earth, friend of
humanity, created for the sake of the universal yajna of
honourable guest, and close at hand for the nourishment
and protection of the people.


9.  (AgniDevata, Bharadvaja Rshi)






[Names: Agnirvrtrani, Samiddhah]
Just as the pure and brilliant fire, the sun, breaks
the clouds, so should the yajaka desirous of wealth burn
off sins with joyful oblations in the fire kindled and raised
in the vedi of yajna.


10. (Agni Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Visvebhih, Piba]
Agni, brilliant scholar and yajaka, just as the sun,
by the currents of energy and the wind, drinks up the
honey-sweets of soma from the world of nature, so should
you, along with the sun and the green sunny haunts of
nature and your friends and seats of sacred fire drink the
honey-sweets of yajna-soma.


11. (Agni Devata, Parashara Rshi)
[Names: Gals, Saag]
ze ue


When the brilliant fragrance, pure and sanctified
in yajna for the sake of nourishment and energy, reaches
the sun, luminous ruler of the world, then the living
energy of the sun creates pure, energising, praiseworthy,
youthful, lovable, fertilizing waters close to the light of
heaven and showers them as the seed of life on earth.


12. (Agni Devata, Vishvavara Rshi)


[Names: Theresa]
fa gen



[Names: Sardha]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Agni, scholar, ruler, rise and assert yourself for
honour and prosperity. May your power and fame rise
to the heights. Make the home and family happy and
disciplined full of conjugal felicity. Face the enermys’
powers and fix them all round.


13. (Vishvedeva Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)


" ca order seat are dora ureter dur: ues




Agni, joyous and great, we approach you with
songs of praise and flames of fire. You alone listen to
our pious words of solemnity. Brilliant as the sun,
powerful as the wind, the noblest of humanity serve
you whole-heartedly with their power and potential, love
and reverence.


14. (Vidvans Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)
As vared fare: Gad Gea: |


[Names: Yantaro]
gonam.


Agni, honoured with praise and served with
flames of fragrant fire, may all the heroes and scholars
be dear to you, all those self-controlled leaders of people
blessed with power and prosperity who suppress the
destroyers of cows and support the development of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




15. (Agni Devata, Praskanva Rshi)




[Names: Srudhi]
Agni, brilliant ruler, man of good ear, keen to
listen, listen to our prayer alongwith your noble
companions of the administrative yajna who carry the
holy fire and oblations with you.

May Mitra, friend of all the people, and Aryama,
chief of justice for the citizens, come and grace their
seats of honour in the morning and join the yajnic
business of governance.


16. (Agni Devata, Gotama Rshi)


[Names: Hdssmqum]
dar: UREN


[Names: Agnirdevanamava]
Inviolable among all the devotees of yajna, guest-
like honoured by all the humans, protective cover for
the noblest divines, may Agni, brilliant ruler and master-
mind of world knowledge, be kind and gracious to all.


17. (Savita Devata, Lushodhanaka Rshi)
uA: fien yio f cup ver


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Sresthe]
Under the shelter and protection of great and
glorious Agni, lord of light, may we live pure and sinless
toward our friends and chosen people of virtue.


May we, under the care of Mitra, divine friend of
life, and Varuna, lord of chosen virtue, enjoy the highest
state of goodness and well-being.

And may we, in obedience to the will of Savita,


lord giver of life, have the divine gifts of food, energy
and protection in this life.


18. (Indra Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)




Eu uel



[Names: Apascitpipyu, Yahi, Vayurna]
Indra, ruling lord of light and glory, the saving
waters of grace abound like waves of light exuberant.
Your worshippers and admirers attain the light of truth
and law.


Kind and gracious, come like the wind on the
wings of light and bless us. You alone, with the gifts of
intelligence, bless us with food, energy and victory.


19. (Indra & Vayu Devata, Purumidha Ajamidha Rshis)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Gava]
The rays of the sun and the cows both sustain
and preserve the earth, and heaven and earth give form
to the yajna and guard it closely. So may Indra and Vayu,
both of good and golden ear, listen to our prayer and
protect and promote yajna.


20. (Savita Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)
[Names: Yadadya, Suvati]
To-day when the sun has arisen, then the
immaculate Mitra, friend of all, Aryama, lord of justice,


Savita, lord of life, and Bhaga, lord of glory and
prosperity, inspire, energise and bless the world.


21. (Vena Devata, Suniti Rshi)






[Names: Teer]
In this holy yajnic world of the Lord, consecrate
the light and glory of the sun which shines over the
beauty of heaven and earth. May all the essences of
nature and the best of humanity hold on to this flood of
light and life. The wisest of the ancients consecrated
and worshipped it, this light and wisdom of the world.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




22. (Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)





[Names: Atisthantam, Mahattadvrsno]
Let one and all adore and consecrate that energy
which abides firm and unshaken. Self-refulgent, wearing
the wealth and beauty of the world, it rolls around. Great
is the name and fame of this generous and bountiful
lord giver of showers and prosperity. It is of universal
character and abides in all permanent forms of life and
nature.


23. (Indra Devata, Suchika Rshi)


ze ue ga: A nè wat yur a weet




All of you offer worship and homage in honour
of Indra, supreme, beatific, support, energy and spirit
of the universe whose creative yajna, omnipotence,
eternal glory and universal wealth, the earth and heaven
serve and celebrate.


24. (Indra Devata, Trishoka Rshi)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Brhannididhma]
Great is the fame and excellence of those whose
friend is Indra, boundless, blazing, expansive, glorious
and unaging lord.


25. (Indra Devata, Madhuchhanda Rshi)






[Names: Maad, Tete, Indrehi, Somaparva]
Indra, lord of might and knowledge, great,
honoured and worshipped by virtue of your own
splendour and glory, come and join all our soma
offerings and enjoy the delicacies of our yajna to your


26. (Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)






[Names: Ahan]
Indra, ruling lord of light and power, challenges
the dark clouds of evil and crime. Strong of policy and
versatile of working ways and forms, he frustrates the
designs of the cunning. Scourge of thieves and grabbers
hiding in the forests, he breaks their arms and burns
them to dust. And he gives full expression to the voice
and actions of those who contribute to delightful peace
and prosperity.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




27. (Indra Devata, Agastya Rshi)






[Names: Heres, Kutastvamindra, Subhanairvocestanno]
Whence, where, do you, Indra, praised and
powerful, go alone all by yourself? Lord of truth, shelter
and support of the wise and good, why thus? What is
the cause? Gliding past by horses on the wing, tell us
that in confidence, we ask you in so many words of
sincerity, since we are your own. Indra, by your own
power and splendour you are great, rarely relenting,


28. (Indra Devata, Gauriviti Rshi)
an wise: Ua asad cure fader |




[Names: Indrayavah, Indrayava, Sakrtsvam, Puruputram, Puruputra]
Indra, enlightened and powerful ruler, the people
who are good and true, who wish to punish those who
are cruel to the cow and the self-disciplined man of the
wealth of cows, and who cultivate the vast, generous
mother earth, sustainer of her many children and flowing


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




with her gifts in a thousand streams — all these admire
and advance your governance and administration.


29. (Indra Devata, Kutsa Rshi)




[Names: Tamutsave]
Indra, lord of power and enlightenment, I
acknowledge, admire and stand by this great word,
wisdom and policy of yours which, powerful as it is,
emerges clearly in this eulogy of yours.


That same great Indra of courage and conquest
by virtue of his valour, the noblest poets and leaders
glorify with great enthusiasm in festivals and
celebrations of growth and development.


30. (Surya Devata, Vibhrat Rshi)


Wafa non


[Names: Vibhrad, Vatajuto, Purudha]
rajati.
Brilliant and boundless, may the sun drink the
honey-sweet nectars of soma, and bless the yajnapati
with life full and inviolate.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Going at the speed of energy, he sustains and
nourishes the living beings with his own might and
shines on in wondrous ways.


31. (Surya Devata, Praskanva Rshi)
3q a madad Xe deta chad: |


Surely the rays of light convey and reveal the
glory of the Sun, lord of light, omniscient, omnipresent
and all-illuminant, so that the world may see the eternal
light and glory of the lord of the universe.


32. (Surya Devata, Praskanva Rshi)






Varuna, lord of universal justice, purifier and
sanctifier, with the eye with which you watch the blazing
lord of nourishment and protection, with the same
benigh eye watch the whole humanity.


33. (Vidvan Devata, Praskanva Rshi)
[Names: Seulaserjssmdge]
"peer Gas GAs acd uere d
ata aa: fat emat us 31




[Names: Daivyavadhvaryu, Suryatvaca]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Divine high-priests of love and compassion, come
by the wondrous chariot of sunbeams, take up and
conduct the yajna with honeyed materials of piety and


Like the yajna of ancient time, this yajna too is
brilliant and beautiful, wonderful and darling of the
divinities.

34. (Savita Devata, Agastya Rshi)





Generous and brilliant Savita, celebrated life of
the world, and Vaishvanara, vital heat of life, may be
gracious to come to our yajna with holy materials and
voices of Divinity. Divinities ever young and young
scholars too may come to us rejoicing on way to yajna
so that they may sanctify our mind and all our life of
the world.


35. (Surya Devata, Shrutakaksha & Sukaksha Rshis)




Indra, lord of might and glory, Sun, blazing power
of light, destroyer of the clouds of darkness, wherever


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




you rise and shine today, all that is under your power
and control.


36. (Surya Devata, Praskanva Rshi)




[Names: Taranirvisvadarsato, Visvamabhasi]
Sun, benevolent energy of the world, universal


eye, you are the light, creator of light and knowledge.
And you illuminate the beautiful world of existence.


37. (Surya Devata, Kutsa Rshi)




[Names: Tatsuryasya, Yadedayukta]
That divine light of the Sun, eternal creator, and
that grandeur of His, is positively extended in the midst
of the universe as His power and will to create. The
same He withdraws (and the structure goes off). When
the power is thus disconnected and withdrawn from
space back into the centre, then from the centre itself,
the Night, the Lord's power of negation, weaves the
cover of darkness for all.


38. (Surya Devata, Kutsa Rshi)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Tanmitrasya, Anantamanyadrusadasya]
In the midst of the heaven of existence, the Sun,
eternal creator, creates the form of Mitra, divinity of
the day, and of Varuna, spirit of the night, to watch (the
work of His own creation) for all. One power of His is
light, brilliant and boundless. The other is dark which
the eternal spaces hold.


39. (Vishvedeva Devata, Jamadagni Rshi)


Teed Gat Hise dams de Were ussffa sen


[Names: Mahaste]
mahan’ asi.


Truly, great is the Sun, eternal creator. Surely,
infinite is the light of omniscience of the Lord
indestructible. The glory, Lord Divine, great and true,
is universally sung and celebrated. Lord of Light
sublime, you are all time great.


40. (Surya Devata, Jamadagni Rshi)



[Names: Mahna]
O Sun, lord of light and generosity, in all truth,
you are great. By virtue of your own glory, you are the
ever living highpriest of the divinities and humanity,
infinite and omnipresent, eternal light of existence, sole


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


and unchallengeable.


41. (Surya Devata, Nrimedha Rshi)


miasa uz fesefa-er vera |



[Names: Srayanta, Vasuni]
Only in the shelter and protection of the Sun, light
and lord of existence, do you partake of the gifts of
Indra, lord of the world's wealth, exactly as we, in the
world created and yet to be created by the lord's might,
receive and gratefully enjoy just our share.


42. (Surya Devata, Kutsa Rshi)
wit: qne


Today on the rise of the sun, the noblest sages
and divinities, we pray, may save us from sin and
despicable action. Similarly may Mitra, light of the day,
Varuna, spirit of the night, the sky, the sea, the earth
and heaven exalt us with honour.


43. (Surya Devata, Hiranyastupa Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Hiranyayena]
Savita, the sun, with his force of gravity and
sphere of light revolves (in space), sustaining all its
mortal and immortal family in place. By the golden
chariot of splendour, the lord of light travels on,
watching the various worlds of space.


44. (Vayu Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)


[Names: Amme]
aT inei




[Names: Visamaktorusasah]
Vayu, the wind, and Pusha, the sun, both as a
team of divinity, invoked early at the meeting of the
night and day, move through the sky like two parental
rulers of the world and energise the waters of life for
the good of all these people of the earth.


45. (Indra & Vayu Devate, Medhatithi Rshi)






[Names: Mitragnim, Mitragni, Adityan]
For the good of all the people of the earth, invoke
Indra, universal electric energy, Vayu, the wind,
Brihaspati, light of the universe, Mitra, pranic energy,
Agni, fire energy, Pusha, the spirit of health and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




nourishment, Bhaga, the wealth vested in nature,
Adityas, the various phases of the solar movements of
the earth, and Maruts, various forms of air and modes
of the wind. Invoke these divinities of nature working
in unison as a united group of powers.


46. (Varuna Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)

[Names: Karatam]
May Varuna, lord of kindness and justice, and
Mitra, lord of love and friendship, be good and gracious
with all kinds of favour and protection and make us
prosperous with blissful wealth.

47. (Vishvedeva Devata, Kutsidi Rshi)





[Names: Indraisam, Indraisa, Omasascarsanidhrtah]
Come Indra, lord giver of prosperity, Vishnu,
omnipresent lord of the universe, Maruts, lords of energy
and power, Ashvins, givers of health for body and mind,
come and with your presence grace us all and all these


Like the ancients we invoke Him, the one self-
refulgent Divinity and all the divine powers of heaven
and earth and the sky.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Protectors and sustainers of life and humanity,
come you all with voices divine and all the blessed
honey wealth of the world and rejoice.


48. (Vishvedeva Devata, Pratikshatra Rshi)




[Names: Marutota]
May Agni, lord of light, Indra, lord of power,
Mitra, universal friend, and all divines bless us with
strength of body, mind and soul. May Vishnu, lord
omnipresent, the Maruts, powers of energy, kind and
favourable Ashvinis, teacher and preacher, Rudra, lord
of justice and punishment, the divine voices, Pusha,
giver of health and nourishment, Bhaga, lord of honour
and prosperity, and Sarasvati, mother of knowledge,
come and bless us and enjoy our hospitality.


49. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vatsara Rshi)


[Names: Huve, Samsam]
savitaramutaye.


I invoke Indragni, fire and energy, Mitra and
Varuna, pranic energies, Aditi, riches of the sky, Sva,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




peace and joy, Prithivi, riches of the earth, Dyau, the
sun in heaven, Maruts, fastest human powers, wealth
of the mountains and clouds, the energy of waters and
rain, and I pray to Vishnu, omnipresent spirit of the
universe, Pusha, nature's spirit of health and
refreshment, Brahmanaspati, guardian Spirit of the
universe and knowledge, Bhaga, lord giver of wealth
and honour, and the celebrated Savita, creator, sustainer
and light-giver of the world, for protection and well-


50. (Mahendra Devata, Pragatha Rshi)





[Names: Heer, Indrajyestha]
For him who prays, sings hymns of praise, and is
strong and rich with oblations for the divinities : for
him and for us all, the Rudras, powers of justice and
punishment, rich and generous people, clouds and
mountains, heroes who rise with us on the call to battle
for elimination of the enemy, followers of the powerful
leader Indra, and the noblest powers of nature and


51. (Vishvedeva Devata, Kurma Rshi)




[Names: Frat]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Arvanco, Tradhvam]
Protective divinities of the yajakas, come to bless
us to-day so that I may benefit from the strength innate
in your heart. Come lest I feel afraid. Save us from the
damage the thief or the tiger might cause.


Devotees of yajna, worshippers of Divinity and
admirers of the sages, save us from falling into the pit
of sin.


52. (Vishvedeva Devata, Lusha Rshi)






May the Maruts, fastest powers of the world,
come to-day and bring us all the wealth and favours.
May all the fires of yajna light for us. May all the
divinities come to us with protection. May the food,
energy and wealth of the world be for us all.


53. (Vishvedeva Devata, Suhotra Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




All the divinities of the world listen to this prayer
of mine, all those existent in the sky and in heaven, and
all those who have knowledge of the sky and heaven
watch this yajna of science and education. May the
divinities of fire and participants of yajna hear, come
and join us on this vedi and rejoice.


54. (Vishvedeva Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)
were fe dan aesae Gare smi




[Names: Devebhyo, Adiddamana]
Savita, lord of light and universal yajna of
creation, you alone create the first and highest part of
the joy of existence, Moksha, for the sagely nobilities
of yajna. And then you alone weave the warp and woof
of the means of light and knowledge and appropriate
means of life and living for humanity.


55. (Vayu Devata, Rijishva Rshi)




[Names: Wares, Vayumaccha, Dyutadyama]
Yajamana dedicated to yajna, poet and sagely
scholar of broad vision and deep universal reflection,
having obtained the right men and materials try to join
the imaginative man of vision and knowledge and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




relentlessly pursue the scientific yajna for the
development of wind energy, source of universal wealth,
universal presence and protection, motive power for
vehicles, and energy leading to heat and light.


56. (Indravayu Devate, Madhucchanda Rshi)


gaat aaria fe usu




Indra and Vayu, scholars of energy and wind,
distilled are the essences and ready these materials.
Come with all preparations and pleasure. The drops of
nectar juices wait for you.


57. (Mitra & Varuna Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi)






[Names: Gadel, Mitrain, Mitrai, Dhiyam]
I invoke Mitra, spirit of universal friendship, pure
and versatile like the day, and I invoke Varuna, silencer
of violence and enmity into peace like the night, both
of which develop intelligence abounding in the creation
of waters and energy.


58. (Ashvinau Devate, Madhucchanda Rshi)




[Names: Wetat]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Dasra, Rudravarttant]
venah.


Come scholars, both of you like the Ashvins, of
extraordinary knowledge, sincere and truthful, behaving
justly like Rudra. Ready are the disciples waiting for
you both, having gathered and spread the holy grass for
seats on the vedi.


59. (Indra Devata, Kushika Rshi)
[Names: Raad]
att maqa omre ve Were SAA eq ins t
[Names: Vidadyadi, Agram]
If the blessed and blissful first Voice, well-
structured in human speech, were to reveal the breach
of the cloud, then, one with the ancient path of Divinity,


proclaiming the original thunder of the Immortal and


60. (Vaishvanara Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)






[Names: Emenamavrdhannamrta]
The immortal ancient sages saw no other
messenger coming, felt no other presence arising in their
mind than this omnipresent Agni, none before this
Divine Light. And they developed and ever develop the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




knowledge and awareness of this immortal light and
power for their victory over the universal battlefield of


61. (Indragni Devate, Bharadvaja Rshi)





We invoke Indra, lord of rule and power, and
Agni, lord of light and leadership, both compelling in
advancement and destroyers of enemies in the battles
of life. May they be kind and gracious and make us
happy and successful in such battles of living.


62. (Soma Devata, Devala Rshi)


[Names: Upasmai]
Leaders and teachers, teach and train this brilliant
and blessed young man of innocent and purifying nature,
keen to meet and reverence the nobilities of honour and


63. (Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)


Tes: nes





All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Indra, lord of honour and power, commanding
homage and obedience, riding horses of lightning speed,
those noble scholars and pious people who invoke you
and exalt you with the call to battle against the clouds
of drought and darkness, those who call you to battle
against the enemies of goodness, and those who exhort
you to battle for light along with the sun-beams, and
those who join you rejoicing with you in celebrations,
with all these, with your troops and commandos, and
with your tempestuous friends and forces drink the soma
of honour and glory of success.


64. (Indra Devata, Gauriviti Rshi)






[Names: Janistha, Avardhannindram, Marutasci]
the noblest mother bore and shaped as a great hero,
highly adorable for instant action and splendid victories,
most lustrous and pride of many whom the most
dynamic leaders and scholars admire and exalt here in
the land, rise and create joy and prosperity all round.


65. (Indra Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)






Indra, glorious leader and ruler, destroyer of the
demon of darkness, come soon and bring all round


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




prosperity for us. Great as you are, advance us with the
best ways of protection and progress.


66. (Indra Devata, Nrimedha Rshi)


sider Site fava wat det aac: tis t



[Names: Tvamindra]
Indra, mighty ruler, over all your rivals in the
fierce battles of life you are supreme. Creator of joy
and prosperity, destroyer of detractors, subduer of
opponents, eliminate those who damage and destroy life
and nature.


67. (Indra Devata, Nrimedha Rshi)






[Names: Visvaste, Turvasi]
Indra, lord of might and rectitude, just as mother
and father love and admire their child, so may the earth
and heaven admire and exhort you for your power to
sap the strength of the enemy. When you break and
destroy the cloud of darkness, all the fighting forces of
the rivals lay down arms before your power and passion.


68. (Aditya Devata, Kutsa Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





Powers of knowledge and brilliance, may the
yajna and gatherings of noble sages bring us peace and
prosperity. May the Adityas, eminent scholars, sages
and blazing warriors be kind and gracious to us. The
vision and wisdom of yours which abides with us right
here may, we pray, be the harbinger of wealth and virtue
more and ever more, and do good even to the sinner
and save him.


69. (Savita Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)




[Names: Ruaa, Adabdhebhih, Hiranyajihvah]
1$ata.

Savita, blazing lord of light and life, protect our
hearth and home to-day with free and fearless,
promotive and auspicious means of protection. Lord of
the Golden Voice, protect and direct us for the latest
joy and prosperity of life. We pray, let no thief rule


70. (Vayu Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)




[Names: Aataiiso, Vaha]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Vayu, powerful ruler, and people, your brilliant
decent men of honeyed culture, have beaten the enemy
with courage and yajnic actions.


Come Vayu, with them rejoicing, bear the soma
and the gifts of yajna and drink with joy the distilled
nectar of active life.


71. (Mitra & Varuna Devate, Vasishtha Rshi)


sur cuit Raat ee it




May the cows and rays of the sun rays protect
and promote yajna. May the great earth and heaven,
both active and golden generous, makers of beautiful
forms, protect and promote the form and function of


72. (Vidvan Devata, Daksha Rshi)


AAAI sem uae FUT |






[Names: Kavyayorajanesu, Risadasa]
Scholars, teachers and preachers, dispellers of the
darkness of ignorance, come to the assembly home of
this versatile genius and grace the seats of the creation
of great literature with your knowledge and wisdom of
truth and noble action.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


73. (Adhvaryu Devate, Daksha Rshi)






[Names: Gace]
Brilliant highpriests of the yajna of love and
development, come by the car shining as sunlight and


create the honey-sweets of the yajna of science and
technology, the new one brilliant as of old.


74. (Surya Devata, Prajapati Rshi)


[Names: Ratensstteareart]
TEMA iex




[Names: Tirascino, Retodha]
The light of the stars moves in waves, downward
Theycarry seeds of life, replete with grandeur, divine
energy itself in motion far and near, nature below, a
gift from above.


Know and be masters of vitality, fertility,
grandeur and greatness, all your own, all round.


75  (Vidvan Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)


fa: Meu


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






This light energy fills the earth and sky and
heaven, born of the Great Mahat mode of Prakriti. When
the veteran performers place, light and develop it in
yajna, it is radiated all round. It is kavi too, carrier of
the Word and sound constantly on the move, immensely
valuable for food, energy and victory.


76. (Indragni Devate, Vasishtha Rshi)





[Names: Hart, Ukthebhirvrtrahantama, Angisairavivasatah]
Indra and Agni, energy and light of the world,
shining and exhilarating, dispellers of darkness and
destroyers of sin, when they are constantly invoked,
served and developed with holy formulaic words,
hymns, and songs of celebration, they illuminate life
and make it pleasant and fragrant.


77. (Vishvedeva Devata, Suhotra Rshi)






[Names: Sumrdika]
Our children who closely hear the voice of
Immortality, may they be good and create peace and
comfort for us all.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




78. (Indra and Marut Devate, Agastya Rshi)






[Names: Asaf, Brahmani, Susma]
The sacred songs of adoration which the seasoned
scholars love and teach us, the peace and comfort which
the children create for us, the riches which the fire and
wind and cloud fed by yajna shower on us: may the
teacher and learner carry on all these as tradition and
bring up well for us.


79. (Indra Devata, Agastya Rshi)


wea wes
[Names: Anuttama]
devata vidanah. Na jayamano na$ate na jato
[Names: Unmoved]
is nothing un-initiated by you. There is no god existent
or omniscient as you. Exalted and most high, unborn,


constant and non-evolving, whatever you do or shall


80. (Mahendra Devata, Brihaddiva Rshi)


[Names: Wage]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Tadidasa, Satrunanu]
That alone is the highest and most exalted in the
world of existence whence the awful sunlike hero of
blazing power is born. Upon the rise, he instantly
destroys the enemies such as darkness. All protective
powers of the world rejoice with him.


81. (Vishvedeva Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)




[Names: Puruvaso, Pavakavarnah]
ranusata.


of mine which celebrate and exalt you may inspire the
wise divines who, brilliant and pure like sacred fire, do
homage to you with hymns of praise.


82. (Vishvedeva Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)




[Names: Yasyayam, Tira]
rayih.


The noble people of the world are obedient
supporters of yours. The treasurer is pious and faithful.
And whatever is treasured or hoarded or hidden with
the trader, the violent man or the armed guard, all that
is wealth preserved for you ultimately.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




83. (Vishvedeva Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)





[Names: Usenet, Aseka, Satyah]
This ruler, taught, trained, strengthened and
fortified by seers and sages shines and rises a thousand
ways like the sea. Great and true is his power and glory
which I celebrate in the priest-like projects of his reign
of piety.

84. (Savita Devata, Bharadvaja Rshi)


1$ata.

Savita, ruler of the golden flame, today protect
our hearth and home and our people with bold and
benevolent methods of all round defence and progress.
Protect and promote us for the latest comfort and


85. (Vayu Devata, Jamadagni Rshi)
[Names: Fuca, Antah]
ayami te.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Vayu, ruler of the winds and power, come and
grace our yajna with precious gifts of knowledge and
science so that the flames of fire may rise and reach the
heights of heaven, and I, this devotee of the holy fire,
inward purified, upward expansive with the flames,
mentally shining and spiritually crystallized may come
to you.


86. (Indra-Vayu Devate, Tapasa Rshi)


zaag duy Yeas ése |


sumana 'asat.


Unto this yajna of life and progress, we invoke
and invite Indra, sovereign ruler of the world, and Vayu,
universal power and energy, both of benign and blissful
eye and eager to come and bless, so that, we pray, this
entire human family of ours live free from want and
suffering and, happy at heart, unite to act in joint
ventures of universal well-being.


87. (Mitra & Varuna Devate, Jamadagni Rshi)


maha a Wet: VITA sei |


[Names: Rdhagittha]
dataye.


Blessed is the man, for sure, who thus for the
sake of peace and service of the wise and for positive
values invokes and invites Mitra, lord of universal love


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and friendship, and Varuna, lord of justice and favourite
of universal choice, to his yajna for the creation and
gift of life's fragrance for happiness and fulfilment of


88. (Ashvins Devate, Vasishtha Rshi)






[Names: Dugdham]
Ashvins, powers of health and joy, come and join
us (ruler and people both), beatify our yajna and drink
of the honey-sweets of fragrance. Virile and generous
lords and pillars of wealth and victory, come with a
shower of milk and waters, neglect us never.


89. (Vishvedeva Devata, Kanva Rshi)
ùa aerate: w deta ue |




[Names: Accha]
May Brahmanaspati, lord of wealth and
knowledge, come and bless us. May the divine voice of
truth and rectitude enlighten us and bless our speech.
May the sagely scholars conduct our yajna for the
attainment of common good and rise of the good, and
brave and noble people of the community.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


90. (Indra Devata, Trita Rshi)
[Names: Rayim, Purusprham, Purusprha]
The moon of celestial hue rushes on through
space in the light of heaven as a roaring horse on the


wing, attaining the tremendous glory of ruddy gold,
darling love of many people.


91. (Vishvedeva Devata, Manu Rshi)





Childern of mother earth, with pious intentions,
brilliant intelligence and noble actions, singing and
celebrating, we call upon every princely hero for
protection and security. We invoke every divine power
for happiness and well-being. We invite every scholar
and leader of eminence for victory in the battles of life.


92. (Vaishvanara Devata, Medha Rshi)


[Names: Ksmaya]
tamah.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




The great universal Agni sanctified in heavenly
light grows with the earth and, raised and exalted with
holy food, kind and favourable to humanity, dispels the
darkness with its light and glory.


93. (Indragni Devate, Suhotra Rshi)






[Names: Gatrteagetss, Hitvi]
Indra and Agni, powers of light and fire, this
dawn, radiating, not walking, from the heights of
heaven, descends (to the earth), first in the morning,
for the moving humanity. It speaks with the tongue of
birds and humans, walks on for thirty steps of the thirty-
muhurta (twenty four hour) day, and then re-turns in
the diurnal course.


94. (Vishvedeva Devata, Manu Rshi)






[Names: Devaso]
May all the noble saints and scholars and men of
wealth and power, zealous and generous, together be
liberal and kind to the entire humanity. May they be
givers of freedom and prosperity to us to-day, and
comfort and advancement to our children to morrow.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




95. (Indra Devata, Nrimedha Rshi)






[Names: Cert, Apadhamadabhis, Devasta]
May Indra, lord of power and ruler of the world,
destroyer of cursers and evil-wishers, be the liberal giver
of prosperity and splendour, and may he eliminate all
fear, violence and terror.

Indra, lord of light and glory like the sun, may all
the nobilities of humanity, divinities of nature and
powers of the winds be friends with you with all their


96. (Indra Devata, Nrimedha Rshi)


an Gala Gael akado yada gA N




[Names: Vrtram, Sataparvana]
Maruts, leaders and commanders of humanity,
sing hymns of praise in honour of Indra, great ruler of
the world. Lord of a hundred yajnic acts, destroyer of
darkness and want with his thunderbolt of a hundred-
fold power, and saviour of humanity with a hundred
safeguards, he eliminates evil and terror.


97. (Mahendra Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Asyedindro]
In the rapture of soma distilled in this world of
Lord Vishnu's yajna of creation, Indra, lord of power
and grandeur, strengthens the vitality and virility of this
devotee.


And that generosity of this Indra all the devotees
celebrate to-day as the ancients did of old.


These celebrations exalt you only. Yours is the
glory. The lord promotes a hundred yajnas. He is up on




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1. (Mana Devata, Shivasankalpa Rshi)






[Names: Sather, Yajjagrato, Durangamam, Ssivasankalpamastu]
The ‘Daiva mind’, perceptive faculty of the
intelligent soul, which in the waking state goes far and
shines, which in the dream state also roams around the
same way and takes us far, that one unique light of lights,
that mind of mine, I pray, be full of noble thoughts,
intentions and resolutions.


2. (Mana Devata, Shivasankalpa Rshi)




[Names: Huard, Padge, Yadapurvam, Sivasankalpamastu]
The ‘Yaksha mind’, volitional faculty, by which
men of action, thought and constancy organise and
perform all acts in yajnic programmes of life, the
matchless faculty, present in all people, may that mind
of mine, I pray, be full of noble thoughts, intentions
and resolutions.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




3. (Mana Devata, Shivasankalpa Rshi)




[Names: Yatprajnanamuta]
The 'Prajnana, Chitta and Dhriti mind',
instrument of awareness, memory and deeper retention,
which is the internal light immortal of living beings,
without which no action whatsoever is possible, may
that mind of mine, I pray, be full of noble thoughts,
intentions and resolutions.


4. (Mana Devata, Shivasankalpa Rshi)






[Names: Yenedam]
The mind, immortal faculty by which all this that
was, and is, and shall be is perceived and retained, and
by which the seven-priest (five senses, feeling-will and
understanding) yajna is planned and performed, may
that mind of mine, I pray, be full of noble thoughts,
intentions and resolutions.


5. (Mana Devata, Shivasankalpa Rshi)


aka: are astesfa afer ufdfssdr Tama-


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Yasminnrcah, Yasminscittam]
The mind in which are woven Riks, hymns of
knowledge, Yajus, hymns of application, and Samans,
hymns of celebration and devotion (and the hymns of
divinity), in which they are inter-fixed like spokes in
the nave of a wheel, in which the Chitta, memory and
unconscious of all the people, is inter-woven, may that
mind of mine, I pray, be full of noble thoughts, intentions
and resolutions.


6. (Mana Devata, Shivasankalpa Rshi)








[Names: Susarathira, Hrtpratistham]
The mind which leads people by stimulation of

the senses like a good driver controlling fast moving
horses with bridle strings, which abides in the heart,
which is unageing and fastest in motion, may that mind
of mine, I pray, be full of noble thoughts, intentions
and resolutions.


7. (Anna Devata, Agastya Rshi)






[Names: Pitum]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




In truth I celebrate food and energy, might and
majesty, justice and piety, and power and splendour,
by the force of which Indra, saviour in all three phases
of time, destroys the otherwise invulnerable Vritra,
demon of darkness, want and sin.


8.  (Anumati Devata, Agastya Rshi)






[Names: Anvidanumate]
Anumati, spirit and power of agreeability,
common consent and assent, whatever you approve, and
whatever you agree is good, give us that, do that for us.


Help us grow in intelligence and expertise for good
action. Help us all cross the seas of life with success.


9. (Anumati Devata, Agastya Rshi)






May Anumati, spirit of consent and common will,

have our yajna of positive action accepted among the
noblest people, and may both the common will and Agni,
brilliant leader and carrier of oblations and investments
to the heights of success, be good and generous to the
contributive participant in the corporate yajna of life.


10. (Sinivali Devata, Gritsamada Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




nah.


Lady of love and loyalty, virgin beauty of fertility,
brilliant and pious, sister of the learned, accept the holy
offer of marriage, take the hand of the noble groom
invited, enjoy life, and give us the gift of lovely children.


11. (Sarasvati Devata, Gritsamada Rshi)




[Names: Sarasvatimapi]
Five streams of sense experience with their perceptions
flow into the one Sarasvati of the mind, and then the
mind, converting the experience into language, flows
out in five streams of expression.


(This is the Vedic triangle of Shabda, Artha and
Pratyaya, that is, the semantic triangle of language,
reality and meaning, which is the mental association of
word and object in an integrated mental picture. The
mantra also draws the full circle of experience,
interpretation and expression for communication of the
experience. The central interpretive role is played by
the soul through its consciousness, chetana, which is
its essential property, senses and mind being its


12. (Agni Devata, Hiranyastupa Angirasa Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






Agni, first vibration and spirit of life, visionary
light of lights, you arise ahead, blessed and blissful,
leader and friend of the learned and the wise. Within
your code of life and living, knowledge, action and piety,
arise great souls, masters of knowledge and action,
visionary heroes of arms, poets and men of tempestuous


13. (Agni Devata, Hiranyastupa Angirasa Rshi)
ve Aisa web ca aR HAAA tat Gave aT d




[Names: Trata]
Agni, brilliant power and divine celebrity, living
within your laws of life and system, we pray, with your
methods of protection, preserve and promote our body-
system and the generous leader of our social yajna. You
are the saviour and vigilant protector of our children
and grand children, our health of body and mind, and
our cows and forms of culture.


14. (Agni Devata, Devashrava Devavata Bharata Rshis)




[Names: Uttanayamava, Arusastupo, Vayune, Vayun]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




The scholar of the science of yajna, fire and water,
inspired to do good, generates rain and fills the extended
sky and earth.


The child of theVoice divine, seer of the secrets
of nature, brilliant and keen to raise men of peace, breaks
new grounds in science and creates new modes of energy
and power.


Agni, lord of light and power, inspire and fill this
child of the Voice with light and knowledge to the full.


15. (Agni Devata, Devashrava Devavata Bharata Rshis)






[Names: Idayastva, Jatavedo]
Holy fire and omniscient power of light, in the
sanctity of the Divine Word, on the centre-vedi of the
earth, we instal you and light you in faith for the creation
and diffusion of the fragrant materials and means of
life in the state of yajna.


16. (Indra Devata, Nodha Rshi)






[Names: Susamangusam, Suvrktibhih]
We study and meditate on nature's energy and
the hymns in praise of divine energy, we study the sun,
lightning and the roaring winds, and we honour the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




venerable learned and the wise, dear as the breath of
life for the sake of scientific knowledge and power, and,
with cleansing words and deeds, we pray for the noble
leader, a man of holy speech, who studies the Riks for
knowledge, hears the learned for wisdom, and worships
the hymns of divine praise.


17. (Indra Devata, Nodha Rshi)





[Names: Savasanaya]
Offer great hospitality and high reverence to
Indra, lord of power and majesty, and in his honour,
sing hymns of Sama by which our ancient forefathers,
scholars of the Veda in possession of the knowledge of
creation, singing songs of worship, realized the holy
speech for you and for us all.


18. (Indra Devata, Devashrava & Devavata Bharata Rshis)
fe dena: gen




[Names: Icchanti, Titiksante]
Indra, lord of knowledge and majesty, friends
love you, lovers of soma wait on you, they distil the
soma and offer delightful oblations to you, they even


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




forbear the imprecations of people, because there is
knowledge flows from you.


19. (Indra Devata, Devashrava & Devavata Bharata Rshis)






[Names: Sthiraya]
Indra, lord of power and majesty, ruler of the
world, even the farthest regions are not too far for you.
Lord of the fastest carriers, come post-haste by the steeds
at your command. These offerings of yajna have been
made for the constant lord of showers. The clouds are
full and ready. The fire is lit and blazing.


20. (Soma Devata, Gotama Rshi)






[Names: Tirant, Asadham, Bharesujam]
Soma, lord of power and joyous prosperity,
formidable hero in battles, defender of the force of
armies, winner of light, giver of cool waters, preserver
of strength, guardian of fortifications, victor of wars,
ruler of the beautiful earth, spirit of fame and honour,
and all round victorious, let us rejoice with you and
celebrate with soma.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




21. (Soma Devata, Gotama Rshi)




[Names: Amasa, Sadanyam]
Whoever offers honour and oblations to Soma,
ruler of life and yajna, Soma blesses him with the gift
of cows and cultured speech, Soma gives him the fastest
carrier ‘horse’, Soma blesses him with a brave son or
daughter heroic in action, gracious in gatherings, pious
in yajna, worthy of high office in assemblies, and
obedient follower of parental tradition.


22. (Soma Devata, Gotama Rshi)






[Names: Tyamima, Tvamatatanthorvantariksam]
Soma, creative power of nature and the world,
you create all these herbs of the world, you create the
waters and yajnic actions, you create the earth, cows
and holy speech. You create and expand the wide skies,
and you dispel and replace the darkness with light and
remove ignorance and sin with knowledge and Dharma.


23. (Soma Devata, Gotama Rshi)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Devena]
Soma, lord ruler of honour and prosperity, mighty
and brilliant power, defend and grant our share of wealth
with a noble and generous mind. No one can stop or
restrict you since you rule the power and valour as
master. And when there is desire for the supreme bliss,
help us as physician to achieve both earth and heaven.


24. (Savita Devata, Angirasa Hiranyastupa Rshi)






[Names: Roag, Astau, Hiranyaksah]
Savita, self-effulgent lord of golden eye, comes
bearing choice gifts of jewels for the giver of charity
through yajna, he comes filling and illuminating the
eight directions and sub-directions of the earth, crossing
the three regions, namely, the heavenly sphere, the
middle sphere and the earth, through the seven seas of
space, viz., Bhu, Bhuva, Sva, Maha, Jana, Tapa and


25. (Savita Devata, Angirasa Hiranyastupa Rshi)
mum Rei


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Hiranyapanih, Apamivam, Suryamabhi]
Savita, lord of golden arms, all illuminator,
moves the sun over both heaven and earth, dispels the
dark and wards off disease. And when it retires it


withdraws the sun and, with the centripetal force of its
energy, sucks in the world of light to zero in the dark.


26. (Savita Devata, Angirasa Hiranyastupa Rshi)






[Names: Hiranyahasto, Apasedhan]
Come Savita, self-refulgent lord of golden beams,
rise and shine forth, energizing, lighting the path of
guidance, gracious and blissful, throwing off the wicked,
the unjust and the evil doers, and exposing every sin
and crime.


27. (Savita Devata, Angirasa Hiranyastupa Rshi)
Sq uen




[Names: Tebhirno]
Savita, lord of light and knowledge, ancient and
eternal are your paths, free from dust, well laid out
between heaven and earth. By those paths, straight and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




simple, come to us to-day, brilliant lord, protect us, and
speak to us from above.


28. (Ashvinau Devate, Praskanva Rshi)





[Names: Avidriyabhirutibhih]
Ashvins, harbingers of light and peace like the
sun and moon, givers of knowledge and wisdom like
teacher and preacher, come both of you, drink to your
pleasure the juice of soma and give us safety and comfort
with inviolable means of defence and protection.


29. (Ashvins Devata, Kutsa Rshi)
aehadaban ada ad al eer quo





[Names: Apnasvatimasvina, Adyutye]
Ashvins, auspicious powers of wonderful acts,
generous lords, render our mind and speech worthy of
noble action and achievement I invoke you for sure
defence and protection without a gamble. Be with us
for victory and advancement in the battle of life.


30. (Ashvinau Devate, Kutsa Rshi)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Dyubhiraktubhih]
Ashvins, powers of piety and prosperity, protect
us by days and by nights and by the noblest forms of
sinless prosperity. May Mitra, universal friend, and
Varuna, lord of justice, safeguard that, and may the
earth, heaven, sea and sky promote that prosperity.


31. (Surya Devata, Hiranyastupa Rshi)


ar Pod wea ata fee deg Heb a |




Revolving with its own force of gravity, moved
round and round by the force of cosmic dynamics,
lighting the constant and the changing forms of nature,
Savita, the brilliant sun, goes on and on by his golden
chariot, watching the worlds of the universe.


32. (Ratri Devata, Kutsa Rshi)




The great night comes and covers the regions of
the earth alongwith the regions of the skies. Away from
the regions of the sun it stays and eclipses the areas of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




light, and the darkness remains until the light comes
again.


33. (Usha Devata, Gotama Rshi)






[Names: Usastaccitramabharasmabhyam]
Usha, lady of the light at dawn, mistress of beauty
and excitement, come bearing that food and wondrous
energy for us by which we may beget, support and
rejoice with our children and the children of our


34. (Agni, etc., Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)






[Names: Urafarasor, Prataragnim, Pratarbhagam, Somamuta, Rudram]
Early morning we invoke Agni, lord of light, light
the fire and pray for the light of life. Early morning we
invoke Indra and pray for power and honour. Early
morning we invoke Mitra and Varuna, and pray for the
energy of prana and udana. Early morning we invoke
the Ashvins and pray for learning and wisdom. Early
morning we invoke Bhaga, and pray for strength and
prosperity. We invoke Pusha and pray for health and
[Names: Brahmanaspati]
omniscient, and pray for knowledge and vision. Early


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




morning we invoke Soma, and pray for peace and joy.
Early morning we invoke Rudra and pray for spiritual


35. (Bhaga Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)


mana mim gaa ad yan fea? d




[Names: Pratarjitam, Adhrascidyam]
Early morning we invoke Bhaga, and pray for
honour and prosperity, Bhaga, all victorious, lustrous
child of immortality and sustainer of the social system,
which everybody — whether poor and helpless, or fast
and impetuous, or a ruling king — loves and honours,
and of which the Lord of Life says: Acquire honour
and glory won by effort and endeavour and enjoy.


36. (Bhagavan Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)




[Names: Bhaga, Bhaga]
Lord of glory, lord of inspiration for
advancement, lord of truth and beneficence, lord of light
and knowledge, blessed us as you have with intelligence,
we pray, save this intelligence of ours from sin and lead
us to the vision of divinity. Lord of power and prosperity,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




help us grow with cows and horses, let us advance with
manpower, bless us with men of vision and leaders of


37. (Bhaga Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)






[Names: Utedanim, Utodita]
Maghavan, magnanimous lord of honour and
prosperity, we pray, we may be prosperous at the present
time. And may we be prosperous at the rise of the sun.
Let us prosper at the middle of the day. And let us be
prosperous in the evening. Let us always abide in the
wisdom and guiding vision of the noble and brilliant
saints and sages for the achievement of wealth and other
wherewithal of life


38. (Bhagavan Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)
dag use




Masters of wisdom and brilliance, the Lord
creator of the glorious universe alone is the Lord
Supreme of honour and prosperity. May we be
prosperous by virtue of His generosity.


Lord of honour and glory, the entire humanity


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


invokes, adores and worships you only.


Lord giver of honour and prosperity, may you be
our guide, inspire us and lead us to prosperity.


39. (Bhaga Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)






[Names: Pherae, Samadhvarayosaso, Arvacinam]
The lights of the dawn, inspired and inspiring to
silence and prayer, advancing like the golden chariot
of the sun for the achievement of yajnic acts of love
and creation may, we pray, bring us the newest treasures
of honour and prosperity, just like the fastest horses
flying chariot-loads of a hero’s trophies of victory.


40. (Usha Devata, Vasishtha Rshi)








[Names: Ayaa]
The holy dawns, replete with vapours, blest with
sunbeams, pregnant with energy and generous with bliss
of ghrta and water, may fill our life with all round
prosperity. And may you, brilliant ladies, protect and
promote us always with good fortune like the dawn.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


41. (Pusha Devata, Suhotra Rshi)


yada ad aad a Rela weed ae |
diae se ufa ise




[Names: Pusan, Stotarasta]
Pushan, lord of health and joy, living within the
rules of your discipline, we pray, we may never suffer


harm or loss and, singing songs of thanks for you here,
live long and happily.


42. (Pusha Devata, Rijishva Rshi)







[Names: Ruai, Caen, Pathaspathah]
Let the devotee seasoned by honest words and
desire come and surrender to adorable Pusha, lord of
health and growth, protector of every way of life. And
Pusha grants the most protective and brilliant means of
advancement and helps realise every thought and
intention of the devotee for us.


43. (Vishnu Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)






Vishnu, omnipresent lord of the universe,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




inviolable and intrepidable protector, sustaining the laws
of existence and maintaining the sustainers of life such
as earth and sun, takes the three steps of creation through
the causal Prakriti, subtle materials, and the concrete
forms of life and matter. Hence He alone is the lord


44. (Vishnu Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)






[Names: Tadvipraso, Visnoryatparamam]
That which is the highest stage of human
attainability is Vishnu's divinity. That is what the sages,
light up, realise and live.


45. (Dyava-prithivi Devate, Bharadvaja Rshi)


THAT qwe




[Names: Ghrtavati, Dyavaprthivi]
By the eternal power and existential law of
Varuna, Lord Supreme, are sustained firmly the sun and
the earth together, both unageing, mighty prolific,
abundant in living waters, glory of the worlds, wide,
expansive, full of honey sweets and wondrous beautiful.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


46. (Prithivi & others Devata, Vihavya Rshi)







[Names: Vasavo]
Whoever are our enemies, we keep off. We throw
them off with arms of fire and electric energy. May the
Vasus, Rudras and Adityas raise me sky-high, mighty
strong and wide-awake to preside over the rulers of the


47. (Ashvinau Devate, Hiranyastupa Rshi)







[Names: Geld, Prayustaristam]
Ashvins, powers true and incorruptible, come

here with thirty three divinities to drink the honey-

sweets of nectar, promote our health and age, wash off


our sins and evil, ward off jealousy and enmity, and be
close friends with us in truth.


48. (Maruts Devata, Agastya Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






Maruts, dynamic citizens of the land, this valuable
work of the venerable artist of eminence and this treatise
is for you. Come with food and energy for the growth
and protection of the health of the people of all ages.
And we shall find the food, energy and knowledge for
a general tonic and panacea for all disease.


49. (Rishis Devata, Prajapatya Yajna Rshi)






[Names: Sahastomah, Purvesam]
Sages and scholars collaborating on projects of
graduates equally competent in reason and science,
visionaries of divinity with penetrating senses, mind and
intellect, courageous and resolute of will, having studied
and realised the paths traversed by the predecessors,
extend the bounds of knowledge and hold the reins of
the human community on the march to progress.


50. (Hiranyanteja Devata, Daksha Rshi)


amq ehem mAN d




[Names: Ayusyam]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




This golden glow of life and health which bursts
forth from within is the gift of mother earth. It is the
giver of health and long age and physical and intellectual
brilliance. It is the guardian giver of wealth and
insurance against suffering and disease. May this golden
treasure of lustrous victory, I pray, come in to bless me
with success in life.


51. (Hiranyanteja Devata, Daksha Rshi)






That golden glow of celibate life the demons and
ogres cannot violate, nor can they cross over and attain
it. It is the splendour of the divines, first born of Mother
Nature. One who commands this golden essence of the
art of life and living lives a long age of activity among
the divines, lives a long age of activity among humanity.


52. (Hiranyanteja Devata, Daksha Rshi)






[Names: Yadabadhnan, Tanma, Satasaradayayusmanjaradastiryathasam]
That golden glowing science and discipline of
life which the sages of noble mind and expertise of living


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




hold and prescribe for a man desirous of a hundred fold
lustre, I hold and observe so that I may live a full
abundant age of hundred years.


53. (Prithivi etc. Devata, Rijishva Rshi)








Just as our voice reaches the clouds floating in
the sky, the earth and the sea, so may it reach the eternal
Lord of omniscience, and may the Lord listen to our


Also, may the pursuers and promoters of truth and
eternal law, the noblest minds of the world, and the
mantras and formulas of divine celebration created and
sung by the poets of imagination, protect and promote
us.


54. (Adityas Devata, Kurma gartsamada Rshi)





[Names: Ansarat, Srnotu]
These words of prayer sanctified by holy waters
and ghrta I always take and offer in yajna with the ladle
of faith and love to the Adityas for the brilliant rulers.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




May Mitra, universal friend, Aryama, lord of
justice, Bhaga, lord of honour and prosperity, Tuvijata,
manifesting for all, Varuna, best power and highest,
Daksha, master of the art of creation, and Ansha, the
brilliant Sun, hear my prayers for all.


55. (Adhyatma & Pranas Devata, Kanva Rshi)




[Names: Saptapah]
devau.


Seven sages, i.e., five faculties of perception, one
mana (mind), and one buddhi (intellect), vested in the
body, the seven together serve and protect the body
without let up and negligence. Of the sleeping person,
the seven, still there, retire with the soul into the heart.
But two other sages, i.e., prana and apana, keep awake
in the body and do not go to sleep.


56. (Brahmanaspati Devata, Kanva Rshi)




[Names: Uttistha]
Arise, lord of universal Vedic knowledge, we
have come to you in search of divinity in pursuit of
knowledge. The most charitable, generous and dynamic
people of the speed of the winds come to you. Indra,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




lord of knowledge and power, be friends, be smart with


57. (Brahmanaspati Devata, Kanva Rshi)






[Names: Imset, Yasminnindro]
Brahmanaspati, lord of universal knowledge,
speaks to us, for sure, of the wonder mantra of celebrated
knowledge in which divinities such as Mitra, Varuna,
Aryama and Indra abide in mystery with their power
and secret of prana, water, spirit and light.


58. (Brahmanaspati Devata, Gritsamada Rshi)


qit: as gat fagat i fagackat 1 a H: f |




[Names: Brahmanaspate, Anna]
Brahmanaspati, lord of the universe and universal
knowledge, you are the leading light and controller of
this world.


Listen, and acknowledge our praise and prayer.
Love, protect and promote our children. The universal
good which the divinities protect and extend may come


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and bless us. Brave with heroic children, we sing great
songs of praise in honour of the Lord.


Vishvakarma who is our father has created all
these worlds of existence.


Lord of food and energy, bless us with food,
energy and the power to grow and rise.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1.  (Pitara Devata, Adityas or Devas Rshis)






[Names: Apeto, Dyubhirahobhiraktu]
Go off from here the niggards, the malevolent
and the revilers of Divinity. This is the beauteous place
of the generous and inspired yajamana. May Yama, the
leading light and controller of the world, grant him a
place of rest and freedom blest by the lights of heaven
and by days and nights.


2.  (Savita Devata, Adityas or Devas Rshis)
wet gagat: usu




Human soul, may Savita, Lord of life and Law,
will and determine a suitable place of residence for your
bodies on the earth or in the skies, and may the rays of
the sun be instrumental to that placement for you.


3. (Savita Devata, Adityas or Devas Rshis)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





May the wind purify you. May Savita, lord of
light, purify you with the blazing heat of agni and the
light of the sun. And may the rays of light deliver you
from bondage.


4.  (Vayu & Savita Devate, Adityas or Devas Rshis)




Short is your stay in a temporary world. Your nest
is built but on a leaf. Live here as co-sharers of existence
with the earth, the senses, the sun-beams and the divine
Word, and abide in worship close to the eternal Spirit
of the universe.


5.  (Vayu & Savita Devate, Adityas or Devas Rshis)






[Names: Sartrani, Sambhava]
May Savita, lord of creation and generation, plant
your bodies in the womb of the mother and seat you on
her lap of love.


[Names: Nature]
and gracious to this soul.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


998




(Prajapati Devata, Adityas Devas Rshis)




[Names: Prajapatau]
O soul, I place you securely in the beautiful world


close to the sacred waters within the divine Prajapati,
father of his children.


May He wash off our sins and shine us to




ve


(Yama Devata, Sankasuka Rshi)

[Names: Feiss]
eir wel





[Names: Param, Caksusmate]
Yama, lord of death and reckoning, keep off the


path that is other than the divine. Come following the
path that is supreme.


Lord of vision, lord of the ear, I speak to you in


prayer: Do not hurt our children, do not strike the brave.


8.


(Vishvedeva Devata, Adityas or Devas Rshis)



All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




May the winds be good and kind to you, cool
and refreshing. May the sun be good and kind, warm
and soothing. May the vedi and the home be happy and
blissful. May the fires of the hearth and yajna be good
and fragrant. May nothing on earth cause you sorrow
and suffering.


9.  (Vishvedeva Devata, Aditya Deva Rshis)


[Names: Pada, Reda, Kalpantam, Antariksarn]
May the spaces be harmonious and good to you.
May the waters be soothing and blissful to you. May
the rivers and the seas be kind and favourable to you.
May the skies be kind and generous. And may all the
directions feed, nourish, strengthen and season you with
love and kindness (for life and death).


10. (Vishvedeva Devata, Suchika Rshi)
am o!




[Names: Asmanvati]
Friends, brothers and comrades, the river of rocks
and boulders rushes on. Gird up your loins all, arise
and cross over. Whatever be the hurdles against us, we


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


1000




crush, and let us win the battles of life to victory.


11.


(Apah Devata, Shunahshepa Rshi)




[Names: Apaghamapa, Apamaraga]
Sage physician of mind and soul, great as


and root out dirty dreams.


12.


(Apah Devata, Adityas Devas Rshis)





May the waters and pranic energies, and herbs


such as somalata be good friends to us, and may they
be antidotes to those negativities which harm us and
which we hate to suffer.


13.


COW,


(Krishivalah Devata, Aditya Devah Rshis)






[Names: Anadvahamanvarabhamahe]
Just as we employ the bullock, off-spring of the
as carrier power for the service of noble people in


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




farming, so may the fire energy like electricity be our


14. (Surya Devata, Aditya Devah Rshis)




Let us rise beyond the dark to the regions of light
and bliss, watching higher and higher, and reach to the
self-refulgent Sun, the highest light among the
brilliancies of the universe.


15. (Ishvara Devata, Sankasuka Rshi)

I fix and raise this limit and boundary wall for
the safety and discipline of the living souls so that
nothing alien may encroach upon their freedom and
property. May these abundant souls live for a hundred
years and by their law and discipline resist death from


16. (Agni Devata, Aditya Devah Rshis)




Are badhasva ducchunam.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Agni, lord giver of life, you purify and sanctify
the long years of our life. We pray, create and promote
food, energy and the light of knowledge for us, and
throw off all evil and violence far from us.


17. (Agni Devata, Vaikhanasa Rshi)


"prd dient ay are wet fuere woaufunterarfaur«-




[Names: Ayusmanagne]
Agni, long-lived ruler of power and light,
growing by fragrant offerings, manifesting in the rising
flames of ghrta, abiding in ghrta, come and, having
drunk of ghee and the honey-sweet delicious products
of the cow, protect and promote these dedicated souls
as father protects the children.


This is the voice of the heart in truth of word and
deed.


18. (Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Shirambitha Rshi)






[Names: Parime, Devesvakrata]
All these, you all, protect and promote the cow,
raise the holy voice of knowledge, preserve and
replenish the earth, expand the fire of yajna, and feed
the divinities of nature and the environment, and who
can dare to challenge you ? None!


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




19. (Agni Devata, Damana Rshi)
maaa uA qr dud esq fuere: |
Bema Madar easel Gear ded USAT ug




[Names: Kravyadamagnim, Ihaivayamitaro]
Knowing well (what is right and what is wrong),
I reject and cast away the flesh-eating fire. The carrier
of sin must go to Yama, lord of justice and reckoning.

And I pray: may this other fire of yajna, symbol
of knowledge and power of light and heat of life, come
bringing auspicious food and fragrance for the divinities
of nature and the best of humanity.


20. (Jataveda Devata, Aditya Devah Rshis)
as wur wada: faqs atarera fifa




[Names: Medasah]
Man of knowledge brilliant as Agni, for the
parents and forefathers, manage the land where, far off,
you know the hidden treasures therein, so that streams
of delicacies flow for them and their dreams and wishes
come true in holy word and deed.


21. (Prithivi Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)


[Names: Bebra]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Syona, Yaccha]
Earth, sweet mother, be good and kind to us,
thornless and smooth, generous and hospitable. Wide
and expansive, give us a happy home. Wash off our
sins and make us shine.


22. (Agni Devata, Aditya Devah Rshis)






[Names: Asmattvamadhi]
Agni, lord of brilliance and master of a happy
home, far higher above have you risen from this world.
May this homely world be reborn of you as a new
paradise. Our homage to that paradisal world of bliss.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1. (Agni Devata, Dadhyang-atharvana Rshi)
wa ara Ww der Wt aa: Uu der ard uri u der erar:




[Names: Rcam, Vagojah]
I arise and come to Rigveda, voice of Divinity. I
come to Yajurveda, mind and resolution divine. I come
to Samaveda, energy and ecstasy divine. I come to
Atharva-veda, vision and vibration of Divinity. That
speech is my light and glory. That light and mind is my
strength and spirit of courage and fortitude. By virtue
of the divine, the prana and apana energy is my real


2. (Brihaspati Devata, Dadhyang-atharvana Rshi)


qed Ie Al wad ge seat: URI




[Names: Yanme]
Whatever the weakness of my eye, of my heart,
and of my mind, whatever the loop-holes anywhere, may
the Lord of Infinity make up and re-fill. May the lord
who is father and guardian of the universe, we pray, be
good and gracious to us.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




3. (Savita Devata, Vishvamitra Rshi)


ferar ar 4: weet 3


With the knowledge of Being, Becoming, and
Spirit, with knowledge, karma and prayer, we meditate
upon the blazing glory of self-effulgent lord Savita, Lord
of existence, intelligence and bliss, the only worthy
choice of ours, and we pray that He may inspire and
guide our vision and intelligence to the right path.


4. (Indra Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)






[Names: Apaassidagd]
By what modes and acts of protection, by which
might and brilliant, current and recurrent power and
intelligence, does the wondrous lord of the universe,
great and ever greater, abide by us as our universal friend
and inspire our noble thoughts and actions?


(By divine acts, blissful intelligence, and


5. (Indra Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)


[Names: Hatt]
«er feres ad uud




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Who is it, true and constant, strong and inviolable,
most abundant treasure and most liberal giver of the
joyous gifts of food and soma, who gives you and sends
you to the ecstasy of living, O dear soul, in search of
brilliance and bliss? (The Lord Beatific.)


6. (Indra Devata, Vamadeva Rshi)




Lord Supreme, be all-round saviour of ours, of
friends and admirers, in a hundred ways of your divine


7. (Indra Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)




Lord of abundant showers, let us know by which
ways of protection you save and bless your worshippers
with joy, and by which forms of generosity you raise
your devotees.


8. (Indra Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)






All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Indra, lord of light, power and glory, rules the
world. By His grace, may all be peace and joy with the
humans and with the animals.


9. (Mitra & Others Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)



[Names: Geeata]
— 2 DE . : i . » .


May Mitra, lord and friend of the world, be good
and kind to us. May Varuna, giver of cool and bliss be
good and kind to us. May Aryama, lord of universal
justice, be good and kind. May Indra, lord of power
and glory be good and gracious. May Brihaspati, lord
infinite and omniscient, be good and generous. May
Vishnu, lord infinite and omnipresent of grand action
be good and generous with gifts of peace and joy for us


10. (Vatah & Others Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)






May the winds blow cool and calm for us. May
the sun shine warm and clear for us all. May lightning,
thunderous brilliant, bring peace for us all. And may
the generous cloud shower rains of soothing joy and
prosperity for us all over the world.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




11. (Aharadaya Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)





[Names: Stel, Wasa, Ahani, Indravaruna, Indrapusana]
May the days be good and useful for us. May the
nights hold peace and comfort for us. May Indra and
Agni, energy and heat, be good and productive with
safety and protection. May Indra and Varuna, power
and water, be good and generous with food and wealth.
May Indra and Pusha, power and good health, bring
peace and freedom. May Indra and Soma, power and
peace, bring inspiration for the joy of living.


12. (Apah Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)




May the heavenly waters be full of soothing
sweetness and give us the pleasure of desired bliss. May
they bring us generous showers of profound peace and


13. (Prithivi Devata, Medhatithi Rshi)




[Names: Braet]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






May this dear green earth be free from vexations
and full of wealth in abundance. Generous and
expansive, may it provide a happy and comfortable
home for all of us to live in peace and joy.


14. (Apah Devata, Sindhudvipa Rshi)


ae uta aAA esi




Surely the waters, full of peace and well-being,
abide by us holding energy, greatness, victory and vision
for all of us.


15. (Apah Devata, Sindhudvipa Rshi)


at d: Rad waet màs d: 1




Like generous mothers overflowing with love for
their children, blessed women, give us here in life our
full share of the most blissful nectar that you hold for
us as the essence of nature's gift of vitality.


16. (Apah Devata, Sindhudvipa Rshi)






All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Women, cool and blessed like heavenly waters,
as you arise for the peace and bliss of the home of the
man you love, we would provide for the joy and comfort
of him and for you too. And you too create and generate
joy and bliss for us.


17. (Ishvara Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)


qaa: suf: aed: sibafage «er: sag



[Names: Dyauh, Santi, Vanaspatayah, Santirvisve]
May the heavens bring us peace. May peace be
with the skies, and may the skies shower us with peace.
May there be peace on earth, and may the earth mother
bring us peace. May there be peace with the waters,
and may the waters bring us peace. May there be peace
in the herbs, and may the herbs bring us peace. May
peace be with the trees and may the trees bring us peace.
Peace be with the divinities of the world, and may they
bless us with peace. May the Great Lord of the universe
bless us with peace, and may the Veda inspire us with
peace. May all existence be at peace and may peace
come from all existence to all. May there be peace only,
universal peace for all. May that heavenly peace come
and bless me. May It bless all.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


1012
18.




(Ishvara Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)

fup uate aè een



[Names: Drte, Mitrasyaham, Mitrasyaha]
Lord of light and power, strengthen us for a place


of honour and respect. May all the living beings view
me with the eye of a friend. May I look at all the living
beings with the eye of a friend. May we all view all
with friendly eyes of love and understanding.


19.


(Ishvara Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)






[Names: Jyokte]
Lord of light, remove the veil of darkness and


illusion, strengthen me, so that I may live for ever in
the light of reality under your benign eye, live for ever
in the holy light of your benign presence.


20.


(Agni Devata, Lopamudra Rshi)






All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Salutations to the Lord extinguisher of the passion
and smoke of evil, to the blazing holy fire of
sanctification! Homage be to the Lord of light adorable.

May your flames burn up the evils other than our
real selves. May the light and holy fire be good and
kind to us.


21. (Ishvara Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)


Homage to the lord of lightning! Homage to the
lord of thunder! Salutation to you, lord of omnipotence,


since you alone love, inspire and gather us into light
and bliss!


22. (Ishvara Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)





[Names: Assists]
Here, there, anywhere, wherever you initiate and

inspire us, from there itself render us free and fearless.
Create peace, freedom and prosperity for our people.
Create peace, freedom and fearlessness for our animals.


Create freedom and fearlessness for us from people and
from animals.


23. (Soma Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






May the waters, pranic energies and herbs be
friendly tonics for us, and may they be antidotes to
whatsoever hates and injures us and what we hate and
disapprove. (Prayer for health against negativities.)


24. (Surya Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)






[Names: Bula, Taccaksurdevahitam, Pasyema, Saradah, Srnuyama, Satamadinah, Saradah]
That light divine, blissful to the divinities, pure
and wide awake since eternity, may we continue to see
for a full hundred years, live under its benign eye for a
hundred years, hear for a hundred years, speak and
celebrate for a hundred years, and be fit and fine in a
state of freedom and independence for a hundred years,
and even more than a hundred years!




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1.  (Savita Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)


aot car afa: was atag t ger evatszmri



In the yajnic creation of Savita, I invoke and
welcome you with the arms of Ashvins, currents of
energy, and the hands of Pushan, Mother Nature's power
of nourishment. You are the leader of the world and
indestructible light of life.


2.  (Savita Devata, Shyavashva Rshi)




Saints and scholars join their mind and intellect
with the great, omniscient and omnipresent lord of the
universe, in meditation. The One Lord alone knows the
ways and laws of the universe, He alone holds the worlds
together. This universe is the great song and celebration
of the self-manifestive lord Savita, the Creator.


3. (Dyava-prithivi Devate, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Makhaya, Sirsne]
Brilliant heaven and generous earth, brilliant
teacher and preacher, in this divine yajna of the holy
earth to-day I worship and honour you both at the head


of the ritual. I welcome you to the yajna, and pray take
it to the top of success.


4. (Yajna Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)


[Names: Wand]
aos ufereur:i ware car ure vem viri wen


[Names: Devyo]
Young and brilliant first graduate learned ladies,
I welcome you to-day to the top position of this divine
assembly of yajna in honour of the earth for the living
Highpriest of yajna, I welcome you for the
organisation of the yajna. I honour you for the top
success of the yajna.


5. (Yajna Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)


[Names: Gens]
qre: mat vem une car sitet gi


Young scholar, so much in advance of the yajna
is this offer and invitation to you today to the top position


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of the ritual in the divine yajna of the earth. I honour
you for the conduct of the yajna and wish you bring it
to the top of success.


6. (Yajna Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)




[Names: Indrasyaujah, Indrasyauja]
Sages and scholars, I exhort you to shine in the
glory of Indra. I pray for Indra's blessings of honour
and power in yajna. I invite and welcome you to be the
head of yajna in honour of the divines and children of


I invite you to the yajna of knowledge and pray
you bring it to the top of success.


I invite you to the yajna of karma and pray you
bring it to the top of success.


I welcome you to the yajna of worship and
meditation and pray you bring it to the top of success.


7. (Ishvara Devata, Kanva Rshi)


ug ehea: w deta wem od





[Names: Tare]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Sirsn]
May the sagely scholar of the Veda come and
advance the yajna. May the noble ladies, scholars of
the Law of Truth and the Divine Voice, come and take
on the yajna for conduct. May the noble sages guide
our yajna and take it forward, yajna which is good and
gracious, maker of the brave, creator of great men and
women, and inspirer of the leaders of the communities.


Sage and scholar of the Veda, we welcome you
to the yajna and request you to take it to the top of
success in knowledge.


Ladies of the Law, we welcome you to the yajna
and we request you take it to the top of success in


[Names: Dharmic]
Noble saints and scholars, we welcome you to
the yajna for meticulous conduct of it and pray you take
it to the top of success in the advancement of culture,
good conduct and civilized manners.


8. (Yajna Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)


[Names: Anisa, Anisa]
ma cat une vem yit d

rare cat une car yit |



All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.







[Names: Makha, Sursne, Makha, Makha, Makha]
You are at the head of yajna, dedicated to the yajna


of Brahmacharya. We exort you to take it to the top of

You are at the helm of the household, we commit
you to the yajna of intelligent, creative and cooperative
social action, and and wish and pray for you that you
take it to the top of success.

You are at the head of the yajna of thinking and
meditation, we elect you to the yajnic task of research,
discovery and invention, and we hope and pray that you
take it to the heights of achievement.

You are of the yajna, for the yajna, destined to be
on top.

You are of the yajna, for the yajna, destined to
take it to the top of success.

You are born of yajna, trained for yajna,
committed to yajna, and destined to reach the top and
take it to the top of success.


9.  (Vidvan Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)
"pere cer une vem yit 1
"pere cat une car yit d


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




mari car sitet usu




[Names: Sakna]
With the speed of the Ashvins and the generosity
of Pusha, I season you for the yajna of the divinities of
the earth. We want you for the yajna, we select you for
the conduct of the yajna to the top of success for us.


With the energy and generosity of Indra, I temper
you for the yajna of the divine powers of the skies. We
select you for the yajna, we elect you for the yajna to
take it to the top of success for us.


With the light and generosity of Savita, lord of
sun-beams, I enlighten you for the yajna of the divinities
of heaven. We elect you for the yajna, we consecrate
you for the yajna to lead the yajna to the top of success
for us


Of the yajna, for the yajna, we want you, we select
you for the top of success.


You are of the yajna, you are for the yajna. We
select you, we elect you for the top of success.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Of the yajna you are, for the yajna you are. We
elect and consecrate you for the top of success for
yourself, for us and for the yajna itself.


10. (Vidvan Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)


car yit | ware war rarest car sfrsf à caret car



[Names: Rjave]
Sagely scholar, for the simple and natural people,
we want you. For the virtuous and the excellent, and
for social good we elect you. For the sake of happy
homes, we consecrate you. We want you for the yajna,
and select you for the top success of yajna.


We select you for yajna. We elect you for yajna,
for the top success of it.


We elect you for the yajna. We consecrate you
for the top success of the yajna.


11. (Savita Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)




[Names: Arcirasi, Socirasi]
For law and social justice, for yajna and social


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




cooperation, and for the discipline of piety in the service
of the Sun, light of the universe, may the self-effulgent
Savita, creator and generator of life, bless you with the
honey-sweets of the earth. Protect yourself and us from
the pollution of sin. You are the light of brilliance. You
are the light of purity. You are the tempering fire of the
austerity of Dharma.


12. (Prithivi Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)







[Names: Anadhrstapurastadagneradhipatya, Putravatidaksinata, Vidhrtiruparistad, Visvabhyo]
Mother Earth, unassailable and unviolated, from


the east, under the rule and laws of Agni, bless me with
life and age.


Mother of brave children, from the south, under
the rule and supremacy of Indra, bless me with children.


Blessed home for humanity, from the west, under
the rule and supremacy of Savita, bless me with light of
the eyes.


Universal listener, praised and admired all round,
from the north, under the rule and supremacy of the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




lord sustainer of the world, bless me with health and


Mother of constancy, from above, under the rule
and supremacy of Brihaspati, bless me with the light
and lustre of life.


You are the Queen omnipresent in the heart and
mind, protect me from the defilement and pollutions of
the world.


13. (Vidvans Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)
[Names: Reina]
ag Ae wel ue




[Names: Sriyasva]
Man of knowledge, with truth of word and deed,
shine as a flame with the children of the earth, mix with
them and provide all round sustenance. Save the earth
from the scorching blaze of the sun. May knowledge


14. (Ishvara Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)


[Names: Gaur]
rocate.


The Origin of divinities, father of the wise,
sustainer of His children, light of the universe, pervading
the brilliant sun, giver of light and sustainer of life, the
[Names: Know]
with Him, go with Him.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




15. (Agni Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)




[Names: Samagniragnina]
Agni, heat and vitality of fire, burns and shines
in the world in unison with Agni, universal heat and
light of Divinity, in unison with the Supreme Savita,
creator of life (from whom the heat and vitality emanates
to the fire), and in unison with the brilliant sun (who
receives the emanation of light from Savita and radiates
it to the fire).


Agni, Supreme Creator of light and life, pervades
the heat of fire, being one with it; inspires the divine
creative and generative power of nature, being one with
it, and blazes as one with the sun, and thus illuminates
the universe with His self-effulgent glory.


This is the voice of Divinity, in truth of word and
deed.


16. (Ishvara Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)




[Names: Frees, Vacamasme]
yaccha devayuvam.


The self-effulgent wielder of the heavens,
controller of the heat and light of the universe, sustainer


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of the divinities of nature, and lord immortal manifesting
through His passion for existence, shines on the earth,
thunders in the skies and blazes in the stars.


Saint and sagely scholar, give us that voice and
vision which may lead us to the life divine.


17. (Ishvara Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)




WA: uel




[Names: Apasyam]
O that I could see that protective power divine,
unassailable and incomprehensible, which is constant
and unmoved and yet by mysterious ways vibrates
within and beyond the universe, which pervades all the
centripetal and centrifugal forces of nature in all
directions of space and whirls around in the worlds of
the universe.


18. (Ishvara Devata, Dadhyangatharvana Rshi)


meei gen





[Names: Visvasam, Devasruttvam]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Lord creator and sustainer of the worlds of the
universe, lord of the dynamics of universal mind, lord
of the universal voice of knowledge, lord protector of
the speech of humanity, listener of the voice of
nobilities, lord of light, self-effulgent, save the divinities
of nature and blessed souls of humanity.


Teacher and preacher, may the lord protect you
both for the sake of divine gifts of knowledge and virtue.


Give us the sweets of life with the months of
spring. Give us the sweets of knowledge and science
by the hands of Ashvinis.


19. (Ishvara Devata, Atharvana Rshi)




Lord and Light of the universe, for the purity of
heart, for the enlightenment of mind, for the bliss of
heaven and gift of energy, and for the light of the sun
and knowledge of the stars, we meditate on you and the
divine knowledge. Lord highest of existence, advance
our yajna of love and non-violence among the divinities
of nature and humanity and bless it that it may rise to
the heavens.


20. (Ishvara Devata, Atharvana Rshi)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Pita, Tvastrmantastva]
You are our father. As father, enlighten us.
Homage and worship to you. Pray injure me not. Lord
maker of the world, we are your children blest with
brilliant gifts, and we wish to be with you. Bless us
with children and animal wealth. Bless us with a noble
community, I pray, unhurt and untarnished, I may
always abide by you, my lord and protector.


21. (Ishvara Devata, Atharvana Rshi)






[Names: Ahah, Ratrih]
May the day, our wakeful state of the soul, join
with knowledge, and may the light of our knowledge
join with the light divine in truth of word and deed.


May the night, our dream-and-sleep state of the
mind, join with knowledge, and may the light of
knowledge join with the light divine in truth of word
and deed.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1.  (Savita Devata, Atharvana Rshi)





In the yajnic creation of Savita, universal creator
and progenitor, I take you unto me with the procreative
powers of the Ashvins, sun and moon, and the sustaining
powers of Pusha, the wind. You are the generous and
gracious power of Mother Nature's fertility for
expansive growth and freedom.


2.  (Sarasvati Devata, Atharvana Rshi)


sesugiaasufe maA |




[Names: Asavehyasave]
Come Ida, voice divine. Come Aditi, mother of
fertility. Come Sarasvati, mother of knowledge and spirit
of life’s onward flow.


And come he who seeks the voice divine, who
seeks generation and sacred growth, and who seeks
knowledge and progress.


3. (Pusha Devata, Atharvana Rshi)


aide meieoma: i


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Pusasi]
Pushan, like the protective head-gear and the
graceful crown of life, you are the giver of noble policy
for the progress of society.


You are the mother spirit of nourishment and
growth. Give us, we pray, give for the sake of yajna,
sanctity, piety and humanity.


4. (Sarasvati Devata, Atharvana Rshi)




[Names: Svahendravat]
Grow for Sarasvati in dynamic knowledge and
wisdom, for Indra in dignity and power, and for the
Ashvins in beauty and glory of the nation.


In truth of word and deed, be like Indra in


In truth of word and deed, be like Indra in power.


In truth of word and deed, be like Indra in beauty
and vitality.


5. (Vak Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)
aed eat: TIT ar EDIE G] Tee daha: ya:


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Urvanta]
Sarasvati, like the mother's breast which
overflows for the baby, which is blissful, and which is
a generous jewel box of the choicest gifts of life, is your
gift of the Word and Vision, which is supremely
generous, and by which you feed the entire humanity.


That stream of voice and vision, mother, let flow
here on earth for the nourishment of your children so
that I too may follow the voice and rise to the vast skies.


6.  (Ashvins Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)






[Names: Gayatram, Indrasvina]
Happy bride, you are bright and joyous like the
twenty-four syllable verse of the Gayatri metre. Happy
groom, you are strong and free like the fortyfour syllable
Trishtubh metre. For the sake of heaven and earth I
accept you both as wedded couple, and I lead you home
by the paths of the sky. Like Indra and the Ashvins,
promote and advance the yajna fire of the sweets of
honey in life. Inmates of the home, perform yajna in the
home in honour of the Vasus and rays of the sun which


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




bring showers of rain for the earth. This is the voice of
Divinity, follow it in truth of word and deed.


7. (Vata Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)


qaad cer atata caren aka vem enatis vemel i


[Names: Sariraya, Anadhrsyaya, Avasyave]
Wedded couple, in truth of word and deed we
accept you for the sea and the sky and the winds. In
truth of word and deed, we accept you for the flowing
waters and floods and storms. In truth of word and deed,
we accept you for courage and freedom and the social
environment. In truth of word and deed, we accept you
for irresistible power and creation of freedom from the
winds of tension. We accept you for all round protection
of body, mind and soul and the study of prana energy,
in honesty of word and deed. Surely, we accept you for
the science of food and nourishment and udana vayu,
all sustaining energy. This is the divine voice.


8. (Indra Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Rudravate, Rudravat, Savitre, Rbhumate, Rbhumat]
Homage to you, Indra, ruler of power, prosperity
and justice. Salutations to Indra, lord of blazing
splendour. Exhortations to you, Indra, destroyer of
enemies. All hail to you, blest with light and generosity,
supported by the wise, universally admired, and
wielding plenty of food, energy and power of defence.
Homage to you, lord of wide knowledge and wisdom
blest with divine qualities.


9. (Vayu Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)


ama esiga fugusa caret |




Hail to the lord of justice, master of law and
divinity with faith and love for traditions and the seniors.
Homage to the ruler, father and guardian of the people,
dedicated to social yajna, and himself an image of yajna.


10. (Ashvins Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)


[Names: Svahakrtasya]
Ashvins, teachers and preachers, men and
women, in this world, enjoy the honey sweets of the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




fragrant gifts of yajna from the holy materials offered
into the sacred fire.


So also the highpriest sitting south of the vedi
should offer homage of yajna for all the directions of
space and all the divinities of nature and humanity.


11. (Yajna Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)

Men and women, wedded couples, pursue this
yajna of home life, society and sacrificial ritual
wakefully in the light of the day and raise it to the regions
of the sun. Offer oblations to Agni in truth of word and
deed. Perform yajna with verses of Yajurveda for the
lovers of Yajurveda and let it emanate peace and


12. (Ashvinau Devate, Dirghatama Rshi)




[Names: Tantrayine]
Ashvins, men and women, wedded couples,
promote yajna with all kinds of protection and support
day and nigh, and offer homage to the earth and heaven
and to the sun, mover of the wheel of time. Yajna is so
dear to the heart, so blissful to the soul.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




13. (Ashvinau Devate, Dirghatama Rshi)
sea wad: Gq esi




[Names: Apatamasvina]
May the Ashvins, winds and sun rays, men and
women, wedded couples, protect and promote the fire
of yajna and yajnic living. And may the earth and heaven
approve and advance the yajna so that here itself we
may experience all the joys and comforts of life.


14. (Dyava-prithivi Devate, Dirghatama Rshi)


ara wet aa aa ata fast are oux




[Names: Dharmasi]
Man of yajnic power, grow for the growth of food.
Grow for the growth of energy. Grow for the growth
and expansion of divine knowledge. Grow for the
strength and protection of the social system. Grow for
the growth and protection of the earth and the
environment. You are Dharma, the sustainer. You are
Sudharma, noble ruler and sustainer. You are the man
of love and non-violence. Hold and bring the wealths
of life for us. Sustain and support research, education
and the Brahmana. Support and strengthen organisation,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




governance and the Kshatriya. Govern, support and
promote the economic system and the Vaishya producer
of wealth.


15. (Pusha & Others Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)






[Names: Agessa, Sarase]
Homage to gentle Pusha, sweet mother Earth,
giver of nourishment and growth. Homage to the clouds
and mountains. Homage to the reverberating caves and
skies. Homage to the forefathers and the seniors.
Homage to the higher powers of intelligence and the
sustainers of pure yajna fire. Homage to heaven and
earth. Homage to all divinities.


16. (Rudra & Others Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)


wet esr See were wenfdur wed: 1 ste:




[Names: Geetfasaticer, Rudrahutaye, Rudrahutay]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Homage to Rudra who rallies and calls up the
Rudra prana energy (for the destruction of evil). The
light of the world joins with the light of the universe.


May the day with its lustre, beautiful light, join
with the light divine. Homage to this communion.

May the night with its beauty, soothing grace, join
with the grace divine. Salutations to this communion.

Lord of the universe, cosmic yajna, grant us a taste
of the celestial honey sweets offered into the mightiest
fire of cosmic yajna. Salutations to you!


Mighty Rudra, lord of pranic energy, lord of
justice and reckoning, pray injure us not.


17. (Agni Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)


[Names: Abhimam]
Agni, inspired and expansive, this grandeur of


yours predominates the heaven and fills this earth with
fame.


Great you are indeed, most pleasing and blissful
to the divinities. Pray be settled in the vedi and shine.


Agni, lord admirable, pray create the red flames
of divine beauty (and fragrance from the vedi).


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




18. (Yajna Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)





[Names: Aaea]
Light and spirit of yajna, the light of your bright
flames that is in heaven, in the Gayatri verses and in the
house of yajna, may that increase and may that grow
higher and stronger. For that all hail to you and homage
in worship in truth of word and deed.

The energy of your bright flames that is in the
sky, in the Trishtubh verses and in the fire, may that
increase and grow faster and stronger. For that all hail
to you and exhortation.


The heat of your bright flames that is on the earth,
in the jagati verses, and in the house of Assembly, may
that increase and grow wider and stronger. For that all
hail and exhortation to you.


19. (Yajna Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Kstrasya]
Ruler of the land, for the protection of the people
and advancement of the nation, protect and promote
the Brahmana body of education and research. Protect
and strengthen the Kshatra body of defence and
administration. And all the people and we too support
and follow you as a matter of discipline and Raja-
Dharma for the achievement of new and newer forms
of wealth and well-being.


20. (Yajna Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)




[Names: Usadaet, Catuhsraktirnabhirrtasya]
Ruler, head of the national yajna of governance
and administration, well-armed you are all round in the
four directions. Centre-hold of the law and the body-
politic, you are expansive (omnipresent, as if, through
the system). Universally popular, may you attain to full
age to protect and promote us. Celebrated head of
universal development and friend of all, may you live a
full age of dignity for us. We reject hate and hostility,
crooked opposition and those committed to contrary
values.


21. (Yajna Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)


agi cr aga A maè usu


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Gharmaitatte, Pyasisimahi]
Dharma, brilliant ruler and high-priest of this
blazing yajna, this nation and this yajna is the measure
of your power and potential. Grow by it and attain to
your full stature. And may we too grow by it and rise to
our full national honour and glory.


22. (Yajna Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)






[Names: Acikradad, Sain]
Agni, brilliant light of cosmic yajna, roaring with
thunder, showering with the clouds, shooting as
lightning, great and glorious, universal friend, bright
and beautiful, and blazing with the sun is a jewel treasure
of wealth deep as the oceans of space.


23. (Apah Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)






May the herbs and waters and the pranic energies
they bear be efficacious as good friends to us, and may
they carry strong antidotes for those negativities that
injure us and which we hate to suffer.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




24. (Savita Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)






[Names: Sifter]
High and higher beyond the dark, looking up to
the heavens, let us rise and reach to the sun, bright and
blazing, light supreme among the stars of the universe.


25. (Ishvara Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)




Lord of the universe, you are the fire. You are the
fuel. You are the furnace. You are the light and you are
the radiation.


Radiate that fire and splendour unto me. May we
grow intense radiant by the blaze of that light and fire
divine.

26. (Indra Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)




[Names: Yavati, Tavantamindra]
Indra, lord of fire and splendour, as far as the
heaven and earth abound, as far as the seven seas of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




space roll on, that far do I hold on to that immortal zone
of power and splendour and receive it unto me intact
and indestructible with all my strength and energy.


27. (Yajna Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)


"E neon
[Names: Gharmastri]
That expansive power in me, that yajnic
efficiency of action like threefold passion of fire,


lightning and the sun shines in me with the immanence
of light, omniscience and cosmic power of Infinity.


28. (Yajna Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)


aden asema aer arenes uiui
WAIT ure




[Names: Tvisah, Indrapitasya, Indrapitas]
From the milk of cosmic plenty, vitality is received.
We receive the shower of that vitality rising in abudance
year by year.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Lord of infinite peace and joy, for the human
observance and extension of your cosmic yajna I am
one with your light and splendour, lord of omnipotence
and bliss of life. And having invoked and fed the fire of
yajna, inspired and sanctified by the holy fire, I taste
the honey-sweets of yajna raised by the waves of Indra's
energy, and consumed, revitalized and showered by the
sun, father and guardian of the children of divinity.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1.  (Prana & Others Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)


vez ue



[Names: Dive]
This oblation is for the pranas, companions of
the soul, (at the end of life when the pranas merge with
the universal prana). This oblation is for the earth. This
is for the fire. This is for the sky. This is for the air. This
is for the heaven. This is for the sun.


This is the end of life in truth of word and deed.
(The divinities of nature take their portion of the
temporal existence of the human being when death


2.  (Digadayah Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)


fava: wet pura taal AAAA: AISAT:
Taal ao eel | aT et Yara vemel usi




[Names: Digbhyah, Nabhyai]
This oblation is for the quarters of space, this is

for the moon, this is for the nakshatra stars, this is for

the waters, this is for the seas, this is for the navel, this


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


is for purification through the fire.


3. (Vak etc. Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)






[Names: Vace, Caksuse, Srotraya]
This oblation is for speech and its purity, this is
for the breath of one nostril, this is for the breath of the
other, this is for the sight of one eye, this is for the sight
of the other, this is for the hearing by one ear, this is for
the other.


4.  (ShriDevata, Dirghatama Rshi)




[Names: Uses, Manasah, Pasunain, Srayatam]
May I get the sanctified will and resolution of
the mind. May I get the divine truth of speech. May I
beget the beautiful forms of living beings. May I get
the sweet vitality and taste of food. May all these and
honour, beauty and grace be vested in me in life again
and again.


This is the voice of the soul in truth of word and
deed.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




5. (Prajapati Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)






[Names: Maitrah]
Jiva, the soul, nourishing and supporting life, is
prajapati, guardian of life. Fully provided and
prosperous, it is Samrat, brilliant and sovereign. Well-
positioned in society, it is vaishhvadeva, a human
divinity. High and distinguished it is gharma, yajnic fire.
Risen to the heights, it is teja, splendour. Sanctified and
initiated in water, it is ashvina, blessed with pranic
energy. Abundant and generous, it is paushna, child of
the sun. Destroyer of enemies, it is maruta, of the winds.
Developing waters, it is maitra, generous and friendly.
Moving tempestuously, it is of the air, flying and
floating. Kindled and challenged, it is fiery. Invoked
and invited, it is vak, voice of divinity.


[Names: Others]
EA TESA: T med: aaa aga


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Agnirdvittye, Agnirdvitty, Vayustrtiya, Vayustrti]
When the soul leaves the body, on the first stage
it goes to Savita, the sun, to Agni on the second, to
Vayuon the third, to Aditya on the fourth, to Chandrama
on the fifth, to Ritu on the sixth, to Maruts on the
seventh, to Brihaspati on the eighth, to Mitra on the
nineth, to Varuna on the tenth, to Indra on the eleventh,
and to Vishvedevas on the twelfth.


7.  (Marutah Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)
amaira «i fafaa: caret non




[Names: Ugrasca, Sasahvansca]
According to its nature and action, the soul after
death is violent or peaceful, fearful or fearless, dark or
or non-cooperative, disruptive or concentrative, (and is
reborn in an appropriate form).


8. (Agni etc. Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





The soul comes to attain and hold Agni by the
heart, electric energy by the front part of the heart,
Pashupati Shiva by the whole heart, the kind Shiva by
the liver, the fearsome Shiva by sides of the heart, ruling
power by righteous anger, the great lord by ribs on both
sides of the chest, heat and light of spirits by the
intestines, manly excellence by the ventricles of the


9.  (Ugraetc. Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)
uf us



[Names: Ugramllohitena, Bhavasya]
The soul comes to have hypertension by the
blood, friendliness by noble thoughts and values,
violence by negative thoughts and values, honour and
power by good conduct, strong people by power, good
people and success by love and cheerfulness. Sweetness
of the throat is the seat of praise and social appreciation.
Inside of the ribs is the seat of Rudra. The liver is the
seat of Mahadeva. The intestines are the seat of strength.
The arteries of the heart are the seat of Pashupati.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


1048
10.




(Agni Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)


qha: tater cites: caret cep aet cep Cae
[Names: Catal, Yael, Sassy, Careleava]
mona: e vun: xeTel | Uta Laat wag
xem o



[Names: Lomabhyah, Maimse, Retase]
This oblation is for the hair in parts of the body,


this is for the hair of the whole body. This is for the
skin in parts, this for the whole. This is for blood in the
parts, this for the whole. This is for the fat in the parts,
this for the whole. This is for the flesh in parts, this for
the whole. This is for the tendons, this for the nerves.
This is for single bones, this for all. This is for the
marrow in the parts, this is for the whole marrow in the
body. This is for the semen. This is for the anus.


11.


(Agni Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)





[Names: Rama, Villa, Ayasaya, Suce, Socate]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




In all truth of word and deed and in all
commitment to faith: homage to the spirit of new
attainment, to effort for the new attainment, to balance
and peace in the effort and attainment, to success in
various new attainments, to effort for rising higher and
higher, to purify and purification of the body, mind
and soul.


Homage to the purifier, to the light of purification,
and all hail to the body, mind and soul for the intake of
purity from the process of purification.


12. (Agni Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)





[Names: Wass, Catat, Niskrtyai]
In all truth of word and deed and in all
commitment to faith : homage to the fire of purification,
to the soul in the crucibles of purification, to the soul
receiving the light of purification, to the soul purified
and redeemed, to the heat and light of the new day, to
purity from pollution and evil, to disintegration of body
and release of the soul, to penitence and self-
introspection, and homage to new health and new


13. (Agni Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





In truth of word and deed and faith, homage to
Yama, lord of justice and reckoning. Homage to Antaka,
transcendent time that ends up everything in existence.
Homage to Death that consumes all that is born. Homage
to Brahma, the Supreme. Homage to the migration of
the soul. Homage to the divinities of existence. Homage
to Heaven and to Mother Earth.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






1. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)


All this that is, moving in the moving universe,
is pervaded by the Ruling Lord of Existence. Therefore,
live it as given by Him, enjoy it objectively in a spirit of
detachment. Covet not anyone’s wealth. It belongs to
none (except to the Lord).


2. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)




[Names: Kurvanneveha, Evam, Only]
to live for a full hundred years. Only this way—there is
no other way—Karma does not smear the soul of man


3. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)




[Names: Wenfd]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Asurya, Tanste]
janah.

Surely after death and even while living,
demonical souls sunk in darkness who kill their
conscience and live only a physical existence (void of
virtue) go to those sunless regions of the world which
are covered in the impenetrable darkness of sufferance.


4. (Brahma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)






[Names: Adearsarteqay, Anejadekam, Taddhavato]
Brahma is constant, unmoving, One and only
One, without a second, and faster than the mind. The
mind and senses cannot attain to It, although It is present
everywhere, already and always. Though still, It
surpasses and transcends others who are at the fastest
move in nature. Within It the wind holds the waters of
the universe. Within the Divine Presence the soul
performs its actions. (If somthing moves faster than the
velocity of light, it becomes omnipresent. And what is
omnipresent, is still too, because there is no space to


5. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)






[Names: Tadejati, Tadantarasya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




omnipresent). It is at the farthest of space, even farther,
and It is at the nearest. It is within this all, and surely It
is outside of all this.


6. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)






[Names: Yastu, Sarvabhutesu]
One who sees all the forms of existence existing
within the Supreme Soul, and the Supreme Soul
immanent in all the forms of being, suffers from no doubt
or illusion (and holds on to faith).


7. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)






[Names: Yasmintsarvani, Soka]
In the state of knowledge wherein the knower
knows all the forms of being as pervaded by the same
One Soul, how can there be any illusion or suffering
for the person who sees the same Unity in existence


8. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)
u xg *


wada: TAT: dedi


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Kavirmantist]
The Supreme Soul is omnipresent, omnipotent,
sinless, visionary poetic creator and omniscient, existent
in the heart and mind of all, transcendent, self-existent,
who for the infinite ages of eternity creates, organises,
reveals and sustains all the forms of existence as they
are and ought to be.


9.  (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)




[Names: Andham]
Down into the darkest dark do they fall who
worship only the primordial prakriti. Still deeper and
darker do they fall who worship only the existential
forms and are lost therein.


10. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)
amag: zem nem |




[Names: Anyadevahuh]
Different is the result, they say, from primordial
prakriti, and different is the result, they say, from the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




existential forms. This have we heard from the Wise
who revealed it to us.


11. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)




[Names: Sambhutim, Vinas]
One who knows the immortal/constant primordial

and the mortal/mutable existential and knows that

Supreme Spirit along with both, masters the facts of


death by the mortal and realizes the immortal by the


12. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)




Down into the darkest dark do they fall who
[Names: Avidya]
Still deeper, and darker do they fall who are lost in
Vidya, i.e., knowledge without reference to karma or
the reality content of it.


13. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)






[Names: Anyadevahurvidyaya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Different is the result of Vidya, they say, and
different is the result of Avidya, they say. This we have
heard from the wise who revealed the difference of both
to us.


14. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)




[Names: Vidyam, Avidyaya]
One who knows Vidya, i.e., the constant reality
and the knowledge of it, and Avidya, i.e., illusion, for
what it really is, and Karma including the order of
change, and knows that Supreme Spirit along with both
Vidya and Avidya, masters the reality and meaning of
death by Avidya, and realises Immortality by Vidya.


15. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)




Vayuranilamamrtamathedam bhasmanta in


[Names: Sariram, Klibe, Krtain]
The end of the body is ash. The prana-vayu
merges with the cosmic energy. And this soul is


O soul, remember Om, Supreme Soul of
Existence. Agent of Karma, remember your karma.
Remember both these to realise your real form and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




16. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)






Agni, brilliant lord omniscient of all the laws and
ways of existence, lead us to the wealth of life by the
right path of honesty and simplicity. Remove from us
all sin and crookedness. We sing the most joyous songs
of celebration in praise of you. Homage to you again
and again.


17. (Atma Devata, Dirghatama Rshi)




[Names: Hiranmayena]
The face of truth is covered by a golden veil. The
veil is removed by the Lord of golden glory.


The life and light that shines in the sun is that
Supreme Purusha. That is there, and that is here in me.


Om is the saviour. Om is Brahma, Brahma is




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




NOTE


Swami Dayananda has accepted this version of
Yajurveda chapter 40. There is another version, which
is also accepted as Ishopanishad, and that has eighteen
mantras. That version from mantra 15 to mantra 18 is
given below:


15. The face of truth is covered with a golden
veil (the veil of Prakrti). That veil, O Lord preserver
and promoter of life, unveil so that we may see the Truth
and eternal Dharma.


16. Lord giver of life and protection, universal
guide, eternal light, lord of creation, Sole Lord, one and
light for me. The splendour that is yours is the most
auspicious and sublime form I see. The light that shines
in the sun is the Purusha. That is there, That is in me.


17. The end of the body is ash. The breath of life
goes to eternal energy. The soul is immortal. O soul,
remember Om. Remember your karma. Lord of yajna,
agent of karma, remember the actions performed.


18. Agni, light of life, lead us on by the right path
to the wealth of life. Brilliant lord omniscient of all laws
and ways of existence, and all our thoughts and deeds,
remove from us all sin and crookedness. We sing songs
of celebration in praise of you. Homage to you again
and again


Note: In the Vaidic tradition of religious
studies, thought and practice specially after Swami


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Shankaracharya]
are: Vedanta Sutras, Upanishads, and the Gita. The three
together are known as Prasthana-trayi, and summed up
as ‘Vedanta’ in popular parlance. And Vedanta is
sometimes understood to be an ‘End of the Vedas’, a
‘take off? and even a substitute for the Vedas. For the
information of the dedicated readers it is important to


1. The Vedanta Sutras are an extensive
commentary on the closing words of Yajurveda. The
closing words of Yajurveda are: Om Kham Brahma. And
the opening words of Vedanta Sutras are: Athato


[Names: Jijnasa]
Which means: And now, an enquiry into the
nature of Brahma. Clearly the Vedanta Sutras are an
extensive act of meditation on the open-ended close of
Yajurveda. Similarly Mandukyopanishad also is an
expansive act of meditation on OM, the first of the
closing words quoted above and Yajurveda (40, 15): Om


[Names: Krato, Smara]
2. Chief among Upanishads for the common
reader are Ishopanishad and Mandukyopanishad.
Ishopanishad is a literal version of the closing chapter
of Yajurveda, and Mandukya, an act of meditation on


3. The Gita is a call to action, an extensive
commentary on the second mantra of the closing chapter
of Yajurveda:






All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Prasthana-trayi thus is neither the *End of the
Vedas’, nor a substitute, nor a take off. Each work is a
continuation of Vedic studies in its own context of
meditation, meditative teaching, and a rousing call to
action in a situation of karmic crisis.


The three are, thus, not a departure from the
Vedas, they are a homage to the Vedas.


num


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.

